Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the “Company”, “Vir,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Vir Biotechnology, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Our discussion and analysis below are focused on our financial results and liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including year-over-year comparisons of our financial performance and condition for these years. Discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019 specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our financial performance and condition for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, are located in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, as filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021. For a detailed discussion on our business environment, please read Item 1. Business, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For additional information on the risks that could negatively impact our business, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage immunology company focused on combining immunologic insights with cutting-edge technologies to treat and prevent serious infectious diseases. Infectious diseases are among the leading causes of death worldwide and can cause trillions of dollars of direct and indirect economic burden each year - as evidenced by the coronavirus disease 2019, or COVID-19, pandemic. We believe that now is the time to apply the recent and remarkable advances in immunology to combat current and prepare for future infectious diseases. Our approach begins with identifying the limitations of the immune system in combating a particular pathogen, the vulnerabilities of that pathogen and the reasons why previous approaches have failed. We then bring to bear powerful technologies that we believe, individually or in combination, will lead to effective therapies.
Our current pipeline consists of sotrovimab (previously VIR-7831; and where marketing authorization has been granted, marketed under the brand name Xevudy®) and other product candidates targeting COVID-19, hepatitis B virus, or HBV, influenza A virus, and human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV. We have assembled four technology platforms, focused on antibodies, T cells, innate immunity and small interfering ribonucleic acid, or siRNA, through internal development, collaborations and acquisitions. We have built an industry-leading team that has deep experience in immunology, infectious diseases, and product development and commercialization. Given the global impact of infectious diseases, we are committed to developing cost-effective treatments that can be delivered at scale.
COVID-19
Sotrovimab is an investigational severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or SARS-CoV-2, neutralizing monoclonal antibody, or mAb, that incorporates Xencor, Inc.'s, or Xencor, Xtend™ technology.
•In May 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, granted an Emergency Use Authorization, or EUA, to sotrovimab for the early treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in adults and pediatric patients (12 years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg) with positive results of direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing, and at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death. We also received a positive scientific opinion from the Committee for Human Medicinal Products in the European Union, or EU, for sotrovimab in May 2021. In June 2021, we announced confirmatory full results for the Phase 3 COVID-19 Monoclonal antibody Efficacy Trial - Intent to Care Early, or COMET-ICE, trial, which resulted in an adjusted relative risk reduction of 79% (p<0.001) in all-cause hospitalization for more than 24 hours or death due to any cause by Day 29 compared to placebo, meeting the primary endpoint of the trial. In December 2021, the European Commission granted marketing authorization to Xevudy® (sotrovimab) in the EU for the treatment of adults and adolescents at increased risk of progressing to severe COVID-19.
•We have made significant progress increasing global patient access to sotrovimab in collaboration with Glaxo Wellcome UK Limited and GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals S.A. (individually and collectively referred to as GSK). Sotrovimab has been granted EUA, temporary authorization or marketing approval (under the brand name Xevudy®) in more than 40 countries.
•To date, binding agreements have been received for the sale of approximately 1.7 million doses of sotrovimab worldwide.
oIn November 2021, we and GSK announced the sale of more than 750,000 doses globally to date, including multiple contracts with the U.S. government. Approximately 90% of those doses were delivered in 2021 and the remainder are expected to be delivered throughout the first half of 2022. The delivered doses led to the recognition of $917.2 million of sotrovimab collaboration revenue in 2021.
oIn January 2022, we and GSK announced the sale of an additional 600,000 doses to the U.S. government, which are expected to be delivered throughout the first quarter of 2022, and the sale of approximately 350,000 additional doses to other countries, which are expected to be delivered throughout the first half of 2022. Based solely on the binding agreements received to date, we expect to recognize approximately $1.1 billion of sotrovimab collaboration revenues when the doses are delivered in the first half of 2022.
•We and GSK expect to manufacture approximately two million doses of sotrovimab in the first half of 2022, and additional doses in the second half of 2022.
•During and following the fourth quarter, we announced preclinical data generated through pseudovirus testing demonstrating that sotrovimab retains neutralizing activity against the highly divergent Omicron variant (B.1.1.529).
•In February 2022, we published pseudovirus data demonstrating a 16-fold shift in neutralization activity against the Omicron BA.2 subvariant. Our BA.2 results were derived from 10 independent experiments that were conducted using an optimized pseudovirus assay. This is the same assay that was used to generate data for previous variants. These data have been shared with regulatory agencies around the world. Initial feedback from the FDA question our conclusion that the 500 mg intravenous, or IV, dose of sotrovimab retains activity against the BA.2 Omicron subvariant based on our current modeling assumptions, and the FDA has asked for additional data to support our position. The FDA also requested safety data for higher doses. Both have been provided to the FDA and we are awaiting further correspondence.
•The Health Care Provider Fact Sheet was recently updated to show that sotrovimab’s neutralization activity was reduced an average fold change in EC50 value of 16-fold against the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron B.1.1.529/BA.2 spike variant compared to wild-type. The Fact Sheet also noted that the clinical relevance of the 16-fold reduction in sotrovimab activity against the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron B.1.1.529/BA.2 variant is unknown.
•As of February 28, 2022, the FDA noted on its EUA website that sotrovimab is currently authorized in all U.S. regions until further notice by the FDA.
•In November 2021, we announced the results of the Phase 3, randomized, open-label COMET-Treatment of Acute COVID-19 with Intramuscular monocLonal antibody, or COMET-TAIL trial, which achieved its primary endpoint, demonstrating that 500 mg intramuscular, or IM, administration of sotrovimab (n=376) was non-inferior to 500 mg IV administration (n=378) for the early treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in high-risk, non-hospitalized adults and adolescents. Low rates of serious adverse events (≤1% in both arms) were observed. Based on the results of the COMET-TAIL trial, in January 2022, we and GSK submitted an application to the FDA requesting an amendment to the EUA for sotrovimab to include IM administration.
•We and GSK plan to submit a Biologics License Application, or BLA, for sotrovimab to the FDA in the second half of 2022.
•We and GSK are collaborating to assess the use of sotrovimab in uninfected immunocompromised patients to determine whether sotrovimab can prevent symptomatic COVID-19 infection. Two Phase 3 trials are expected to start in the second quarter of 2022. One is a platform trial and one is a company sponsored trial, COVID-19 Monoclonal antibody Efficacy Trial - Stop Transmission of Acute SARS-COV-2, or COMET-STAR. The primary endpoint for both trials is incidence of symptomatic PCR-confirmed COVID-19. The analysis of the primary endpoint of COMET-STAR will be event driven, and could be as early as the second half of 2022.
•Sotrovimab is also being evaluated among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the U.K. as part of the Randomized Evaluation of COVID-19 Therapy, or RECOVERY, trial. Initial data are expected in the second half of 2022.
VIR-7832 is an investigational vaccinal SARS-CoV-2-neutralizing mAb that incorporates Xencor’s Xtend and other Fc technologies. VIR-7832 shares the same characteristics as sotrovimab and has been engineered to potentially be a therapeutic T cell vaccine to further help treat and/or prevent COVID-19. The U.K.'s National Health Service-supported AGILE
initiative evaluating VIR-7832 in a Phase 1b/2a trial of adults with mild to moderate COVID-19 remains ongoing. To date, no safety signals have been reported for the 50 mg, 150 mg and 500 mg dose cohorts. The first patient in the Phase 2a portion of the trial was dosed in February 2022. Additional data are expected in the first half of 2022.
HBV
VIR-2218 is an investigational HBV-targeting siRNA.
•In June 2021, we announced clinical data from our Phase 2 trial of VIR-2218 alone and in combination with pegylated interferon alpha, or PEG-IFN-α. First, with VIR-2218 as monotherapy, the trial demonstrated a strong safety profile and a substantial, durable and dose dependent reduction of hepatitis B virus surface antigen, or HBsAg, through 48 weeks. Second, evaluating VIR-2218 alone and in combination with PEG-IFN-α for 12 weeks, more rapid and substantial declines in HBsAg compared to VIR-2218 alone were observed.
•In November 2021, we announced additional data evaluating VIR-2218 in combination with PEG-IFN-α for 24 weeks. New findings demonstrated that concurrent initiation of VIR-2218 and PEG-IFN-α therapy resulted in earlier and more substantial HBsAg reductions compared to VIR-2218 alone or with PEG-IFN-α following a VIR-2218 lead-in. Also, three participants achieved HBsAg loss below the lower limit of quantification by Week 24; two of three achieved anti-HBs seroconversion. Additional data are expected in the first half of 2022.
•VIR-2218 is also being evaluated in additional clinical trials with collaborators.
VIR-3434 is an investigational HBV-neutralizing mAb that incorporates Xencor’s Xtend and other Fc technologies.
•In July 2021, we initiated the Phase 2 Monoclonal Antibody siRNA Combination against Hepatitis B, or MARCH, trial to evaluate the combination of VIR-2218 and VIR-3434 as a functional cure regimen for chronic HBV infection. Initial data are expected in the first half of 2022. As some of our clinical trial sites are in Ukraine and Moldova, we are monitoring the situation to determine any impact resulting from the current conflict in this region.
•In November 2021, we announced that a single dose of six mg, 18 mg, or 75 mg of VIR-3434 resulted in rapid HBsAg reductions in most participants within approximately one week post-dose, and the largest and most sustained reductions in HBsAg were observed in the 75 mg cohort. Initial data are expected in the first half of 2022.
Influenza A virus
VIR-2482 is an investigational mAb designed for the prevention of influenza A that incorporates Xencor’s Xtend technology. In August 2019, we initiated dosing in the Phase 1/2 clinical trial for VIR-2482. VIR-2482 has been well-tolerated in the approximately 100 healthy volunteers dosed in Phase 1. Anticipating an increase in the incidence of influenza in the Northern Hemisphere this coming winter, we expect to initiate a Phase 2 trial in the second half of 2022.
Additionally, we and GSK are evaluating the potential of several next-generation mAbs for influenza treatment and prevention, functional genomics applications for respiratory targets, and mAbs for non-influenza diseases under the collaboration agreement with GSK executed in May 2021, or the 2021 GSK Agreement. For details regarding the 2021 GSK Agreement, see Note 7-Collaboration and License Agreements to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
HIV
VIR-1111 is an investigational HIV T cell vaccine based on human cytomegalovirus, or HCMV. In December 2020, we initiated a Phase 1 trial of VIR-1111. No safety signals have been reported to date and we expect to have additional clinical data in the first half of 2022.
In January 2022, we announced an expansion of our collaboration with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to include the advancement of innovative platform technologies in the development of broadly neutralizing antibodies designed to provide a “vaccinal effect” aimed at a functional cure of HIV and the prevention of malaria.
Financial Overview
We were incorporated in April 2016 and commenced principal operations later that year. To date, we have focused primarily on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, identifying, acquiring, developing and in-licensing our technology platforms and product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials.
We have financed our operations primarily through sales of our common stock from our initial public offering, subsequent follow-on offering and convertible preferred securities, and payments received under our grant and collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2021, excluding restricted cash, we had $909.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and investments, and after excluding the equity investment in Brii Biosciences Limited, or Brii Bio Parent, we had $766.4 million. Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that $766.4 million as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. However, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional financing to fund our long-term operations sooner than planned. See the section titled “Liquidity, Capital Resources and Capital Requirements-Future Funding Requirements” below for additional information.
Although we recorded net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, we have otherwise incurred accumulated net losses since inception and may continue to incur net losses in the foreseeable future. To date, sotrovimab has been granted EUA, temporary authorization or marketing approval (under the brand name, Xevudy®) in more than 40 countries. Although we (through our collaborator GSK) have recently entered into procurement agreements to supply sotrovimab to governments around the world and began to recognize revenue for sotrovimab, the extent of future revenue remains uncertain. We have not obtained regulatory approval for any other product candidates, and we do not expect to generate significant revenue from the sale of our other product candidates until we complete clinical development, submit regulatory filings and receive approvals from the applicable regulatory bodies for such product candidates, if ever. Our net income was $528.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our net losses were $298.7 million and $174.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $138.6 million. Our primary use of our capital resources is to fund our operating expenses, which consist primarily of expenditures related to identifying, acquiring, developing, manufacturing and in-licensing our technology platforms and product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, and to a lesser extent, selling, general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. Although we began recognizing revenue for sotrovimab and have substantial deferred revenue under our 2021 GSK Agreement, we may continue to incur net operating losses for at least the next several years as the extent of future revenue remains uncertain. In particular, we expect our expenses and losses to increase as we continue our research and development efforts, advance our product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seek regulatory approval, prepare for commercialization, as well as hire additional personnel, protect our intellectual property and incur additional costs associated with being a public company. We also expect to increase the size of our administrative functions to support the growth of our business. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We are currently manufacturing product candidates from three of our platforms: antibodies, T cells and siRNAs. We have established our own internal process development, manufacturing and quality capabilities and are working with contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CDMOs, to supply our early- and late-stage product candidates in the near term. We continue to expand our internal capabilities and resources in process development, analytical development, quality, manufacturing and supply chain, which are supported by our San Francisco, California, and Portland, Oregon facilities that include laboratories for process development, production of HCMV research viral seed stock and selected quality control testing for our product candidates. We have established relationships with multiple CDMOs and have produced material to support preclinical studies and Phase 1 through Phase 3 clinical trials. Material for Phase 3 clinical trials and commercial supply will generally require large-volume, low-cost-of-goods production. For example, for our COVID-19 program, we and our collaborator GSK have executed manufacturing agreements with CDMOs having large-scale capacity to support future scale-up and product supply, particularly for potential commercialization.
COVID-19 Business Update
We have implemented a number of plans and policies designed to address and mitigate the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 situation and will evolve our plans and policies as needed going forward. As a result of these developments, in March 2020, we implemented work-from-home policies for most of our employees. We have also implemented plans, which continue to evolve based on the current climate and response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, to reopen our offices to allow employees to return when appropriate. Although these plans are based on a phased approach consistent with local government requirements, and
focused on employee safety, and contemplate returning to remote work should new restrictions be implemented, there is uncertainty regarding the recent phased reopening, which may be rolled back, and restrictions re-implemented. We are also working to provide our employees with the support they need to ensure continuity of business operations. We are working closely with our CDMOs to manage our supply chain activities and mitigate any potential disruptions to our clinical trial supplies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, there are no assurances that our manufacturing and supply chain infrastructure will remain uninterrupted and reliable, or that the CDMOs will be able to satisfy demand in a timely manner and not have supply chain disruptions due to COVID-19 related shutdowns, stock-outs due to raw material shortages and/or greater than anticipated demand or quality issues given the operational challenges and raw material shortages that have been experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic. For some of our clinical development programs, we are experiencing, and may continue to experience, a disruption or delay in our ability to initiate trial sites and enroll and assess patients. In addition, we rely on contract research organizations or other third parties to assist us with clinical trials, and we cannot guarantee that they will continue to perform their contractual duties in a timely and satisfactory manner as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our Collaboration, License and Grant Agreements
We have entered into collaboration, license and grant arrangements with various third parties. For details regarding these and other agreements, see the section titled “Business-Our Collaboration, License and Grant Agreements” and Note 6-Grant Agreements and Note 7-Collaboration and License Agreements to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Acquisitions
We have completed various acquisitions. For details regarding our acquisitions, see the section titled “Business-Our Acquisition Agreements” and Note 4-Acquisitions to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
To date, sotrovimab has been granted EUA, temporary authorization or marketing approval (under the brand name, Xevudy®) in more than 40 countries. We (through our collaborator GSK) have recently entered into procurement agreements to supply sotrovimab to governments around the world, and we have begun recognizing revenue from our profit share under our definitive collaboration agreement with GSK executed in June 2020, or the 2020 GSK Agreement. However, the extent of future revenue remains uncertain. We have not obtained regulatory approval for any other product candidates, and we do not expect to generate any significant revenue from the sale of our other product candidates until we complete clinical development, submit regulatory filings and receive approvals from the applicable regulatory bodies for such product candidates, if ever.
Our revenues consist of the following:
Collaboration revenue includes recognition of our profit share from the sales of sotrovimab pursuant to the 2020 GSK Agreement. Our contractual share of 72.5% from the sales of sotrovimab is applied to the revenue reported in the period by GSK, net of cost of goods sold and allowable expenses from both GSK and us (e.g., medical affairs, selling and marketing expenses) and adding back our expenses that appear elsewhere in the consolidated statement of operations (e.g., cost of revenue).
Contract revenue includes recognition of revenue generated from license rights issued to GSK, from research and development services under other third-party contracts, and from a clinical supply agreement with Brii Biosciences Offshore Limited, or Brii Bio.
Grant revenue is comprised of revenue derived from grant agreements with government-sponsored and private organizations.
License revenue from a related party is comprised of revenue related to Brii Bio’s exercise of its option to obtain exclusive rights to develop and commercialize compounds arising from VIR-2218 in greater China recognized in the prior year.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue currently represents royalties earned by third-party licensors on net sales of sotrovimab by us or our collaborators. We recognize these royalties as cost of revenue when we recognize the corresponding revenue that gives rise to payments due to our licensors.
Research and Development
To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to discovery efforts and preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. We do not track research and development expenses by product candidate.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our product candidates in development and prior to regulatory approval, which include:
•expenses related to license and collaboration agreements, and change in fair value of certain contingent consideration obligations arising from business acquisitions;
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel contributing to research and development activities;
•expenses incurred under agreements with third-party contract manufacturing organizations, contract research organizations, and consultants;
•clinical costs, including laboratory supplies and costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•other allocated expenses, including expenses for rent and facilities maintenance, and depreciation and amortization.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including: the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical programs, the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed product candidates, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. To date, sotrovimab has been granted EUA, temporary authorization or marketing approval (under the brand name, Xevudy®) in more than 40 countries. However, we may never succeed in achieving BLA or other similar approvals for sotrovimab or any of our product candidates. In addition, COVID-19 treatment standards are susceptible to rapid changes in epidemiology and the emergence of new variants, thus, sotrovimab may be rendered inferior or obsolete in the future. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate significant revenue from the commercialization and sale of sotrovimab or any of our product candidates. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments, our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential and the impact of public health epidemics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Our clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•whether a collaborator is paying for some or all of the costs;
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
•the phase of development of our product candidates; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses for personnel in executive, finance and other administrative functions, facilities and other allocated expenses, other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, insurance costs and change in fair value of certain contingent consideration obligations arising from business acquisitions. Personnel-related expenses consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation.
We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase substantially in absolute dollars in the foreseeable future as we continue to support our continued research and development activities, and commercialization activities for our EUA product or any of our product candidates, if approved, and to grow our business. We also anticipate incurring additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Change in Fair Value of Equity Investments
Change in fair value of equity investments consists of the remeasurement of our investment in Brii Bio Parent's ordinary shares based on the quoted market price at each reporting date.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and the remeasurement of contingent consideration related to our acquisition of TomegaVax, Inc., or TomegaVax.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consisted primarily of income tax on our domestic and foreign operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented:
Revenues
The increase in collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due to our profit-sharing arrangement with GSK for the sale of sotrovimab under our 2020 GSK Agreement, for which there were no comparable revenues recognized in the prior year. Our contractual share of 72.5% from the sales of sotrovimab is applied to the revenue reported in the period by GSK, net of cost of goods sold and allowable expenses from both GSK and us (e.g., medical affairs, selling, and marketing expenses) and adding back our expenses that appear elsewhere in the consolidated statement of operations (e.g., cost of revenue).
The increase in contract revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to $168.3 million related to the license granted to GSK upon execution of the 2021 GSK Agreement, partially offset by $43.3 million related to the license granted to GSK upon execution of our 2020 GSK Agreement in the prior year.
The decrease in grant revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to a decrease of $3.4 million recognized under the amended grant agreement, originally entered into in January 2018, with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation relating to our HIV program attributable to a supplemental award received in the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by $2.2 million recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021 under the grant agreement entered into in November 2021 with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
The decrease in license revenue from a related party for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due to the $22.7 million of revenue related to Brii Bio’s exercise of its option to obtain exclusive rights to develop and commercialize compounds arising from VIR-2218 in greater China recognized in the prior year.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table shows the primary components of our research and development expenses for the periods presented:
The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to the following factors:
•clinical costs increased by $67.8 million, which was primarily attributable to activities related to our sotrovimab, VIR-2218 and VIR-3434 clinical trials;
•personnel-related expenses increased by $52.2 million, which was primarily attributable to an increase in our headcount;
•licenses, collaborations and contingent consideration expenses increased by $22.0 million, which was primarily attributable to increases of $58.9 million in costs under our collaboration agreements with GSK, $9.2 million in fair value of the contingent consideration from our acquisition of Humabs Biomed SA, or Humabs, due to the achievement of certain milestones in 2021 as well as changes in assumptions and probabilities used in calculating the fair value of the remaining liability, and $1.0 million in third-party milestone payments, partially offset by decreases of $31.8 million due to achievement of the first development milestone under our amended collaboration agreement with Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or the Amended Alnylam Agreement, in the first quarter of 2020, $10.0 million payment to Alnylam resulting from Brii Bio's exercise of its option for VIR-2218 in the second quarter of 2020, and $6.4 million in collaboration costs under our Amended Alnylam Agreement;
•other research and development expenses increased by $9.0 million, which was primarily attributable to increases of $6.4 million in the allocation of facilities and other costs due to an increase in our headcount and higher lease expense, and $2.7 million in sublicense fees due under a license agreement; and
•contract manufacturing expense decreased by $5.4 million, which was primarily attributable to a decrease of $13.5 million in costs related to our COVID-19 product candidates mainly resulting from the completion of clinical manufacturing activities in the third quarter of 2020, partially offset by an increase of $8.2 million related to our HBV drug supply in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to increases of $39.4 million in fair value of the contingent consideration related to sales-based milestones from our acquisition of Humabs that were achieved in the fourth quarter of 2021, $39.0 million in personnel-related expenses resulting from additional headcount, and $10.6 million in external consulting services.
Change in Fair Value of Equity Investments
In July 2021, Brii Bio Parent became a publicly traded company on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited. In connection with the initial public offering, our investment in shares of Brii Bio Parent became a marketable equity investment and subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized an unrealized gain of $138.0 million due to the change in fair value of the equity investment. No comparable amount was incurred for the same period in 2020.
Interest Income
The decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower interest rates and higher amortization of premium on investment balances for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020.
Other Expense, Net
The increase in other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily related to the change in fair value of the contingent consideration related to our acquisition of TomegaVax.
Provision for Income Taxes
The increase in provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to taxable income for 2021 attributable to significant collaboration revenue from the sale of sotrovimab as well as unrealized gain from the equity investment in Brii Bio Parent.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Capital Requirements
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of our common stock from our initial public offering and follow-on offering; sales of our convertible preferred securities; and payments received under our grant and collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2021, excluding restricted cash, we had $909.5 million cash, cash equivalents and investments, and after excluding the equity investment in Brii Bio Parent, we had $766.4 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had a positive working capital balance and an accumulated deficit of $138.6 million. We have also entered into a sales agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, in 2020 pursuant to which we may from time to time offer and sell shares of our common stock for an aggregate offering price of up to $300.0 million, through or to Cowen, acting as sales agent or principal. We will pay Cowen a commission of up to 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares, reimburse legal fees and disbursements and provide Cowen with customary indemnification and contribution rights. As of December 31, 2021, no shares have been issued under the Sales Agreement.
Our primary use of our capital resources is to fund our operating expenses, which consist primarily of expenditures related to identifying, acquiring, developing, manufacturing and in-licensing our technology platforms and product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, and to a lesser extent, selling, general and administrative expenditures.
Future Funding Requirements
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2021 as noted above will enable us to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. However, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional financing to fund our long-term operations sooner than planned. Moreover, it is particularly difficult to estimate with certainty our future revenue and expenses given the dynamic and rapidly evolving nature of our business and the COVID-19 pandemic environment generally. We may also need to raise additional capital to complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates and fund certain of our existing manufacturing and other commitments. We anticipate raising additional capital through the sale of our equity securities, incurring debt, entering into collaboration, licensing or similar arrangements with third parties, or receiving research contributions, grants or other sources of financing to fund our operations. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. There can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to us on attractive terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding from these or other sources, it may be necessary to significantly reduce our rate of spending through reductions in staff and delaying, scaling back, or stopping certain research and development programs. Insufficient liquidity may also require us to relinquish rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic
continues to rapidly evolve and has already resulted in a significant disruption of global financial markets. If the disruption persists and deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our capacity for certain corporate development transactions or our ability to make other important, opportunistic investments. Market volatility, inflation, interest rate fluctuations and concerns related to the COVID-19 pandemic may have a significant impact on the availability of funding sources and the terms on which any funding may be available.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of biotechnology products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Financial Position and Capital Needs” for a description of certain risks that will affect our future capital requirements.
We have various operating lease arrangements for office and laboratory spaces located in California, Oregon, Missouri, and Switzerland with contractual lease periods expiring between 2022 and 2033. As of December 31, 2021, we expect to make total lease payments of $185.4 million through 2033.
To date, we have entered into collaboration, license and acquisition agreements where the payment obligations are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial milestones, and we are required to make royalty payments in connection with the sale of products developed under those agreements. For additional information regarding these agreements, including our payment obligations thereunder, see the sections titled “Business-Our Collaboration, License and Grant Agreements” and “Business-Our Acquisition Agreements,” as well as Note 4-Acquisitions and Note 7-Collaboration and License Agreements to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For information related to our future commitments under our facilities and manufacturing agreements, see Note 9-Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $47.6 million. This consisted primarily of net income of $528.6 million and non-cash charges of $203.3 million, offset by an unrealized gain of $138.0 million on our equity investment, payment of contingent consideration of $8.1 million for the achievement of a milestone related to our TomegaVax acquisition, a gain of $4.8 million from a sublease termination, and an increase in our net operating assets of $628.4 million. The change in our net operating assets of $628.4 million was primarily due to an increase in receivable from collaboration by $773.1 million resulting from our profit share from the sale of sotrovimab, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.7 million, partially offset by an increase in deferred revenue of $92.0 million driven by the upfront fee received under the 2021 GSK Agreement, and an increase in accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities of $58.5 million due to timing of payments. The non-cash charges of $203.3 million primarily consisted of $91.8 million for revaluation of contingent consideration, $83.8 million for stock-based compensation expense, $15.2 million for deferred income tax expense, $6.2 million for noncash lease expense, and $5.3 million for depreciation and amortization.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $190.9 million. This consisted primarily of a net loss of $298.7 million and payments on contingent consideration of $15.8 million related to the milestones achieved related to our Humabs acquisition, partially offset by a decrease in our net operating assets of $29.5 million and non-cash charges of $94.0 million. The change in our net operating assets of $29.5 million was primarily due to an increase in accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities by $46.6 million, which was partially offset by a decrease in deferred revenue of $7.0 million related to revenue recognized from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation grants, a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $3.7 million due to lease payments, and an increase of $4.5 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily related to prepayment of clinical trial cost for our research and development activities. The non-cash charges of $94.0 million primarily consisted of $38.4 million for revaluation of contingent consideration related to our Humabs acquisition, $16.8 million for the change in fair value of the derivative liability under the Alnylam Agreement, $27.6 million for stock-based compensation expense, and $4.4 million for depreciation and amortization.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $140.8 million. This consisted primarily of purchases of investments of $420.2 million and property and equipment of $21.8 million, partially offset by $301.2 million in proceeds received from investments that matured during the period.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $9.9 million. This consisted primarily of purchases of investments of $403.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $6.5 million, partially offset by $400.3 million in proceeds received from investments which matured during the period.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $100.3 million. This consisted primarily of proceeds received from the issuance of our common stock to Glaxo Group Limited (an affiliate of GSK) of $85.2 million in March 2021, from exercises of stock options of $13.1 million, and from issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $2.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $529.5 million. This consisted primarily of proceeds received from the issuance of our common stock to GSK of $206.7 million in April 2020, the issuance of our common stock related to our follow-on offering of $323.2 million and from exercises of stock options of $4.1 million, partially offset by payments of contingent consideration related to our Humabs acquisition of $4.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. The critical accounting policies, estimates and judgments that we believe to have the most significant impacts to our consolidated financial statements are described below. For more detail on our critical accounting policies, refer to Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Collaboration, License and Contract Revenue
Under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods and services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
For collaborative arrangements that fall within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements, or ASC 808, we first determine which elements of the collaboration are deemed to be a performance obligation with a customer within the scope of ASC 606. For elements of collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to ASC 808 and are not
subject to the guidance in ASC 606, we apply the revenue recognition model under ASC 606 or other guidance, as deemed appropriate. When we are considered an agent in elements of collaboration arrangements within the scope of ASC 808, we record our share of collaboration revenue in the period in which such sales occur. We are considered an agent when the collaboration partner controls the product before transfer to the customers and has the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the product. In these instances, collaboration revenue is based upon the revenue reported by our collaboration partners, net of cost of goods sold and allowable expenses (e.g. medical affairs, selling and marketing expenses) in the period. In order to record collaboration revenue, we utilize certain information from our collaboration partner, including revenue from the sale of the product, and costs incurred for development and sales activities. For the periods covered in the financial statements presented, there have been no material changes to prior period estimates of revenues and expenses.
We have entered into a number of license and collaboration agreements that fall within the scope of ASC 606. We evaluate the promised goods or services in these agreements to determine which ones represent distinct performance obligations. These agreements may include the following types of promised goods or services: (i) grants of licenses, (ii) performance of research and development services, and (iii) participation on joint research and/or development committees. They also may include options to obtain licenses to our intellectual property.
Prior to recognizing revenue, we make estimates of the transaction price, including variable consideration that is subject to a constraint. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. These estimates are re-assessed each reporting period as required. These agreements may include the following types of consideration: non-refundable upfront payments, reimbursement for research services, research, development or regulatory milestone payments, profit-sharing arrangements, and royalty and commercial sales milestone payments.
If there are multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on their estimated standalone selling prices, or SSP. We estimate the SSP for each distinct performance obligation by considering information such as market conditions, entity-specific factors, and information about our customer that is reasonably available to us. We consider estimation approaches that allow us to maximize the use of observable inputs. These estimation approaches may include the adjusted market assessment approach, the expected cost plus a margin approach or the residual approach. We also consider whether to use a different estimation approach or a combination of approaches to estimate the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. Developing various assumptions, including treatable patient population, expected market share, probability of success and product profitability, and discount rate based on weighted-average cost of capital, to determine the estimated SSP of a distinct performance obligation requires significant judgment. Accordingly, these assumptions are subject to uncertainty, and changing the methodology and/or assumptions could materially impact the estimated SSP for distinct performance obligations, and as a result, the amount and/or timing of revenue recognition.
For performance obligations satisfied over time, we estimate the efforts needed to complete the performance obligation and recognize revenue by measuring the progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an input measure. For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including commercial milestone payments based on pre-specified level of sales, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). Achievement of these royalties and commercial milestones may solely depend upon the performance of the licensee.
Management may be required to exercise considerable judgment in estimating revenue to be recognized. Judgment is required in identifying performance obligations, estimating the transaction price, estimating the SSP of identified performance obligations, and estimating the progress towards satisfaction of performance obligations.
Contingent Consideration and Embedded Derivatives
Contingent consideration related to business combinations and obligations required to be accounted for as embedded derivative financial instruments under Topic ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, are considered to be Level 3 instruments that are initially measured at their estimated fair values on the transaction date and subsequently remeasured with changes recorded in the consolidated statement of operations each subsequent reporting period.
The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration related to the Humabs acquisition was determined by calculating the probability-weighted clinical and regulatory milestone payments based on the assessment of the likelihood
and estimated timing that certain milestones would be achieved, as well as the use of Monte Carlo simulation model that includes significant estimates and assumptions pertaining to commercialization events and sales targets. The most significant unobservable inputs are the probabilities of achieving clinical and regulatory approval of the development projects and the subsequent commercial success and discount rates.
The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration related to our acquisition of TomegaVax was determined based on a Monte Carlo simulation model that includes significant estimates and assumptions pertaining to probability and timing to achieve the required share price of our common stock, expected volatility and discount rate. Although the TomegaVax acquisition was accounted for as an asset acquisition, such contingent consideration met the definition of an embedded derivative financial instrument.
For the periods covered in the financial statements presented, there have been no material changes to prior period estimates of the fair value of our contingent consideration liability.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition or results of operations.