Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a development-stage biotechnology company focused on advancing novel antiviral therapies to treat diseases associated with a viral triggered abnormal immune response such as FM. Overactive immune response related to activation of tissue resident herpes virus has been postulated to be a potential root cause of chronic illnesses such as FM, IBS, chronic fatigue syndrome and functional somatic syndrome, all of which are characterized by a waxing and waning manifestation of disease. While not completely understood, there is general agreement in the medical community that activation of the herpes virus is triggered by some form of environmental and/or health stressor. Our lead product, IMC-1, is a novel, proprietary, fixed dose combination of famciclovir and celecoxib. IMC-1 represents a novel combination, dual mechanism, antiviral therapy designed to synergistically suppress herpes virus activation and replication, with the end goal of reducing viral mediated disease burden.
IMC-1 combines two specific mechanisms of action purposely designed to inhibit herpes virus activation and replication, thereby keeping the herpes virus in a latent (dormant) state or “down-regulating” the virus
from a lytic (active) state back to latency. The famciclovir component of IMC-1 inhibits viral DNA replication. The celecoxib component of IMC-1 inhibits cyclooxegenase-2 (“COX-2”) and to a lesser degree cyclooxegenase-1 (“COX-1”), enzymes used by the herpes virus to amplify or accelerate its own replication. We are unaware of any other antivirals in development for the treatment of FM specifically used to inhibit both herpes virus activation and subsequent replication, with the goal of keeping tissue resident herpes virus tissue in a latent state. We believe this novel approach was a germane consideration in U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) designating IMC-1 for fast-track review status for the treatment of FM. IMC-1 has also been granted a synergy patent based on the fact that neither of the individual components has proven effective in the management of FM, yet the combination therapy generated a result that is greater than the sum of its parts.
In June 2021, we announced the dosing of our first patient in our Phase 2b study in FM, known as the FORTRESS study (an abbreviation of and stands for Fibromyalgia Outcome Research Trial Evaluating Synergistic Suppression of Herpes Virus). We are presently enrolling over 400 female patients aged 18 to 65, who have been diagnosed with FM using the 2016 American College of Rheumatology diagnostic criteria for FM. The study participants are being randomized to receive either IMC-1 or placebo in a 1:1 ratio. The primary endpoint of our FORTRESS study focuses on reduction in pain over time. Pain reduction is being measured daily by the numeric rating scale (“NRS”) 24-hour recall scale via an electronic diary that the patient uses at home. In addition to assessing the FM patients pain reduction, we are assessing IMC-1’s ability to improve symptoms of fatigue, sleep disturbance, improvements in overall global health status and improved patient function. We have enrolled over 50% of patients in the trial and project top line results from the FORTRESS study in the third quarter of 2022. In parallel to the FORTRESS study, our chronic toxicology studies in two species are progressing as planned. These studies are required by regulatory authorities to support chronic administration of IMC-1 in forward clinical development. The results of our chronic toxicology program are timed to complete in the third quarter of 2022 as well.
We have never been profitable and have incurred losses since inception. Our net losses were $15,960,268 and $10,346,395 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and our accumulated deficit at December 31, 2021 was $43,925,373. We expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect these losses to increase as we continue to develop and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
We recognize the emergence of widespread health emergencies or pandemics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, could have a significant impact on our business or delay the enrollment or completion of our proposed clinical trials, including the FORTRESS study. Future emergence of widespread health emergencies or pandemics could lead to new quarantines, business shutdowns, disruptions to the healthcare system and overall economic instability. If suppliers, clinical research organizations, clinical trial sites, regulators, consultants and other third parties with whom we conduct business were to experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to enroll patients and conduct our clinical trial in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially and negatively impacted. Although we currently believe our FORTRESS study will be completed on time, we cannot guarantee that the COVID-19 pandemic or any other widespread health emergencies will not have a material impact on our business or the timely completion of our clinical trials.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in development and clinical studies relating to our product candidates, including:
● payments to third-party contract research organizations, or CROs;
● payments to third-party contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CMOs;
● personnel-related expenses, such as salaries and benefits; and
● payments to contract laboratories and independent consultants.
We expense all research and development costs as incurred. Clinical development expenses for our product candidates are a significant component of our current research and development expenses. Products in later stage clinical development generally have higher research and development expenses than those in earlier stages of development, primarily due to increased size and duration of the clinical trials. We track and record information regarding research and development expenses for each study or trial we conduct. We use third-party CROs, CMOs, contractor laboratories and independent contractors. All research and development costs incurred to date have been for our lead product candidate, IMC-1. We recognize the expenses associated with third parties performing services for us in our clinical studies based on the percentage of each study completed at the end of each reporting period.
Our research and development expenses in 2021 primarily related to our FORTRESS study which began screening patients in May 2021 and two long-term animal toxicology studies - a 26-week study in rats, which began in May 2021 and a 39-week study in dogs, which began in June 2021. We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as a result of the continuation of the FORTRESS study, related toxicology studies, and the initiation of a Phase 3 program in FM. These expenditures are subject to numerous uncertainties regarding timing and cost to completion. Completion of our clinical development and clinical trials may take several years or more. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of the current or future studies and clinical trials or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● successful enrollment in, and completion of, clinical trials;
● successful completion of Investigational New Drug-enabling activities, including for IMC-1 for indications other than FM;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● making arrangements with third-party manufacturers or establishing our own commercial manufacturing capabilities;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and non-patent exclusivity;
● launching commercial sales of IMC-1, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● acceptance of IMC-1, if approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
● effectively competing with other therapies and treatment options;
● a continued acceptable safety profile following approval;
● enforcing and defending intellectual property and proprietary rights and claims; and
● achieving desirable medicinal properties for the intended indications.
A change in the outcome of any of these factors could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of our current and future product candidates. For example, if the FDA, or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development, or if we experience significant delays in execution of or enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of IMC-1 and other potential product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related personnel costs, including equity and stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include public company costs, directors and officers’ insurance, professional fees for legal, including patent related expenses, consulting, auditing and tax services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities and potential commercialization of our product candidates and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, among other expenses.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net, in 2020, primarily consists of interest expense on the convertible promissory notes and amortization of related debt issuance costs that converted into membership interests in connection with our conversion into a Delaware corporation on December 16, 2020. Other (expense) income, net, in 2021, primarily consists of the cost associated with the Release and Settlement Agreement with Torreya. See Item 3. Legal Proceedings and Note 10 to the Financial Statements included in the Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Related Parties
The Company uses Gendreau Consulting, LLC, a consulting firm (“Gendreau”), for drug development, clinical trial design, and planning, implementation and execution of contracted activities with CROs. Gendreau’s managing member became the Company’s Chief Medical Officer (“CMO”) effective January 1, 2021. The Company has and will continue to contract the services of the CMO’s spouse through the firm to perform certain activities in connection with the Company’s ongoing clinical trial in FM.
For a full discussion of related party transactions see Note 9 to the Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $17,956,000. These net operating losses can be carried forward and applied against future taxable income, if any. These losses currently have no expiration date and may be carried forward
indefinitely. As the Company was incorporated in December 2020, all tax years of the Company remain open to examination by tax authorities.
The Company has recorded a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 because the Company has determined that it is more likely than not that these assets will not be fully realized due to historic net operating losses incurred. The ultimate realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which these temporary differences become deductible.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as critical because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates - which also would have been reasonable - could have been used. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. The Company arranges and contracts with third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”), contract development and manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”), contractor laboratories and independent consultants. As part of the process of preparing its financial statements, the Company may be required to estimate some of its expenses resulting from its obligations under these arrangements and contracts. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided. The Company’s objective is to reflect the appropriate expenses in its financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are rendered. The Company determines any accrual estimates based on account discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion. The Company makes estimates of its accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. The Company’s estimates are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of CROs, CMOs and other third-party vendors. At the end of each reporting period, the Company compares the payments made to each service provider to the estimated progress towards completion of the related project. Factors that the Company considers in preparing these estimates include the number of patients enrolled in studies, milestones achieved, and other criteria related to the efforts of its vendors. These estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, the Company will record prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Equity and Share-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes compensation expense relating to equity-based payments based on the fair value of the equity or liability instrument issued. For equity-based instruments, the expense is based upon the grant date fair value and recognized over the service period. For awards with a performance condition,
compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period if it is probable that the performance condition will be satisfied. For awards to non-employees, the Company recognizes compensation expense in the same manner as if the Company had paid cash for the goods or services. The Company estimates the fair value of options and warrants granted using an options pricing model. Expense is recognized within general and administrative expenses and forfeitures are recognized as they are incurred.
Results of Operations
Operating expenses and other (expense) income were comprised of the following:
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $10.6 million to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to increases in expenses for our FORTRESS study of $7.1 million, toxicology studies of $1.8 million, salaries and related personnel costs of $1.0 million and drug development and manufacturing costs of $0.7 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased by $5.0 million to $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to a decrease of $7.6 million in salaries, benefits and equity and share-based compensation costs offset by an increase of $2.2 million in costs associated with being a public company and an increase of $0.4 million in accounting and legal fees. The significant year over year decrease in compensation expense was attributable to the recognition in 2020 $2.0 million in equity-based compensation for the issuances of membership interests to the Company’s founder and the recognition of $5.4 million in share-based compensation for the issuance of stock options pursuant to executive employment agreements upon our IPO.
Other (Expense) Income
Other expenses decreased by $0.02 million to $0.32 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.34 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was mainly due to a net decrease in interest expense of $0.39 million, which was the result of the conversion of debt upon our Corporate Conversion and IPO in December 2020 offset by a net increase in other expense in 2021 of $0.37 million primarily related to the Release and Settlement Agreement with Torreya.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations through a public offering of common stock and proceeds from private placements of membership interests and convertible promissory notes. To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of products and we do not anticipate generating any revenue from the sales of products for the foreseeable future. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was our cash, which totaled $14.0 million.
The COVID-19 global pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions and temporary shutdowns of both essential and non-essential businesses in the United States and abroad. To date, the pandemic has not had a material impact on our operations as our employees are effectively working from home. FM research and development activities have largely progressed as planned during the pandemic. However, due to many uncertainties, we are unable to estimate the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, if any, in the future.
Equity Financings
We closed our IPO on December 21, 2020, raising gross proceeds of $34.5 million and net proceeds of approximately $31.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
Debt Financings
In 2020, we issued an aggregate of $2.0 million principal amount of convertible promissory notes. At the Corporate Conversion, these notes converted to common interests at the price of $400,000 per 1% of common interests. There was no debt outstanding at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Future Capital Requirements
We estimate our current cash of $14.0 million at December 31, 2021 is sufficient to fund our operations and capital requirements through the end of the first quarter of 2023. We believe that these available funds will be sufficient to complete our FORTRESS study for IMC-1 and commence the planning of our Phase 3 study in FM for this product candidate. However, it is difficult to predict our spending for our product candidates prior to obtaining FDA approval. Moreover, an adverse change in circumstances could cause us to expend cash faster than we currently anticipate because of any such circumstances beyond our control.
We will need to raise additional capital before we exhaust our current cash in order to continue to fund our research and development, including our plans for Phase 3 and any new product development, as well as to fund operations generally. As and if necessary, we will seek to raise additional funds through various potential sources, such as equity and debt financings or through corporate collaboration and license agreements, and we may file one or more registration statements with the SEC in connection with such financings. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our shareholders will experience dilution. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, or, if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities.
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operations was $15.7 million and consisted of a net loss of $15.9 million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $0.1 million attributable to an increase in prepaid expenses offset by non-cash items of $0.3 million attributable to share-based compensation.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash used in operations was $3.9 million and consisted of a net loss of $10.3 million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million offset by non-cash items of $7.4 million attributable to equity and share-based compensation. The net change in operating assets and liabilities included an increase in prepaid expenses of $1.7 million offset by a net increase in operating liabilities of $0.7 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash used by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.1 million and was attributable to $0.2 million in proceeds received from the exercise of warrants offset by payment of IPO offering costs of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $33.4 million and was attributable to cash proceeds from our IPO of $31.3 million, net of deal costs and other expenses, $1.9 million net proceeds from the issuance of convertible promissory notes and $0.2 million proceeds from the exercise of warrants to purchase our common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to the financial statements elsewhere in this report for details of recently issued accounting pronouncements and their expected impact on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”), was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” As an “emerging growth company,” we are electing to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.