Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to various factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and those other factors discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year-end is December 31.
Overview
Vislink, incorporated in the state of Delaware in 2006, is a global technology business specializing in collecting, delivering, and managing high-quality, live video and associated data from the action scene to the viewing screen. Vislink provides solutions for collecting live news, sports, and entertainment events for the broadcast markets. Vislink also furnishes the surveillance and defense markets with real-time video intelligence solutions using various tailored transmission products. The Vislink team also provides professional and technical services utilizing a staff of technology experts with decades of applied knowledge and real-world experience in the terrestrial microwave, satellite, fiber optic, surveillance, and wireless communications systems delivering a broad spectrum of customer solutions. The Vislink and Mobile Viewpoint Connected Edge solutions leverage IP networks to provide their customers low latency, high-capacity ultrafast live video transport utilizing AI to automate workflows.
LIVE BROADCAST:
With over 50 years in operation, Vislink has the expertise and technology portfolio to deliver fully integrated, seamless, end-to-end solutions. Vislink provides an extensive portfolio of solutions for live news, sports, and entertainment industries. These solutions encompass the video collection, transmission, management, and distribution via microwave, satellite, cellular, I.P., and MESH networks.
Industry-wide contributors acknowledge Vislink’s live broadcast solutions. The transmission of a vast majority of all outside wireless broadcast video content uses our equipment, with over 200,000 systems installed worldwide. We work closely with the majority of the world’s broadcasters. Vislink wireless cameras and ultra-compact encoders help bring many of the world’s most prestigious sporting and entertainment events to life. Recent examples include globally watched international sporting contests, award shows, racing events, and annual music and cultural events.
MILITARY AND GOVERNMENT:
Building on our knowledge of live video delivery, Vislink has developed high-quality solutions to meet surveillance and defense markets’ operational and industry challenges. Vislink solutions are specifically designed with interagency cooperation in mind, utilizing a standard international protocol, I.P., platform, and a web interface for video delivery. Vislink provides comprehensive video, audio, and data communications solutions to law enforcement and public safety, including Airborne, Unmanned Systems, Maritime, and Tactical Mobile Command Posts. These solutions may include airborne downlinks, terrestrial point-to-point, tactical mobile command, maritime, UAV, and personal portable products that meet the demands of field operations, command centers, and central receiving sites. Short-range and long-range solutions are available in areas including established infrastructure and exceptionally remote regions, making valuable video intelligence available regardless of location. Vislink public safety and surveillance solutions are deployed worldwide, including throughout the United States, Europe, and the Middle East, at the local, regional, and federal levels of operation, a criminal investigation, crisis management, mobile command posts, and field operations.
SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS:
Over 30 years of technical expertise supports Vislink’s satellite solutions. These solutions ensure robust, secure communications while delivering low transmission costs for any organization that needs high-quality, reliable satellite transmission. We offer turnkey solutions that begin with state-of-the-art coding, compression, engine modulation and end with our robust, lightweight antenna systems. Vislink Satellite solutions focus heavily on being the smallest, lightest, and most efficient in their categories, making transportation and ease of use a key driver in the customer experience. Vislink offers an extensive range of satellite designs that allow customers to optimize bit rate, size, weight, and total cost. Our satellite systems are used extensively globally, with over 2,000 systems deployed by governments, militaries, and broadcasters alike.
CONNECTED EDGE SOLUTIONS:
Vislink offers the hardware and software solutions needed to acquire, produce, contribute, and deliver video over all private and public networks with this acquisition. Connected edge solutions aid the video transport concept of utilizing ubiquitous IP networks and cloud-scale compute across 5G, WiFi6, Mesh, and COFDM-enabled networks. These solutions include:
● Live video encoding, stream adaptation, decode and production solutions
● Remote production workflows
● Wireless cameras
● AI-driven automated production
● Ability to contribute video over:
● Bonded cellular (3G and 4G)
● Satellite
● Fiber
● Emerging networks, including 5G and Starlink
COVID-19 Update
The ongoing global health crisis (including resurgences) resulting from the pandemic have and continue to disrupt the normal operations of many businesses, including the temporary closure or scale-back of business operations and/or the imposition of either quarantine or remote work or meeting requirements for employees, either by government order or voluntarily. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic, and worldwide governmental authorities have taken extraordinary steps to contain and combat the impact of the coronavirus. While the outbreak recently appeared to be trending downward, notably as vaccination rates increased, new variants of COVID-19 continue emerging, including the Delta variant and the newly-discovered highly transmissible Omicron variant (currently a “variant of concern”), spreading throughout the United States and globally and causing significant uncertainty.
The global economy, our markets, and our business have been and may continue to be materially and adversely affected by COVID-19. Mounting omicron infections have forced firms to scramble, threatening economic recovery, and many employers vow to stay open but struggle as employees fall sick or quarantined. Major airlines have canceled thousands of flights, while public transit systems in New York and Washington curtailed service because of staffing shortages. Professional sports schedules were upended, and corporations such as American Express, Goldman Sachs, and The Washington Post have shelved their return-to-office plans. The recovery remains vulnerable to the coronavirus’s unpredictable trajectory.
The COVID-19 pandemic in generating cases worldwide affects air and sea cargo shippers, factory shutdowns, and closures, creating global supply-chain bottlenecks, shortages of components, and surging prices of critical raw materials squeezing manufacturers globally. We cannot foresee if worldwide governments can effectively contain the outbreak of COVID-19 on a sustained basis, nor can we predict the severity and duration of its impact. We cannot predict the effect of the Delta or Omicron variant or other new, more contagious, or lethal variants that may emerge, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against the Delta or Omicron variant or such different variants, and the related responses by governments, including reinstated government-imposed lockdowns or other measures.
The Company closely monitors the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and geographies, including how it will impact business partners. The Company continues to experience supply chain shortages and delays in obtaining specific inventory items. The Company’s operations team is mitigating the risk by increasing inventory levels in its purchase management of these components. The execution of this policy has improved our ability to ship products.
It is unclear how such restrictions will contribute to a general slowdown in the global economy, and it is difficult to isolate the impact of the pandemic on our business, the results of operations, financial condition, and our future strategic plans. Further, while many companies have survived the past year, and some have thrived, as the pandemic endures, we cannot predict how the global economy will respond to the return to normalcy or whether it will continue to sustain steadily.
In addition, the Company is uncertain of the total effect the pandemic will have on it for the long term since the scope and duration of the pandemic is unknown. The protocol followed in distributing effective vaccines across the world, and the extent of any resurgences of the virus or emergence of new variants of the virus, such as the Delta, Omicron and other variants, will impact the stability of economic recovery and growth. The extent to which the operations of the Company, and the operations of its customers and supply chain, may be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend mainly on these future developments. The Company may experience long-term disruptions to its operations resulting from government policy or guidance; quarantines of employees, customers, and suppliers in areas affected by the pandemic; and closures of businesses or manufacturing facilities critical to its business or supply chains. The Company is actively monitoring and will continue to monitor the pandemic and the potential impact on its operations, financial condition, liquidity, suppliers, industry, and workforce.
COVID-19 Update (continued)
Vislink enforces strict social distancing, symptom self-assessments, sanitation, and mask protocols within its facilities. We believe that we comply with all public health guidance, and we continue to take precautionary measures, make contingency plans, and improve our response to the ongoing situation. The Company continues to perform most administrative operations remotely, in the United States and overseas. The Company continues to limit business travel and face-to-face meetings, and a portion of its non-manufacturing employees work remotely. Remote work arrangements and travel restrictions have not adversely affected Vislink’s ability to maintain operations and financial reporting, and the Company does not anticipate a material impact on its human capital resources or productivity.
For further discussion of the challenges and risks we confront related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and otherwise, please refer to Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Climate Change-Related Effects
Climate change is an important global issue that presents opportunities and challenges for our company, partners, and communities. Climate change matters for our company are likely to be driven by changes in physical climate parameters, regulations and/or public policy, and changes in technology and product demand.
The lack of empirical data surrounding the credit and other financial risks posed by climate change renders it impossible to predict how specifically climate change may impact our financial condition and results of operations; however, the physical effects of climate change may also directly affect us. The global business community has increased its political and social awareness surrounding the issue, and the United States has entered into international agreements to reduce global temperatures, such as reentering the Paris Agreement. Further, the U.S. Congress, state legislatures, and federal and state regulatory agencies continue to propose numerous initiatives to supplement the global effort to combat climate change
Further, the effects of climate change may negatively impact regional and local economic activity, which could adversely affect our customers and impact the communities in which we operate. In addition, there is a growing concern from advocacy groups and the general public that the emissions of greenhouse gases and other human activities have caused, or will cause, significant changes in weather patterns and temperatures and the frequency and severity of natural disasters.
Overall, climate change, its effects, and the resulting unknown impact could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. While we seek to mitigate the risks associated with climate change, we recognize inherent climate-related risks regardless of where we conduct our businesses. Access to clean water and reliable energy in the communities where we operate our company is a priority. Any of our locations may be vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. Climate-related events can potentially disrupt our business, including our customers, and cause us to experience higher attrition, losses, and additional costs to resume operations.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the items in the consolidated statements of operations of the financial statements included herewith for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 (in thousands).
Revenue
The revenues ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $33.9 million and $22.9 million, respectively, representing an increase of $11.0 million or 48%. The Company experienced an increase of $8.90 million in North America, $0.30 million in Europe, $0.30 million in the rest of the world, offset by a decrease of $0.50 in Asia.
The increase in revenues is predominantly due to three factors (1) an increase in live event-related sales attributable to the return of these activities to pre-pandemic levels. (2) an increase in military/government sales and (3) the recognition of additional revenue from the August 16, 2021 acquisition of MVP.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of Components and Personnel
The cost of components and personnel for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $15.2 million and $13.9 million, respectively, representing an increase of $1.3 million or 9%. The increase in the cost of components and personnel is predominately twofold: (1) an increase in expenditures associated with the upsurge in production, including labor necessary to yield the growth in the sale of products during the year, and (2) additional costs of components and personnel incurred resulting from the August 16, 2021 acquisition of MVP.
In the first quarter of 2022, we have been experiencing supply chain challenges and related cost impacts. We have secured additional raw materials from existing and alternate suppliers and have taken other actions to mitigate supply disruptions. We have offset specific cost increases with increases in the selling price of some of our products. We cannot guarantee that we can continue to do so in the future. In this event, our business, results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Inventory Valuation Adjustments
Inventory valuation adjustments are tools used to determine inventory measurement at lower-of-cost-or-market or lower-of-cost and net realizable value. For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 inventory valuation adjustments amounted to $0.9 million and $0.4 million, representing an increase of $0.5 million or 125%. The increase is primarily due to identifying items of inventory considered obsolete.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are costs incurred in operating the business daily and include salary and benefit expenses, including stock-based compensation and payroll taxes, as well as the costs of trade shows, marketing programs, promotional materials, professional services, facilities, general liability insurance, travel and expenses associated with being a public company.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, general and administrative expenses were $22.0 million and $17.0 million, respectively, representing an increase of $ 5.0 million or 29%.
The increase is primarily attributable to $3.2 million of stock-based compensation, $2.0 million in salaries and benefits, $1.9 million in acquisitions costs, and $0.6 million in insurance, predominately due to the recognition of compensation costs associated with performance-based registered stock units, the addition of senior management personnel, the Company’s acquisition of MVP, and the increase in the D & O insurance policy coverage. This was offset by the decrease of $0.9 million in professional fees and $0.8 million in bad debt.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, including stock-based compensation and payroll taxes and prototypes, facilities, and travel costs. For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, research and development expenses were $3.1 million and $2.7 million, respectively, representing an increase of $0.4 million or 15%. The increase is primarily attributable to miscellaneous research and consulting fees of $0.4 million.
Impairment
The Company recorded impairments related to inventory and right-of-use assets operating leases in the amounts of $-0- million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded goodwill impairment charges of $9.2 million and $-0-, respectfully, based upon our annual quantitative assessment in the assessment of goodwill. Our assessment recognized a decline in our market capitalization due to unfavorable changes in the market and the rise in inflation as “triggering event” conditions increasing the risk of impairment.
Amortization and Depreciation
Amortization and depreciation expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $1.3 million and $1.4 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $0.1 million or 7%. The reduction is primarily due to Company assets being impaired or fully depreciated in current and prior years.
Gain on settlement of debt
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the company recognized a gain on settlement of debt amounting to $1.4 million and $ 0.10 million, respectively, and an increase of $1.3 million or 1300%. The increase is predominantly attributable to the forgiveness of the PPP government grant in July 2021.
Net Loss
Net losses for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were $16.4 million and $17.6 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $1.2 million or 7%.
The reduction in the Company’s net loss has been partly due to the Company’s implementation of cost-saving strategic initiatives in response to uncertainties of the economic climate predicated by the COVID-19 pandemic. We remain uncertain of the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s future impact on our operations or whether it will result in business disruptions and the possible severity. It is indeterminable to assess the duration or lasting impact the pandemic will have on the economy. With vaccines in place, new therapeutics currently under trial-testing procedures, the recent Delta and Omicron variants, coupled with possible future unknown variants, the Company will continue to attempt to mitigate unexpected conditions brought by the future influence of the COVID-19 pandemic, domestically and worldwide, continuing to employ workforce safety and security, cost management, and enterprise agility.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company incurred an approximate $17.7 million loss from operations and $9.6 million of cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company had $50.7 million in working capital, $286.5 million in accumulated deficits, and $36.2 million of cash on hand as of December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued 6,163,198 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $12,600,000 under its at-the-market facility with Alliance Global Partners (the “ATM”). As of March 31, 2022, approximately $4,500,000 of capacity remains under the ATM.
On February 8, 2021, the Company completed an underwritten public offering for net proceeds of $46,820,000. The Company issued 18,181,820 shares of common stock, supplemented by 9,090,910 five-year warrants with an exercise price of $3.25 per share exercisable for one share of common stock.
The enduring of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the advent of Delta and Omicron variants, plus the uncertainty of possible future variants, may subject the Company to particular challenges of its business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows. The unpredictability of the pandemic’s scope, severity, duration, and actions implemented to alleviate its direct and indirect economic effects and containment measures provides no assurances that the pandemic will not have material adverse repercussions on the Company’s operations, liquidity, financial condition, and any residual unfavorable consequences to global economics.
The Company bases its evaluation on possibilities that may prove wrong and could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Developments may take place, including those beyond our control, that would cause us to consume our available capital more quickly, including but not limited to those relating to the markets in which we compete or wish to enter, strategic acquisitions, our market strategy, our research and development activities, regulatory matters, and technology and product innovations. Notwithstanding these risks and uncertainties, based on management’s liquidity preservation program and proactive spending reductions implemented in the fiscal year 2020, as well as the capital injections discussed above, the Company believes it will have sufficient funds to continue its operations for at least twelve months from the date of these financial statements.
Our operations primarily have been funded through cash generated by debt and equity financing. Cash consists of cash on hand and demand deposits. Our cash balances were as follows (in thousands):
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the major components of our consolidated statements of cash flows data for the periods presented (in thousands).
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $9.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, was principally attributable to a decrease of $1.4 million of accounts payable, a decrease of $0.5 million in operating lease liabilities, offset by an increase of $3.6 million in accounts receivable, $3.2 million of inventory, and $0.9 million of deferred revenue and customer deposits. Additionally, the Company experienced a net loss of $7.2 million, a $1.4 million gain on debt settlement, offset by an impairment in goodwill of $8.2 million, $3.9 million in stock-based compensation, $1.3 million in depreciation and amortization, and $0.8 million of an inventory valuation adjustment.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $17.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, was principally related to the cash used in the acquisition of 100% of MVP’s outstanding shares, cash acquired from the MVP acquisition, offset by a decrease in capital expenditures for furniture and computer equipment. Net cash used in investing activities of $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to equipment purchases.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $58.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, was principally attributable to net proceeds from equity raises and common stock warrants’ exercise offset by the principal payment of $1.0 million for the Company D & O insurance policy.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $18.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the net proceeds received from an equity financing of $18.5 million, principally offset by principal payments made on convertible promissory notes of $0.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared under the United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”), which require us to make estimates and assumptions. Specific critical accounting policies affect the more significant accounts, particularly those involving judgments, assessments, and assumptions used to prepare our consolidated financial statements. Our management has determined the development and selection of these critical accounting policies. We have reviewed our critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors. Due to the significant judgment involved in selecting certain assumptions used in these policies, other parties may choose different assumptions and reach different conclusions. We consider our policies relating to the following matters to be critical accounting policies.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for acquisitions that qualify as business combinations by applying the acquisition method according to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”). Transaction costs related to the acquisition of a business are expensed as incurred and excluded from the fair value of consideration transferred. The identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and noncontrolling interests in an acquired entity are recognized and measured at their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of consideration transferred over the fair values of identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and noncontrolling interests in an acquired entity, net of the fair value of any previously held interest in the acquired entity, is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America or (“U.S. GAAP”) as found in the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), the Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) and the rules and regulations of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. We have eliminated all intercompany accounts and transactions upon the consolidation of our subsidiaries.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. These estimates also affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Significant accounting estimates reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements include the useful lives of property, plant, and equipment, the useful lives of right-of-use assets, the useful lives of intangible assets, impairment of long-lived assets, allowance for accounts receivable doubtful accounts, allowance for inventory obsolescence reserve, allowance for deferred tax assets, valuation of warranty reserves, contingent consideration liabilities, and the accrual of potential liabilities. Actual results could differ from estimates, and any such differences may be material to our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments (continued)
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company’s operations will be subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including financial, operational, regulatory, and other risks associated, including the potential risk of business failure. Global events, including global health concerns, like the COVID-19 pandemic, could also result in social, economic, and labor instability in the countries in which we operate or where the third parties with whom we engage, including sites of manufacturing facilities of our third-party contract manufacturers. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the response to the pandemic and information continues to evolve. The COVID-19 pandemic fluctuations, global supply chain challenges, employment pressures in various industry sectors, and related economic repercussions have created significant uncertainty. Policymakers worldwide have responded with fiscal policy actions to support their industries and economies, but these interventions’ magnitude and overall effectiveness remain uncertain. Although capital markets and economies worldwide improved during the second and third quarters from the initial negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, there remains uncertainty around the strength and timing of global economic recoveries, which could cause a local or global economic recession. Such economic disruption could have a material adverse effect on our business.
International security issues and adverse developments such as the current political tension between Russia, Ukraine, and potentially western security alliances could adversely affect global trade and economic activity. We monitor developments in Ukraine and the related export controls and financial and economic sanctions imposed on specific industry sectors and parties in Russia by the U.S., the U.K., the European Union, and others. Although we do not presently foresee direct material adverse effects upon our business, financial condition, or results of operations due to developments in Ukraine and the consequent controls and sanctions, these factors may affect companies in many sectors. They could lead to increased market volatility and uncertainty, affecting us in turn.
Segment Reporting
The Company identifies operating segments as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete financial information is available for evaluation by the operating decision-makers, or decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and assess performance. The Company’s decision-making group is the senior executive management team. The Company and the decision-making group view the Company’s operations and manage its business as one operating segment with different product offerings. All long-lived assets of the Company reside in the U.S., the U.K., and the Netherlands.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company extends credit to its customers in the ordinary course of business. Further, the Company regularly reviews outstanding receivables and provides for estimated losses through an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the level of established loss reserves, the Company makes judgments regarding its customer’s ability to make required payments, prevailing economic conditions, previous experience, and other factors. As these factors’ financial situation changes, circumstances develop, or additional information becomes available, adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. The Company maintains reserves for credit losses, and losses have been within its expectations.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are presented at cost at the date of acquisition, less depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over estimated useful asset lives, ranging from 1 to 14 years. The costs of the day-to-day servicing of property and equipment and repairs and maintenance are recognized in expenses as incurred.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquired business over the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination under the acquisition method of accounting under ASC 805 “Business Combinations” (see Note 4). Goodwill is not amortized but, per ASC 350, is tested for impairment annually. Goodwill is also tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount. Judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred during the course of a year. When testing goodwill for impairment, we may assess qualitative factors for some or all of our reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. Alternatively, we may bypass this qualitative assessment for some or all of our reporting units and perform step 1 of the two-step goodwill impairment test. If we perform step 1 and the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, we will perform step 2 to measure such impairment. We have completed our annual impairment test and recorded $9,189,000 in goodwill impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments (continued)
Intangible Assets
Patents and licenses:
Patents and licenses, measured initially at purchase cost, are included in intangible assets on the Company’s balance sheet and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 18.5 to 20 years. Amortization totaled $668,000 and $669,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Other intangible assets:
The Company’s remaining intangible assets include the trade names, technology, and customer lists acquired in IMT, Vislink, and Mobile Viewpoint Corporate B.V., a third-party appraiser, determined the value of these acquired assets for these business combinations. Absent an indication of fair value from a potential buyer or similar specific transactions; we have determined that using the methods employed provided a reasonable estimate in reporting the values assigned.
The Company amortizes intangible asset costs over their useful lives of 3 to 15 years with its net book value reported on the balance sheet. Amortization totaled approximately $257,000 and $330,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of the promised goods or services to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. The Company determines revenue recognition through the five (5) steps identified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock compensation with persons classified as employees for accounting purposes under ASC 718 “Compensation-Stock Compensation,” which recognizes awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model, and the fair value of common stock issued for services is determined based on the Company’s stock price on the issuance date.
The expansion of Topic 718 fell under ASU 2018-07 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The measurement date for equity-classified nonemployee share-based payment awards is no longer at the earlier date at which a commitment for performance by the counterparty is reached or the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete. Instead, the grant date is now considered the measurement date. Under today’s guidance, the measurement of nonemployee share-based payment awards with performance conditions is at the lowest aggregate fair value, often resulting in a zero value. The new ASU aligns the accounting for nonemployee share-based payment awards with performance conditions with accounting for employee share-based payment awards under Topic 718 by requiring entities to consider the probability of satisfying performance conditions. Current guidance requires entities to use the contractual term to measure the nonemployee share-based payment awards. The new ASU allows entities to make an award-by-award election to use the expected duration (consistent with employee share-based payment awards) or the contractual term for nonemployee awards.
Stock-Option Awards - Time-based and performance-based:
Under ASC Topic 718, the compensation cost is measured based on an award’s fair value at the grant’s date for the time vested option award using the Black Scholes-Merton formula as a valuation technique. The Company used the U.S. Treasury note’s rate over the expected option term for the risk-free rate. Employees’ expected term represents the period that options granted are expected to be outstanding using the simplified method. The Company’s historical share option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis for estimating the expected term. For nonemployee options, the expected term is the entire term of the option. Expected volatility is based on the average weekly share price changes over the shorter expected term or the period from the Nasdaq Capital Markets Exchange placement to the grant’s date. The Company estimates forfeiture and volatility using historical information. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues over the options’ equivalent lives.
The Company has not paid dividends on its common stock, and no assumption of dividend payment(s) is made in the model. For employee equity-classified awards, compensation cost is recognized over the employee’s requisite service period with a corresponding credit to additional paid-in capital. The employee’s requisite service period begins at the service inception date and ends when the requisite service has been provided.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments (continued)
Restricted Stock Unit Awards (“RSUs”) - Time Based:
Under ASC 718, the exercise price for RSUs is determined using the fair market value of the Company’s common stock on the date of the grant. For an award with graded vesting subject only to a service condition (e.g., time-based vesting), ASC 718-10-35-8 provides an accounting policy choice between either graded vesting attribution or straight-line attribution. The Company elects the graded vesting method, recognizing compensation expense for only the portion of awards expected to vest. Forfeitures of time-based units and awards are recognized as they occur. Stock-based compensation costs are calculated using the closing stock price on the grant date to estimate time-based restricted stock units’ fair value.
Restricted Stock Unit Awards (“RSUs”) - Performance-Based:
The accruals of compensation cost for an award with a performance condition are related to that performance condition’s probable outcome. Under ASC 718, a “performance condition” is the achievement of a specified target that is defined by referring to the employer’s operations or activities, such as an option that vests if the employer’s growth rate increases by a certain amount or there are the attainment of regulatory approval for a product. There is an accrual of compensation cost upon the likely achievement of the performance condition, and there is no accrual if the accomplishment of the performance condition is not probable. The exercise price for RSUs is determined using the fair market value of the Company’s common stock on the date of the grant. Stock-based compensation costs are calculated using the closing stock price on the grant date to estimate performance-based restricted stock units’ fair value.
Impairment of inventory
Under the Company’s strategic initiative plan, management recognized that certain items were not moving due to the diminishing consumer demand and lack of profitability. As part of our product rationalization program, a decision to eliminate specific product lines resulted in recognizing an impairment loss of approximately $-0- million and $3.8 million for the years ending December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Management reviews long-lived assets, including property, plant, equipment, other intangible assets with definite lives, and right-of-use operating lease assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. We conduct the Company’s long-lived asset impairment analyses under ASC 360-10-15, “Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.” ASC 360-10-15 requires the Company to group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and evaluate the asset group against the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows. The contemplation of measuring an impairment charge occurs if the undiscounted cash flows do not indicate the asset’s carrying amount is recoverable, by which the asset group’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value based on discounted cash flow analysis appraisals. Under Topic 360, consideration is given to asset impairment, for intangible assets with definite lives continue to be amortized over their estimated useful lives and are subject to impairment testing as part of their asset group if and when events or changes in circumstances indicate. In the performance of the impairment tests, management utilizes a considerable amount of judgment and assumptions.
As part of the Company’s strategic initiative plan, including the consolidation and elimination of specific facilities, it was determined that specific property and equipment were no longer useful, concluding they held no future economic benefit. We abandoned approximately $1.7 million of property and equipment. For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company recognized a loss on property and equipment abandonment of approximately $-0- million and $0.7 million, respectively.
Right-of-use operating lease abandonment
As part of the Company’s consolidating effort, management decided to vacate specific locations and scaled-down square footage usage on another. The economic environment of these locations precluded the action of sub-letting unused sites and determining them abandoned. Under ASC 360, leased space abandonment is an impairment indicator, and the Company assessed the lease ROU assets for impairment. For the years ending December 31, 2021, and 2020, we recognized a loss on impairment of right-of-use assets of approximately $-0- million and $0.9 million.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants and Other Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company classifies common stock purchase warrants and other freestanding financial instruments as equity if the contracts (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement in common stock or (ii) give the Company a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in common stock (physical settlement or net-share settlement). The Company classifies the following contracts as either an asset or a liability: contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement (including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside the control of the Company), (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in common stock (physical settlement or net-share settlement) or (iii) contain reset provisions. The Company assesses the classification of its freestanding derivatives at each reporting date to determine whether a change in classification between assets and liabilities is required.
Commitments and Contingencies
Except as otherwise disclosed in this Report, we have no material commitments or contingent liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments (continued)
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements (Pending final review of newly issued standards to determine applicability by PHC)
Recently Issued Accounting Principles Adopted
On May 21, 2020, the SEC issued Final Rule Release No. 33-10786, “Amendments to Financial Disclosures about Acquired and Disposed Businesses” (“SEC Rule 33-10786”), which amends the disclosure requirements applicable to acquisitions and dispositions of businesses to improve the financial information provided to investors, facilitate more timely access to capital, and reduce the complexity and costs to prepare disclosure. The SEC Rule 33-10786 amends, among other things, (i) the tests used to determine significance and expand the use of proforma financial information; (ii) revise the proforma information requirements; (iii) reduce a maximum number of years for which financial statements under Regulation S-X are required to two years; (iv) permit abbreviated financial statements for certain acquisitions; (v) modify the disclosure requirements relating to the aggregate effect of acquisitions for which financial statements are not required; and, (vi) conform the significance threshold and tests on both disposed and acquired business. The amendments are effective January 1, 2021, but early compliance is permitted. The Company adopted the standard effective January 1, 2021, with no material impact on its Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Not Yet Adopted as of December 31, 2021
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standard Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which, to provide financial statement users with more decision-useful information about the expected credit losses on financial instruments, replaces the current incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. The amendments affect loans, debt securities, trade receivables, net investments in leases, off-balance-sheet credit. ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company has not yet quantified the impact of ASU 2016-13 on its consolidated financial statements. Its adoption is unlikely to have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.