Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis provides information which our management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon our current expectations, estimates and projections, and involves numerous risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements due to, among other considerations, the matters discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We seek to fulfill the promise of additive manufacturing, also referred to as 3D printing (“AM”), to deliver breakthroughs in performance, cost and lead time in the production of high-value metal parts.
We produce a full-stack hardware and software solution based on our proprietary laser powder bed fusion (“L-PBF”) technology, which enables support-free production. Our technology enables the production of highly complex, mission-critical parts that existing AM solutions cannot produce without the need for redesign or additional assembly. Our products give our customers who are in space, aviation, defense, energy, and industrial
markets the freedom to design and produce metal parts with complex internal features and geometries that had previously been considered impossible for AM. We believe our technology is years ahead of competitors.
Our technology is novel compared to other AM technologies based on its ability to deliver high-value metal parts that have complex internal channels, structures and geometries. This affords a wide breadth of design freedom for creating new metal parts and it enables replication of existing parts without the need to redesign the part to be manufacturable with AM. Because of these features, we believe our technology and product capabilities are highly valued by our customers. Our customers are primarily original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and contract manufacturers who look to AM to solve issues with traditional metal parts manufacturing technologies. Those traditional manufacturing technologies rely on processes, including casting, stamping and forging, that typically require high volumes to drive competitive costs and have long lead times for production. Our customers look to AM solutions to produce assemblies that are lighter, stronger and more reliable than those manufactured with traditional technologies. Our customers also expect AM solutions to drive lower costs for low-volume parts and substantially shorter lead times. However, many of our customers have found that legacy AM technologies failed to produce the required designs for the high-value metal parts and assemblies that our customers wanted to produce with AM. As a result, other AM solutions often require that parts be redesigned so that they can be produced and frequently incur performance losses for high-value applications. For these reasons, AM solutions of our competitors have been largely relegated to tooling and prototyping or the production of less complex, lower-value metal parts.
In contrast, our technology can deliver complex high-value metal parts with the design advantages, lower costs and faster lead times associated with AM, and generally avoids the need to redesign the parts. As a result, our customers have increasingly adopted our technology into their design and production processes. We believe our value is reflected in our sales patterns, as most customers purchase a single machine to validate our technology and purchase additional systems over time as they embed our technology in their product roadmap and manufacturing infrastructure. We consider this approach a “land and expand” strategy, oriented around a demonstration of our value proposition followed by increasing penetration with key customers.
Key Financial and Operational Metrics
We believe that our performance and future success depend on many factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.”
Commercial Launch of the Sapphire® XC System
We shipped our first Sapphire® XC system (“Sapphire® XC”) at the end of 2021. The new Sapphire® XC will have capacity to make parts that are 400% larger and reduce production costs per part by approximately 65% to 80% when compared to the existing Sapphire® system.
The Sapphire® XC system is manufactured in our new 80,000+ square foot manufacturing facility in Fremont, California. On November 1, 2021, our lease for this facility commenced with a term of 65 months and a contractual obligation of $10.9 million in base rent and certain reimbursement of lessor’s operating expenses. As of December 31, 2021, we have invested $6.3 million into lab equipment and leasehold improvements. We expect to invest an additional $4.0 million to $6.0 million in factory equipment and leasehold improvements to complete the Sapphire® XC system manufacturing facility in the first half of 2022. Any delays in successful completion of these steps may impact our ability to generate revenue from these products.
As of December 31, 2021, we have received customer deposits for 23 firm orders for our systems with 18 of those orders being for the Sapphire® XC. The Sapphire® XC deposits were $17.5 million and $3.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, and are included within contract liabilities. As we bring our products to market, we pay particular attention to forecasts by industry analysts and the adoption curve of new technologies. If we fail to anticipate or respond to market adoption of AM, it could result in decreased revenue.
Bookings
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had 34 bookings. A booking is a confirmed order for a 3D printer system. For the years ended December 31, 2020, we had 18 bookings.
Shipments
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we shipped 23 3D printers (13 3D printers sold to customers and 10 3D printers leased under the Recurring Payment model described below). For the year ended December 31, 2020, we shipped 13 3D printers (10 3D printers sold to customers and three 3D printers leased under the Recurring Payment model).
Customers
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had 10 new customers and 18 cumulative system customers. A new customer is defined as receiving a 3D printer system for the first time during the calendar year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had 5 new customers and 8 cumulative system customers. As of December 31, 2021, we had shipped a total of 46 3D Printer systems to 18 customers.
Adoption of Additive Manufacturing with New and Existing Customers
We work closely with our customers to understand their product roadmaps and strategies. Our customers continuously develop new complex metal parts and explore solutions where production is either outsourced to contract manufacturers or performed in-house. The selection process for AM solutions is lengthy, typically 12 to 24 months, and may require us to incur costs in pursuing opportunities with no assurance that our solutions will be selected, which are included in selling and marketing expenses and research and development expenses. As a result, the loss of any key customers to adopt our solutions or any significant delay in commercialization of our products could impact our business and future revenue.
Customer Concentration
Our operating results for the foreseeable future will continue to depend on sales to a small group of customers. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, sales to the top three customers accounted for 62.0% and 71.8% of our revenue, respectively. While our objective is to diversify our customer base, we believe that we could continue to be susceptible to risks associated with customer concentration. See “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - Risks Related to Our Financial Position and Need for Additional Capital - We expect to rely on a limited number of customers for a significant portion of our near-term revenue”, and see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Concentration of Credit Risk and Other Risks and Uncertainties, in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Continued Investment and Innovation
Since our founding, we have been a customer-focused company working to develop innovative solutions to address customers’ needs. We believe this process has contributed significantly to our development of the most advanced metal AM systems in the world. We focus on our customers to identify the most impactful areas for research and development as we seek to further improve the capabilities of our AM solutions. We believe that
continued investments in our products are important to our future growth and, as a result, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase, which may adversely affect our near-term profitability.
Impact of COVID-19 and Other World Events
We continue to operate our business through the COVID-19 pandemic and have taken additional precautions to ensure the safety of our employees, customers, and vendors with which we operate. The impact of COVID-19 on our operating results has added uncertainty in timing of customer orders creating longer lead times for sales and marketing. We continue to experience various supply chain constraints due to the pandemic, which could lead to delays in shipment of our products to our customers. Furthermore, if significant portions of our workforce are unable to work effectively, including because of illness, quarantines, government actions, facility closures, remote working or other restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations will likely be adversely impacted.
General economic and political conditions such as recessions, interest rates, fuel prices, inflation, foreign currency fluctuations, international tariffs, social, political and economic risks and acts of war or terrorism (including, for example, the ongoing military conflict between Ukraine and Russia and the economic sanctions related thereto), have added uncertainty in timing of customer orders and supply chain constraints.
Climate Change
Material pending or existing climate change-related legislation, regulations, and international accords could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations, including: (1) material past and/or future capital expenditures for climate-related projects, (2) material indirect consequences of climate-related regulation or business trends, such as the following: decreased/increased demand for goods or services that produce significant greenhouse gas emissions or are related to carbon-based energy sources; increased competition to develop innovative new products that result in lower emissions; increased demand for generation and transmission of energy from alternative energy sources; and any anticipated reputational risks resulting from operations or products that produce material greenhouse gas emissions and (3) material increased compliance costs related to climate change.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue is primarily derived from our AM full-stack solution product, which includes the Flow™ print preparation software, Sapphire® and Sapphire® XC metal AM printer using our support-free L-PBF technology and Assure™ quality validation software (collectively referred to as the “3D Printer”). Contracts for 3D Printers also include post-sale customer support services (“Support Services”), except for our distributor partners, which are qualified to perform support services.
We sell our AM full-stack solution product through two types of transaction models: a 3D Printer sale transaction and a recurring payment transaction (“Recurring Payment”). We define our Recurring Payment transactions as operating leases. 3D Printer sale transactions are structured as a payment of a fixed purchase price for the system. The timeframe from order to completion of the site acceptance test occurs normally over three to six months. As we scale our production, we expect to reduce this timeframe. Contract consideration allocated to the 3D Printer is recognized at a point in time, which occurs upon transfer of control to the customer at shipment.
The initial sales of 3D Printers and Support Services are included in one contract and are invoiced together. Contract consideration is allocated between the two performance obligations based on relative fair value. This allocation involves judgement and is periodically updated as new relevant information becomes available.
The Recurring Payment transactions, which are structured as operating leases, were 5.8% and 1.8% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Under this model, the customer typically pays a base rent and variable payments based on usage in excess of a defined threshold. Most of our leases have a 12-month term, though in certain cases the lease term is longer.
Support Services are included with most 3D Printer sale transactions and Recurring Payment transactions. Support services consist of field service engineering, phone and email support, preventative maintenance, and limited on and off-site consulting support. A subsequent Extended Support Agreement is available for renewal after the initial contract period based on the then-fair value of the service, which is paid for separately. Support Service revenue is recognized over the contract period beginning with customer performance test acceptance.
Other revenue included under 3D Printer sales includes parts and consumables, such as filters, powder or build plates, that are sold to customers and recognized upon transfer of control to the customer at shipment. Other revenue was not material for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue includes the “Cost of 3D Printers,” “Cost of Recurring Payment” and “Cost of Support Services.”
Cost of 3D Printers includes the manufacturing cost of our components and subassemblies purchased from vendors for the assembly, as well as raw materials and assemblies, shipping costs and other directly associated costs. Cost of 3D Printers also includes allocated overhead costs from headcount-related costs, such as salaries, stock-based compensation, depreciation of manufacturing related equipment and facilities, and information technology costs.
Cost of Recurring Payment includes depreciation of the leased equipment over the useful life of five years less the residual value, and an allocated portion of Cost of Support Services.
Cost of Support Services includes the cost of spare or replacement parts for preventive maintenance, installation costs, headcount-related costs such as salaries, stock-based compensation, depreciation of manufacturing related equipment and facilities, and information technology costs. The headcount-related costs are directly associated with the engineers dedicated to remote and on-site support, training, travel costs and other services costs.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit is revenue less cost of revenue and our gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of revenue. The gross profit and gross margin for our products are varied and are expected to continue to vary from period to period due to the mix of products sold through either a 3D Printer sale transaction or a Recurring Payment transaction, new product introductions and efforts to optimize our operational costs. Other factors affecting our gross profit include changes to our material costs, assembly costs that are themselves dependent upon improvements to yield, and any increase in assembly overhead to support a greater number of 3D Printers sold and markets served.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses represent costs incurred to support activities that advance the development of innovative AM technologies, new product platforms and consumables, as well as activities that enhance the capabilities of our existing product platforms. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs for individuals working in our research and development departments, including stock-based compensation, prototypes, design expenses, information technology costs and software license amortization, consulting and contractor costs, and an allocated portion of overhead costs, including depreciation of property and equipment used in research and development activities.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs for individuals working in our sales and marketing departments, including stock-based compensation, costs related to trade shows
and events, advertising, marketing promotions, travel costs and an allocated portion of overhead costs, including information technology costs and costs for customer proof of concept validation.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs for individuals associated with our executive, administrative, finance, legal, information technology and human resources functions, including stock-based compensation, professional fees for legal, audit and compliance, accounting and consulting services, general corporate costs, facilities, rent, information technology costs, insurance, bad debt expenses and an allocated portion of overhead costs, including equipment and depreciation and other general and administrative expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred under our outstanding debt and finance leases.
Loss on the Convertible Note Modification
Loss on the convertible note modification relates to the convertible note agreement modification in September 2021. For more information, see Note 16, Convertible Notes Payable, in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
(Loss)/gain on Fair Value of Warrants
Loss on valuation of warrant liabilities relates to the changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities, including liabilities related to the public warrants and private placement warrants, which are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date.
Gain/(Loss) on Fair Value of Contingent Earnout Liabilities
Gain (loss) on valuation of contingent earnout liabilities relates to the changes in the fair value of contingent earnout liabilities related to the Earn-Out Shares, which are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net includes interest earned on our bank sweep account, gains and losses on disposals of fixed assets and other miscellaneous income/expenses.
Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of an estimate of federal and state and income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax law. Due to the level of historical losses, we maintain a full valuation allowance against U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded it is more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will not be realized. We do not believe that there is objectively verifiable evidence that the improvement in our results of operations is sustainable to support the release of the remaining valuation allowance. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no foreign income taxes or liabilities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following table summarizes our historical results of operations and as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented:
Revenue
The following table presents the revenue disaggregated by products and service type, as well as the percentage of total revenue.
Total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $27.4 million and $19.0 million respectively. Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $8.5 million, or 44.6% from the year ended December 31, 2020.
3D Printer sales were $23.0 million and $17.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $6.1 million in 2021 from 2020 was attributed to 13 3D Printer sales shipped in 2021 compared to 10 3D Printer sales shipped in the prior year. 3D Printer sales for 2021 also included revenue from two units with lease buyout options which were exercised during the third quarter of 2021, when the customers exercised their purchase option at the end of the lease term instead of renewing their leases. The 3D Printer sales included parts and consumables revenue.
Recurring Payment, structured as an operating lease, was $1.6 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily attributed to an increase from three to nine 3D Printer systems in service generating Recurring Payment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. As discussed above, two of the Recurring Payment revenue systems were converted to 3D Printer sales during the third quarter of 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, three 3D Printer systems shipped under Recurring Payments were pending site acceptance test (“SAT”) completion. The operating lease begins upon SAT completion.
Our Support Service revenue was $2.8 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in 2021 was primarily attributed to 46 3D Printer systems in service as of December 31, 2021 compared to 23 3D Printers in service as of December 31, 2020.
We expect the demand for the Sapphire® XC to increase our revenue in the future. As of December 31, 2021, we have received 18 firm orders for the Sapphire® XC. Our focus for revenue remains on expanding our selling and marketing efforts and developing our existing customer network to increase demand.
Revenue trends from our largest customer, SpaceX, have historically been driven by the timing of its major orders for 3D Printers and the timing of the shipments under those orders. SpaceX revenue is comprised of 3D Printer sales, which is the largest component and is recognized in the quarter that the shipment occurs, and revenue from Support Services which is significantly smaller and is recognized over the service period. SpaceX ordered its first Sapphire® system in 2018, eleven Sapphire® systems in 2019, ten Sapphire® XC systems in 2020, and four Sapphire® systems in 2021. Of these 26 3D Printers, we delivered one in 2018, seven in 2019, four in 2020 and four in 2021 (including 1 Sapphire® XC system). We shipped the first Sapphire® XC system under this order at the end of 2021 and we anticipate that we will ship the majority of the shipments under this order in the first half of 2022.
As a result of the anticipated shipment of the Sapphire® XC 3D Printers in 2022, we expect that SpaceX revenues as a percentage of our total revenues will increase in 2022 compared to 2021. We expect SpaceX to continue to be an important customer going forward. However, SpaceX’s contribution as a percentage of our total revenue will depend on the timing of shipments, as described above.
Cost of Revenue
The following table presents the Cost of Revenue disaggregated by product and service type, as well as the percentage of total revenue.
Total cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $22.5 million and $12.6 million, respectively. Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $9.9 million, or 78.3%, from the prior year.
Cost of 3D Printers was $17.6 million and $10.6 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There was an increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 of $7.0 million from the prior year, attributable to 13 3D Printers sold, which included one Sapphire® XC system, compared to the 10 3D Printers sold in the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of 3D Printers for 2021 also included the cost from two units with lease buyout options which were exercised during the third quarter of 2021, when the customers exercised their purchase option at the end of the lease term instead of renewing their leases.
The first Sapphire® XC was shipped in the fourth quarter of 2021. Similar to the commercial product launch of the Sapphire® in 2019, the cost of the Sapphire® XC includes higher factory overhead costs to scale up operations, production engineering development costs, and higher costs to expedite shipping for manufacturing materials and assemblies related to supply chain disruption in the global markets. Additionally, as we gain experience with Sapphire® XC production, we expect to lower our material costs and reduce labor and overhead expenses per unit. As a result of these efficiencies, we expect to reduce the Sapphire® XC cost for production during the second half of 2022.
Cost of Recurring Payment was $1.1 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There was an increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 of $0.9 million from 2020 due to an increase in depreciation of the equipment on lease and allocable Cost of Support Services as a result of more 3D Printers in service in 2021 compared to 2020.
Cost of Support Services was $3.8 million and $1.8 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There was an increase of $2.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from 2020 primarily attributable to the costs for preventative maintenance, costs incurred to enhance system reliability performance, and field service engineering labor costs due to 46 3D Printers in service in 2021 compared to 23 3D Printers in service in 2020.
Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue was 81.9% and 66.4% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021was primarily due to initial production of Sapphire® XC and lower launch customer pricing engineering production and service costs to support our 2022
growth plan, and higher maintenance costs for upgrading systems to enhance reliability performance compared to 2020.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Total gross profit was $5.0 million and $6.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, the gross margin was 18.1% and 33.6% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in gross profit in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to increased Cost of 3D Printers and increased Cost of Support Services as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as discussed above.
Our 2021 gross profit reflects the impact of launch customer price concessions for our first Sapphire® XC system shipped during the fourth quarter of 2021. This pricing reduced our gross margin for the fourth quarter by approximately 4% compared to the pricing of other Sapphire® XC orders in the backlog and is expected to impact gross margin through the third quarter of 2022 as we complete the delivery of an additional 9 Sapphire® XC systems under the related launch customer contract.
Changes in mix of transaction types have a short-term impact on gross margin as the gross margin in the initial year of a Recurring Payment transaction is lower than for a sale transaction. We also expect a temporary negative impact to our gross profit and gross margin due to increased Service Support cost with the commercialization of the Sapphire® XC, which is typical for larger and more complex products. Additionally, our gross profit and gross margin are influenced by a number of factors, including:
•New product introduction pricing strategies and market conditions that may impact our pricing;
•Production volumes that may impact factory overhead absorption; and
•Cost of our Support Services and product support may be influenced by product mix changes, including new product introductions, and other factors.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $27.0 million and $14.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the year ended December 31, 2021, there was an increase of $12.8 million in research and development expenses primarily due to the development of the Sapphire® XC system.
The increases in research and development expenses in 2021 were related to a $6.1 million increase in components design and engineering testing and validation for the Sapphire® XC large format AM system, a $4.4 million increase for additional headcount, salaries and employee-related expenses, and a $2.3 million increase in product development expenses for new parts for the Sapphire® family of systems.
We expect research and development costs to increase over time as we continue to invest in enhancing and advancing our portfolio of AM solutions. In the near term, we expect an increase to be driven by research and development expenses for the continued product development of the Sapphire® XC system.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses were $12.4 million and $7.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There was an increase of $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
The increase in selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to a $4.8 million increase for additional headcount, salaries and employee-related expenses, a $0.7 million increase in trade show expense offset by a reduction of $0.1 million in marketing initiatives and branding expenses.
We expect selling and marketing expenses to increase over time as we expand our headcount, initiate new marketing campaigns with the launch of the Sapphire® XC, focus on our European markets and increase attendance of additive manufacturing conferences to build product awareness.
We expect the selling and marketing activities to increase for travel, trade shows, new product launch initiatives, and increase advertising campaigns and market awareness.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $23.4 million and $6.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $17.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 in general and administrative expenses as compared to 2020 was attributable to Merger related expenses of $4.4 million with increases in advisory, legal and accounting fees, a $3.1 million increase in additional headcount, salaries and employee-related benefits, a $1.4 million increase in recruiting related expenses, a $2.0 million in public company operational expenses, a $2.9 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $3.2 million increase in other operating expenses.
We expect general and administrative expenses to increase as a result of the expected increase in the scale of our operations and the increased costs of operating as a public company. We expect increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs as we hire additional personnel and enhance our infrastructure to support the anticipated growth of the business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $2.7 million and $0.6 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the year ended December 31, 2020, there was an increase of $2.1 million attributable to increased outstanding debt balances, which was partially repaid during the fourth quarter of 2021.
Loss on the Convertible Note Modification
The loss on the convertible note modification was $50.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 with no like expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. In December 2021, the convertible promissory note agreement was amended to reflect an automatic conversion to Legacy Velo3D Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock upon a change in control. The modification was accounted for as a debt extinguishment per ASC 470-50 Debt and resulted in a $50.6 million fair value adjustment to the $5.0 million convertible promissory note.
Gain/(Loss) on Fair Value of Warrants
The change in fair value of warrants resulted in a loss of $5.2 million, and less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The loss in the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to the non-cash fair value change of the warrant liabilities.
Gain on Fair value of Contingent Earnout Liabilities
The change in fair value of the contingent earnout liability was a gain of $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was related to the non-cash fair value change of the contingent earnout liabilities.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was $0.1 million and less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest income earned from available-for-sale securities was immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Taxes
No provision for federal and state income taxes was recorded because we incurred losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and maintained a full valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We will continue to review our conclusions about the appropriate amount of the valuation allowance on a quarterly basis. If we were to generate profits in 2022 and beyond, the U.S. valuation allowance position could be reversed in the foreseeable future. We expect a benefit to be recorded in the period the valuation allowance reversal is recorded and a higher effective tax rate in periods following the valuation allowance reversal.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had raised net proceeds of $428.3 million, comprised of approximately $278.3 million from the Merger and the PIPE Financing closed on September 29, 2021, and $150.0 million from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock (series A to series D), third-party financing and convertible notes. We have incurred net losses of $107.1 million and $21.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $223.1 million and $15.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and an accumulated deficit of $229.9 million and $122.8 million, respectively. Our business requires substantial amounts of cash for operating activities, including salaries and wages paid to our employees, component and subassembly purchases, general and administrative expenses, and others.
Our purchase commitments pursuant to our standard terms and conditions with our suppliers and vendors are cancellable in whole or in part with or without cause prior to delivery. If we terminate an order, we will have no liability beyond payment of any balances owing for goods and services delivered previously. Certain Sapphire® XC purchase orders for parts and assemblies are non-cancellable and are due upon receipts with standard payment terms and will primarily be delivered in the first half of 2022.
We may require additional funds to respond to business challenges and opportunities, including the need to provide working capital, develop new features or enhance our products, expand our manufacturing capacity, improve our operating infrastructure or acquire complementary businesses and technologies. Accordingly, we may need to engage in equity or debt financings to secure additional funds if our existing sources of cash and any funds generated from operations do not provide us with sufficient capital. We may also seek to raise additional capital from offerings of our equity or debt securities on an opportunistic basis when we believe there are suitable opportunities for doing so.
Term Loan
In May 2021, we entered into a third amended and restated loan and security agreement and a mezzanine loan and security agreement providing for certain debt facilities comprised of a $35.0 million term loan, a $10.0 million revolving credit line and a $8.5 million secured equipment loan facility. On October 29, 2021, we repaid the $20.7 million outstanding balance, interest and fees of the term loan in full using proceeds from the Merger. The term loan facility included a short term $10.0 million working capital revolver line of credit with a variable interest rate of the greater of 9% or Prime plus 5.75% and term of nine months. In August 2021, we drew on the working capital revolver line of credit in the amount of $3.0 million. The outstanding balance as of December 31, 2021 was $3.0 million. We do not hedge our exposure to changes in interest rates. A 10% change in interest rates would not
have a material impact on annualized interest expense. For more information regarding the term loan facility, see Note 15, Long-Term Debt in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Equipment Loans Secured by Leased Equipment
The equipment loan secured by leased equipment has a variable interest rate of the greater of Prime rate, or 3.25%, and terms of three years. As of December 31, 2021, we had $5.6 million in variable rate debt outstanding. We do not hedge our exposure to changes in interest rates. A 10% change in interest rates would not have a material impact on annualized interest expense. For more information regarding the secured equipment loan facility, see Note 15, Long-Term Debt in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Facilities Expansion
As of December 31, 2021, we have invested $6.3 million into lab equipment and leasehold improvements for our Sapphire® XC manufacturing facility. We will invest an additional $4.0 million to $6.0 million in factory equipment and leasehold improvements to complete the Sapphire® XC system manufacturing facility in the first half of 2022.
In October 2021, we commenced a month-to-month lease for a 2,500+ square foot facility located in Augsburg Germany, to accommodate our European headquarters and technology demonstration center.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $56.4 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $107.1 million and cash used from net operating assets of $3.2 million, primarily comprised of increases in other assets of $14.5 million, prepaid expenses and other current assets of $7.6 million related to insurance and vendor prepayments, increases in inventories of $8.0 million for Sapphire® and Sapphire® XC system production, and increases in accounts receivable of $11.5 million due to timing of customer payments, offset by decreases in contract liabilities of $17.6 million, increases in other noncurrent liabilities of $9.4 million, increases in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $6.9 million, decreases in other operating assets of $4.5 million and noncash charges of $53.9 million. The noncash charges primarily consisted of the loss on the convertible note modification of $50.6 million, the change in fair value related to the warrants of $5.2 million, and depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation expense, offset by the change in fair value related to the contingent earnout liabilities of $9.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.4 million, consisting primarily of net loss of $21.8 million and an increase in net operating assets of $7.3 million, primarily due to increases in inventories for parts and work in progress of $2.7 million, increases contract assets of $2.5 million, decreases in contract liabilities for committed orders of $2.4 million, and decreases in other operating assets of $0.3
million, offset by noncash charges of $2.7 million. The noncash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and stock-based compensation expense.
We expect our cash used in operating activities to increase in 2022 driven by working capital requirements and operating expenses as we significantly increase the scale of our operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $33.6 million, consisting of property and equipment purchases of $9.6 million, production of equipment for lease to customers of $8.5 million and purchases of available-for-sale investments of $15.5 million consisting primarily of high quality investment-grade securities.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.4 million, consisting of property and equipment purchases of $0.4 million and production of equipment for the equipment on lease to customers of $3.0 million.
We expect our capital expenditures, excluding purchases of available-for-sale investments to increase slightly in 2022 as we expand existing operations, and complete the build out of our new manufacturing facility.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $282.9 million, consisting of financing activities resulting primarily from the net proceeds of $123.3 million from the Merger, $155.0 million from the PIPE Financing, proceeds of $19.3 million from the term loan, net of issuance costs, proceeds of $3.0 million from the term loan revolving credit line, proceeds of $5.4 million from equipment loans, net of issuance costs, proceeds of $5.0 million from the convertible notes and proceeds of $0.4 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options. This was offset by repayments of $25.3 million for the term loan, repayments of $0.8 million for the property and equipment loan, and repayments of $2.4 million for equipment loans.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.6 million, consisting of financing activities resulting primarily from proceeds of $28.3 million from the issuance of Legacy Velo3D Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of transaction costs, proceeds of $5.4 million from the convertible note, proceeds of $2.3 million from equipment loans, and proceeds of less than $0.1 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options, offset by repayments of $0.4 million of equipment loans.
We expect to provide cash by financing activities by issuing new equity or incurring new debt to continue operations. Our future cash requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Purchase commitments (purchase orders) of $27.7 million for parts and assemblies are non-cancellable and are due upon receipts with standard payment terms and will primarily be delivered in the first half of 2022.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on Velo3D’s consolidated financial statements, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(A) of the Securities Act and has elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period.
We will elect to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public business entities and nonpublic business entities until the earlier of the date we (a) are no longer an emerging growth company or (b) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the recent accounting pronouncements adopted and the recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted for the years ended December 31, 2021.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) December 31, 2025, (b) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the last date of our fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC or (d) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt securities during the previous three years.
Implications of Being a Smaller Reporting Company
We are a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K. Smaller reporting companies may take advantage of certain reduced disclosure obligations, including, among other things, providing only two years of audited consolidated financial statements.
We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will remain a smaller reporting company and may take advantage of certain scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies until the last day of the fiscal year in which (a) the market value of our voting and nonvoting common stock held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $250.0 million measured on the last business day of that year’s second fiscal quarter and (b) our annual revenue equals or exceeds $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year or our voting and nonvoting common stock held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $700.0 million measured on the last business day of that year’s second fiscal quarter.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We evaluated the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates and believe that the following involve a higher degree of judgement or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position and are therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgements used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements. We re-evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. For information on our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, included in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” utilizing the full retrospective method. We primarily derive our revenue from 3D Printer sales, Recurring Payment and Support Services. We determine revenue recognition through the following five-step model for recognizing revenue: (1) identification of the contract with a customer; (2) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determination of the transaction price; (4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
A typical contract with customers for the 3D Printer and bundled software includes the Support Services. We provide a transaction price for all deliverables, including the 3D Printer and bundled software, and for the Support Services. Typically, we have one distinct obligation to transfer the 3D Printers and bundled software, and another distinct obligation to provide the Support Services.
The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine SSP based on observable stand-alone selling price when it is available, as well as other factors, including the price charged to its customers, its discounting practices, and its overall pricing objectives, including risk-adjusted gross profit margin for products and services, while maximizing observable inputs. In situations where pricing is highly variable, or a product is never sold on a stand-alone basis, we estimate the SSP using the residual approach. Significant judgment is used to identify and account for each of the two performance obligations.
3D Printer Sales
We bill our customers beginning at the time of acceptance of the purchase order (which represents a deposit), with the second billing at the time of shipment and final billing upon site acceptance test completion. The timeframe from order to completion of the site acceptance test occurs normally over three to six months. Revenue for the 3D Printer is recognized at a point in time, which occurs upon transfer of control to the customer at shipment. Site installation, testing and customer training are incidental to customer acceptance.
We have elected not to recognize shipping to customers as a separate performance obligation. Revenue from shipping billed to customers was $0.1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Recurring Payment
We have entered into operating leases (“Recurring Payment”) for customers who do not purchase the 3D Printers (“equipment”). On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 842, “Leases,” and determined that arrangements providing for recurring payments from customers qualify as leases. The contracts explicitly specify the equipment which is a production system with defined components and services, including the printer itself, services and accessories. The asset is physically distinct, the supplier does not have substitution rights and the customer holds the right to direct the use of and obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from the use of the identified asset. As of December 31, 2021, lease terms are 12 months with the expectation that customers will not purchase the equipment at the end of the lease. The arrangements provide for a base rent and usually provide for variable payments based on usage in excess of a defined threshold. Support Services are included during the lease term.
Equipment under lease contracts is reclassified from inventory at its basis and depreciated over five years to a salvage value. Income from the lessee is recorded as revenue using the straight-line method over the term of the lease. Support services are a non-lease component. The practical expedient has been elected to include rents and this non-lease component as one revenue stream recognized over the lease term on a straight-line basis. Costs associated with this component are classified as cost of revenue and recognized as incurred.
Costs for warranties for parts and services for equipment under lease are accrued separately at lease commencement, and amortized to cost of revenue over the lease term to the extent the costs are probable and can be reasonably estimated since the related revenue is being recognized over the lease term. Warranty accruals were not material as of December 31, 2021and 2020.
Equipment leased to customers are considered long-lived assets and are tested for impairment as described above under the heading, “Impairment of Long-lived Assets.”
Support Services
Support Services are field service engineering, phone and email support, preventative maintenance and limited on and off-site consulting support. A subsequent Extended Support Agreement is available for renewal after the initial period based on the then fair value of the service.
Support Service revenue are recognized over the contract period beginning with customer performance test acceptance.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost for awards is measured as of the grant date based on its fair value, and the amount is expensed ratably over the service period which is typically the vesting period. We have elected to account for forfeitures when they occur, and any compensation expense previously recognized on unvested shares will be reversed.
We estimate the fair value of stock option awards subject to only a service condition on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the option’s expected term, price volatility of the underlying stock, risk-free interest rate, and the expected dividend yield of the underlying common stock, as well as an estimate of the fair value of the common stock underlying the award.
We estimate the fair value of restricted share unit awards using the value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant.
We estimate the fair value of Earnout Shares awards underlying stock options to employees, which is considered a compensatory award and accounted for under ASC 718, Share-Based Compensation, using the Monte-Carlo simulation model. The Monte-Carlo simulation model was selected as the valuation methodology for the Earnout Shares due to the path-dependent nature of triggering events. Under ASC 718, the award is measured at fair value at the grant date and expense is recognized over the time-based vesting period (the triggering event is a market condition and does not impact expense recognition). The Monte-Carlo model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the current stock price, volatility of the underlying stock, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our risk-free interest rates, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock. An increase of 100-basis points in interest rates would not have a material impact on our stock-based compensation.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method in accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on the estimated future tax effects of differences between the consolidated financial statement and income tax basis of existing assets and liabilities. These differences are measured using the enacted statutory tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which differences are expected to reverse. We recognize the effect on deferred income taxes of a change in tax rates in the period that includes the enactment date. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including historical levels of income, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income, and ongoing tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
We make estimates, assumptions and judgments to determine our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including historical levels of income, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income, and ongoing tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent it believes that recovery is not likely, it establishes a valuation allowance.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, which, as of the date of this Annual Report have not been material, are recognized within provision for income taxes.
Common Stock Warrants Liabilities
Following the Merger, 8,625,000 publicly-traded warrants and 4,450,000 private placement warrants issued to Spitfire Sponsor, LLC (the “Sponsor”) , all of which were issued in connection with JAWS Spitfire’s initial public offering (the “IPO”), are exercisable for one share of our common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. During the year ended December 31, 2021, there were no public warrants or private placement warrants exercised. The public warrants are publicly traded and are exercisable for cash, unless certain conditions occur, such as redemption by us under certain circumstances, at which time the public warrants may be exercised on a cashless basis. The private placement warrants are non-redeemable for cash so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the private placement warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the private placement warrants are redeemable by us and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the public warrants.
We evaluated the warrants and concluded that they do not meet the criteria to be classified within stockholders’ equity. The warrant agreement governing the warrants includes a provision, the application of which could result in a different settlement value for the warrants depending on their holder. Because the holder of an instrument is not an input into the pricing of a fixed-for-fixed option on the common stock, the private placement warrants are not considered to be “indexed to the Company’s own stock.” In addition, the warrant agreement includes a provision that provides that in the event of a tender or exchange offer accepted by holders of more than 50.0% of the outstanding shares of the common stock, all holders of the warrants (both the public warrants and the
private placement warrants) would be entitled to receive cash for all of their warrants. Specifically, in the event of a qualifying cash tender offer (which could be outside of our control), all warrant holders would be entitled to cash, while only certain of the holders of the common stock may be entitled to cash. These provisions preclude us from classifying the warrants in stockholders’ equity.
We classify our public warrants and private placement warrants as liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 815 “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative, we recorded these warrants within warrant liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet at fair value, with subsequent changes in their respective fair values recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss at each reporting date.
Contingent Earnout Liability
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization and pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, eligible former Legacy Velo3D equity holders are entitled to receive additional shares of common stock upon our achieving certain Earnout Triggering Events (as described in the Business Combination Agreement) (the “Earnout Shares”). The Earnout Shares are not indexed to the common stock and therefore are accounted for as a liability at the Closing Date and subsequently remeasured at each reporting date with changes in fair value recorded as a component of gain on fair value of contingent earnout liabilities in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The estimated fair value of the contingent earnout liability was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation using a distribution of potential outcomes on a monthly basis over the Earnout Period (as defined in Note 17, Equity Instruments, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report) prioritizing the most reliable information available. The assumptions utilized in the calculation are based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones, including the current common stock price, expected volatility, risk free rate, expected term and dividend rate. An increase of 100-basis points in interest rates would not have a material impact on our contingent earnout liability. The contingent earnout liability is categorized as a Level 3 fair value measurement (see “Fair Value of Measurements” as described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report) because we estimate projections during the Earnout Period utilizing unobservable inputs. Contingent earnout liabilities involve certain assumptions requiring significant judgment and actual results may differ from assumed and estimated amounts.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company has applied the framework for measuring fair value which requires a fair value hierarchy to be applied to all fair value measurements. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value are classified into one of three levels in the fair value hierarchy based on the inputs used to measure fair value as follows:
Level 1 - Quoted prices observed in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
Level 2 - Inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3 - Significant unobservable market inputs for the asset or liability.
The carrying amounts of cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued expenses approximate fair value due to their short-term maturities. The long-term debt (including convertible notes) with variable interest at market rates is carried at amortized cost, which approximates its fair value and was classified as Level 2. See Note 15, Long-Term Debt and Note 16, Convertible Notes Payable, in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further information.