Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of Velodyne’s results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the information set forth in Velodyne’s financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon our current expectations, estimates and projections that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to, among other considerations, the matters discussed under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A: “Risk Factors.”
The following section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form 10-K, and can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 17, 2021.
Overview
Velodyne is a global leader in lidar technology providing real-time 3D vision for autonomous systems. Our lidar solutions are advancing the development of safe automated systems throughout the world, thereby empowering the autonomous revolution by allowing machines to see their surroundings. Our lidar-based smart vision solutions are also deployed in many non-automotive applications, including autonomous mobile robots, UAVs, drones, last-mile delivery, precision agriculture, advanced security systems, and smart city initiatives.
We also license our technology and provide development services to customers and business partners. In 2021, we generated over half of our revenue from sales to customers deploying our smart vision solutions in non-automotive applications. In addition, we are transitioning from field programmable gate arrays to ASICs in order to further improve performance of our products, lower costs and reduce reliance on any key suppliers.
Business Combination
On September 30, 2020, Graf consummated a business combination with the pre-combination Velodyne Lidar, Inc. The aggregate consideration for the Business Combination and related transactions was approximately $1.8 billion, consisting of (i) $222.1 million in cash at the closing of the Business Combination, net of transaction expenses, and (ii) 150,277,532 shares of common stock valued at $10.25 per share, totaling $1.5 billion. For additional information regarding the Business Combination, see Note 1. “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 2. “Business Combination and Related Transactions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19
The extensive impact of the pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has resulted and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to the global economy, as well as businesses and capital markets around the world.
The timing of customer orders and our ability to fulfill orders we received was impacted by various COVID-19 related government mandates across our worldwide operations. We witnessed certain current and prospective customers delaying purchases based on budget constraints or project delays related to COVID-19. While the broader and long-term implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our workforce, operations and supply chain, customer demand, results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain, we continued to experience disruptions to our business due to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2021.
The impact of COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread have been impactful and continue to affect our business in several ways.
•Operations and supply chain. As a result of COVID-19, we experienced some production delays throughout 2021 due to travel restrictions to Thailand, the location of one of our key manufacturing partners. The San Jose factory continued to produce the major lidar products to support customer demand, augmented by our contract manufacturing partners. The San Jose factory confirmed several cases of COVID-19 from external exposure. As part of our continuing COVID-19 mitigation efforts, we perform audits of our supply chain and work with key suppliers to proactively mitigate potential supply constraints. Supply chain disruption due to COVID-19 has been minimal, however, the global supply of certain components, especially in the semiconductor space, requires ongoing vigilance as both lead times and prices reflect demand exceeding industry supply, and our plans to transition production from our San Jose factory to our contract manufacturing partners have experienced delays as a result of travel restrictions.
•Demand for our products. While we continue to engage with current and potential customers, we believe some customers may delay purchases from us because their development programs may also be delayed as a result of COVID-19.
•Positive customer trend in the pandemic. The global pandemic accelerated a few key robotic programs, which partially offset the impact of some of our customers’ delayed purchasing decisions. The accelerated programs include robots that disinfect the air and surfaces, providing more sanitized environments, and touchless delivery robots for food and medical supplies.
•Liquidity, working capital, and the CARES Act. On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the CARES Act. On April 8, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $10.0 million under the CARES Act’s Paycheck Protection Program to help us offset delays in production and customer purchases. We filed a request for PPP loan forgiveness, and the approval was granted on June 30, 2021.
See Item 1A: “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Design wins. We are developing our smart vision solutions as a key enabling technology for OEMs in automotive and other applications. Because our solutions must be integrated into a broader platform by the OEM, it is critical that we achieve design wins with these customers. The time necessary to achieve design wins varies based on the market and application. The
design cycle in the automotive market tends to be substantially longer and more onerous than in other markets. Even within the automotive market, achieving a design win with an automotive OEM takes considerably longer than a design cycle for an aftermarket application. We consider design wins to be critical to our future success, although the revenue generated by each design win and the time necessary to achieve such a win can vary significantly, making it difficult to predict our future financial performance.
Pricing, product cost and margins. Our pricing and margins will depend on the volumes and the features of the solutions we provide to our customers. To date, most of our revenue has been generated by selling our smart vision solutions that have cost less for us to manufacture and that incorporate new features. In general, solutions incorporated into development-phase products require more complex configurations, have higher prices and higher gross margins. As our markets reach maturity and commercialization, we expect prices and margins will generally decrease. Our commercial-stage customers will require that our smart vision solutions be manufactured and sold at per-unit prices that enable mass market adoption. To meet the technological and pricing needs of customers reaching commercial scale, we are making significant investments in new solutions for both cost improvements and new features. Our ability to compete in key markets will depend on the success of these investments and our efforts to efficiently and reliably produce cost-effective smart vision solutions for our commercial-stage customers. We have customers with technologies in various stages of development. We anticipate that our prices will vary by market and application due to market-specific supply and demand dynamics and product lifecycles.
Commercialization of lidar-based applications. Our revenue has been subject to significant fluctuations. Our customers in pre-commercial development phase may have purchased their requirements of our products in earlier periods and we do not expect them begin purchasing again in volume unless and until they reach commercial deployments. As a number of our target markets reach commercialization, we expect there to be a shift towards higher unit volume at lower per-unit prices, with more predictable customer demand. We expect that our results of operations, including revenue and gross margins, will continue to fluctuate on a quarterly basis for the foreseeable future as our customers continue research and development projects and begin to commercialize autonomous solutions that rely on lidar technology. As more customers reach the commercialization phase and as the market for lidar solutions matures, these fluctuations in our operating results may become less pronounced. However, in the near term, our revenue may not grow as we expect until more customers commercialize their products.
End market demand. We sell our products to customers in a number of end markets. We believe our entry into new markets will continue to facilitate revenue growth and customer diversification. While we will continue to expand the end markets we serve, we anticipate that sales to a limited number of end markets will continue to account for a significant portion of our total revenue for the foreseeable future. Success in an end market, or commercialization, is uncertain and may develop differently in each case, with unique pricing, volume and cost dynamics. Additionally, as production scales in order to meet the demands of commercialization, pricing pressure increases and the amount of that pressure is expected to vary by market.
Sales volume. A typical design win can generate a wide range of sales volumes for our solutions, depending on the end market demand for our customers’ products. This can depend on several factors, including the reputation of the end customer, market penetration, product capabilities, size of the end market that the product addresses and our end customers’ ability to sell their products. In addition to end market demand, sales volumes also depend on whether our customer is in the development, commercialization or production phase. In certain cases, we may provide volume discounts on sales of our solutions, which may or may not be offset by lower manufacturing costs related to higher volumes.
Continued investment and innovation. We believe that we are the industry-leading lidar provider with proven designs, extensive product offerings and advanced manufacturing capabilities. Our financial performance is significantly dependent on our ability to maintain this leading position. This is further dependent on the investments we make in research and development. We must continually identify and respond to rapidly evolving customer requirements, develop and introduce innovative new products, enhance and service existing products and generate active market demand for our products. If we fail to do this, our leading market position and revenue may be adversely affected, and our investments in that area will not be recovered.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and
judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these estimates involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products and to a small extent services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services.
We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations; however, determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may sometimes require significant judgment.
Transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price (SSP) basis. Judgment is required to determine SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP when products and services are sold separately. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we determine SSP using information that may include other observable inputs available to us.
Accounting for contracts recognized over time involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that estimates of costs to complete a performance obligation will be revised in the near-term. We review and update our contract-related estimates regularly, and record adjustments as needed. For those performance obligations for which revenue is recognized using a cost-to-cost input method, changes in total estimated costs, and related progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, are recognized in the period in which the revisions to the estimates are made.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value. Costs are computed under the standard cost method, which approximates actual costs determined on the first in, first out basis. We record write-downs of inventories which are obsolete or in excess of anticipated demand. Significant judgment is used in establishing our forecasts of future demand and obsolete material exposures. We consider marketability and product life cycle stage, product development plans, component cost trends, demand forecasts, historical revenue, and assumptions about future demand and market conditions in establishing our estimates. If the actual component usage and product demand are significantly lower than forecast, which may be caused by factors within and outside of our control, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and our customer requirements, we may be required to increase our inventory writedowns. A change in our estimates could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which has subsequently been amended by ASU No. 2018-19, ASU No. 2019-04, ASU No. 2019-05, ASU No. 2019-11, ASU 2020-02 and ASU 2020-03 to provide additional guidance on the credit losses standard. The objective of the guidance in ASU 2016-13 is to allow entities to recognize estimated credit losses in the period that the change in valuation occurs. ASU 2016-13 requires an entity to present financial assets measured on an amortized cost basis on the balance sheet net of an allowance for credit losses. Available for sale and held to maturity debt securities are also required to be held net of an allowance for credit losses. For smaller reporting companies, the standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We expect to adopt the new standard in the first quarter of 2023 and are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-10, Codification Improvements, which updates various codification topics by clarifying or improving disclosure requirements to align with the SEC’s regulations. ASU 2020-10 is effective for public companies, other than smaller reporting companies, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. For all other entities, ASU 2020-10 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We expect to adopt ASU 2020-10 beginning January 1, 2022, and do not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related footnote disclosures.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations data for the periods presented:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented (the table may not foot due to rounding difference):
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Prior to the Business Combination, compensation expense related to RSAs and RSUs granted under the pre-combination Velodyne’s stock incentive plans remained unrecognized because the performance vesting condition, which is (i) an initial public offering, or (ii) a Company sale event, was not probable of being met. In connection with the Business Combination, the Board waived the liquidity event vesting condition applicable to the pre-combination Velodyne's RSUs and RSAs on October 30, 2020 and May 18, 2021, respectively. As such, the outstanding RSUs and RSAs vested to the extent the applicable service condition was satisfied as of such dates. The vesting of the RSUs and RSAs resulted in approximately $77.5 million and $45.1 million of incremental stock-based compensation expense in the fourth quarter of 2020 and second quarter of 2021, respectively.
Comparison of 2021 to 2020
Revenue
The majority of our revenue comes from the sale of our lidar sensors directly to end users and through our network of U.S. and international distributors. Product revenue is recognized when control of the products is transferred to the customer, which is generally upon shipment. For custom products that require engineering and development based on customer requirements, revenue is recognized over time using an output method based on units of product shipped to date relative to total production units under the contract. We also generate a portion of our revenue from intellectual property licensing, royalties and the sale of services related to product development, validation, extended warranty and product repair services. License revenue is recognized upon delivery of the intellectual property if there are no substantive future obligations to perform under the arrangement. Royalties are recognized at the later of the period the sales occur or the satisfaction of the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalties have been allocated. As our manufacturing partners to whom we have licensed our technology start selling to customers, we expect royalty revenue to increase. Service revenue is recognized as the services are performed.
2021 vs. 2020
Total revenue decreased by $33.4 million, or 35%, to $61.9 million for 2021 from $95.4 million for 2020. The $20.4 million decrease in product revenue reflected a $11.1 million nonrecurring stocking fee in 2020 and a decrease of $16.3 million related to reduction in average selling price for lidar sensors, partially offset by an increase of $7.0 million in the volume and mix of sensors and parts sold. The timing of customer orders and our ability to fulfill orders we received was impacted by various COVID-19 related government mandates across our worldwide operations. The reduction in average selling price reflected our continued objective to drive additional adoption of our smart vision solutions in multiple end markets. Our revenue has been subject to significant fluctuations. Our customers in pre-commercial development phase may have purchased their requirements of our products in earlier periods and are not expected to begin purchasing again in volume unless and until they reach commercial deployments. As a number of our target markets reach commercialization, we expect there to be a shift towards higher unit volume at lower per-unit prices, with more predictable customer demand. The $13.1 million decrease in license and service revenue reflected primarily a $10.1 million decrease in nonrecurring license revenue from the patent cross-license agreements entered into during the second and third quarter of 2020, and a $3.7 million non-recurring engineering services revenue in 2020 that did not recur in 2021.
The $17.9 million decrease in North America revenue for 2021 was due to a $11.1 million nonrecurring stocking fee, a $3.7 million non-recurring engineering services revenue in 2020 that did not recur in 2021 and a decrease of $3.2 million related to reduction of average selling price of units sold. The $13.3 million decrease in Asia-Pacific revenue was primarily due to a $10.1 million decrease in license revenue from our patent cross license agreements, a decrease of approximately $6.5 million due to reduction of average selling price of units sold, partially offset by an increase of approximately $3.3 million related the volume and mix of units sold. The $2.2 million decrease in Europe, Middle East and Africa revenue reflected a decrease of $6.5 million due to reduction of average selling price, partially offset by an increase of $4.4 million related to volume and the mix of sensors sold.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue includes the manufacturing cost of our lidar sensors, which primarily consists of personnel-related costs directly associated with our manufacturing organization, and amounts paid to our third-party contract manufacturers and vendors. Our cost of revenue also includes depreciation and amortization, cost of component inventory, product testing costs, costs of providing services, an allocated portion of overhead, facility and IT costs, warranty costs, excess and obsolete inventory and shipping costs.
Our gross margin varies by product and depends on a variety of factors, including market conditions that may impact our pricing, including our desire to broaden customer adoption of lidar across multiple industries and markets; product mix changes between established products and new products and licenses; excess and obsolete inventories; our cost structure for manufacturing operations, including supply constraints for certain commodities during the next fiscal year, third-party manufacturers, relative to volume; and product support obligations. We also believe our transition to an outsourced manufacturing model will favorably impact our gross margin over time. In addition, our license revenue has lower cost, and therefore it contributes to higher gross margin. We expect our gross margins to fluctuate over time, depending on the factors described above.
2021 vs. 2020
Cost of revenue decreased by $2.4 million, or 3%, to $67.8 million for 2021 from $70.2 million for 2020. The $1.8 million product cost decrease was primarily driven by a decrease of $5.4 million in stock-based compensation and cost savings of $6.8 million as a result of our transition to building products at our contract manufacturers, partially offset by increases of $10.9 million cost related to volume and mix of units sold.
Gross margin decreased from 26% for 2020 to (10)% for 2021, primarily reflecting the timing of high margin license and services revenues and reductions in the average selling price for sensors. We expect to decrease manufacturing labor and overhead costs as we outsource production to our contract manufacturing partners, with the objective of reducing the per unit cost of revenue.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs directly associated with our research and development organization, with the remainder being prototype expenses, third-party engineering and contractor costs, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. Our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing and developing additional functionality for our existing products and on new product development, including new releases
and upgrades to our lidar sensors. We expense research and development costs as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we increase our investment in software development to broaden the capabilities of our solutions and introduce new products and features.
2021 vs. 2020
Research and development expenses decreased by $10.2 million, or 12%, to $77.9 million for 2021 from $88.1 million for 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $24.2 million in stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by increases of $4.2 million in personnel related costs, $6.2 million in outside services and engineering fees, and $2.0 million in prototype costs.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs directly associated with our sales and marketing activities. These include the cost of sales commissions, marketing programs, trade shows, consulting services, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars over time as we hire additional sales and marketing personnel, increase our marketing activities, grow our domestic and international operations, and build brand awareness.
2021 vs. 2020
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $36.3 million, or 114%, to $68.0 million for 2021 from $31.8 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $31.5 million in stock-based compensation expense related to the vesting of RSAs in May 2021, and $3.9 million related to increased investment in sales and marketing personnel.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses associated with our general and administrative organization, professional fees for legal, accounting, and other consulting services, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and stock exchange listing standards, additional insurance expenses (including directors’ and officers’ insurance), investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business.
2021 vs. 2020
General and administrative expenses increased by $4.6 million, or 7%, to $70.3 million for 2021 from $65.7 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $4.6 million in personnel-related costs, $3.7 million in professional services, $3.3 million in insurance expense and $1.8 million in bad debt reserves, partially offset by a decrease of $6.3 million in stock-based compensation expense and non-recurring IPO related expenses of $3.5 million in 2020.
Gain on Sale of Assets Held-for-Sale
On July 2, 2020, we sold our Morgan Hill properties to a third-party buyer for $12.3 million and recorded a gain of $7.5 million in our operating expenses.
Restructuring
Restructuring expenses primarily consist of costs of employee termination benefits incurred in connection with our restructuring plan to downsize the manufacturing function and related engineering and administrative functions in our California locations in March 2020. The purposes of this plan were to align resource requirements with our initiatives to lower our cost structure and to increase our production capacity by outsourcing a majority of manufacturing activities. The plan included a reduction of workforce and has been completed as of December 31, 2020. As a result of the restructuring program, we incurred restructuring charges totaling $1.0 million for 2020, primarily related to employee severance related costs.
Interest Income, Interest Expense and Other Expense, Net
Interest income consists primarily of income earned on our cash equivalents and investments in marketable securities. These amounts will vary based on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment balances, and also with market rates. Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our equipment financing leases and credit facility.
2021 vs. 2020
Interest income increased by $0.3 million, or 195%, for 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of our average cash equivalent and short-term investment balances in 2021.
Interest expense was primarily related to our capital leases and was insignificant for all periods presented.
Other income, net for 2021 was primarily related to the $10.1 million gain from forgiveness of our PPP loan and related interest under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economics Security Act (the CARES Act). Other changes were primarily related to foreign exchange gain or loss resulting from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations during the periods presented.
Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists of federal, state and foreign current and deferred income taxes. As we expand the scale and scope of our international business activities, any changes in the United States and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
We have a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets, including federal and state net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our federal and state deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income.
We believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, although we can provide no assurance that the final outcome of these matters will not be materially different. To the extent that the final outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
2021 vs. 2020
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, China, Germany and India. Our effective tax rate changed from 2.7% in 2020 to (0.3)% in 2021. The change in income taxes was primarily due to the $6.7 million tax benefit related to the release of a valuation allowance in the first quarter of 2020 associated with carrying back a portion of our 2019 net operating losses to 2017 that is allowed by the CARES Act, partially offset by a $2.5 million tax expense related to a Chinese foreign income withholding tax.
Enacted on March 27, 2020, the CARES Act provides emergency assistance and health care response for businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits net operating loss carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. Additionally, the CARES Act allows net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. In May 2020, we received a $7.1 million tax refund related to the carryback of a portion of our 2019 net operating losses to 2017. As of December 31, 2021, we had $367.3 million of U.S. federal and $107.2 million of state net operating loss carryforwards available to reduce future taxable income, which will be carried forward indefinitely for U.S. federal tax purposes and will expire beginning in 2028 through 2039 for state tax purposes. Based on our analysis, the relief provisions will not have additional material impact on our future consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $294.4 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are comprised of money market funds, U.S. government and agency securities, corporate debt securities and commercial paper. To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been payments received from sales to customers and the net proceeds we received through the Business Combination, PIPE offering, private placements of the pre-combination Velodyne convertible preferred stock, public warrant exercises, employee option exercises and ESPP share purchases, and sales to customers. As of December 31, 2021, we received an aggregate of $227.0 million in net proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE offering, and an aggregate of $163.0 million in net proceeds from the exercises of our public warrants.
We have a loan and security agreement with a financial institution that expires on February 24, 2023. The credit agreement, which was entered into in September 2020 and last amended in February 2022, provides a $25.0 million revolving line of credit, with a $5.0 million letter of credit sublimit. The agreement includes an option to increase the credit limit up to an additional $15.0 million with the bank’s approval. The advances under the credit facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the prime rate plus an applicable margin of 1.5% for prime rate advances, or the SOFR rate plus an applicable margin of 2.5% for SOFR advances. The unused revolving line facility fee is 0.15% per annum of the average unused portion of the credit facility. The revolving line of credit is secured by certain assets of the Company. As of December 31, 2021, we were compliant with all associated covenants in the agreement. No amounts were drawn against this credit facility during any of the periods presented.
On April 8, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $10.0 million under the CARES Act’s Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). We filed for the forgiveness of the PPP loan and were approved for forgiveness of such loan and interest on June 30, 2021.
We have incurred negative cash flows from operating activities and significant losses from operations in the past as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $526.3 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur operating losses at least for the next 12 months due to the investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business. We believe that current cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and available borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations, including capital expenditures and purchase commitments, for at least the next 12 months. For additional information regarding our cash requirements from lease obligations and contractual obligations, see Note 6. “Leases” and Note 16. “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our future capital requirements, however, will depend on many factors, including our lidar sales volume, the timing and extent of spending to support our research and development efforts in smart vision technology, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and market adoption of new and enhanced products and features. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. From time to time, we may seek to raise additional funds through equity and debt. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired and on reasonable terms, our business, results of operations, and financial condition be adversely affected.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During 2021, operating activities used $120.7 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $212.2 million, impacted by our non-cash net adjustments of $92.5 million primarily consisting of stock-based compensation of $87.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $8.5 million, provision for doubtful accounts of $2.3 million, reduction in carrying amount of the ROU assets of $3.1 million, gain on extinguishment of PPP loan of $10.1 million and accretion on short-term investments of $1.7 million. The cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $12.5 million was primarily due to an increase of $5.0 million in contract assets, an increase of $1.1 million in prepaid expenses, a decrease of $2.8 million in accounts payable and a decrease of $0.6 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to timing of payments, and a decrease of $3.0 million in contract liabilities due to the timing of billings and cash received in advance of revenue. These amounts were partially offset by cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $11.5 million which primarily consists of a decrease of $8.8 million in inventory primarily due to timing of inventories received, and a decrease of $2.5 million in accounts receivable due to the timing of billings and cash received.
During 2020, operating activities used $68.4 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $149.9 million, impacted by our non-cash net expense of $96.6 million primarily consisting of stock-based compensation of $91.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $8.4 million, write-off of deferred IPO costs of $3.5 million and provision for doubtful accounts of $0.5 million, partially offset by a gain of $7.5 million from sale of assets held-for-sale. The cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $20.6 million which primarily consists of an increase of $2.6 million in accounts receivable, a decrease of $6.7 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to timing of payments, and an increase of $11.3 million in unbilled receivables from a licensing arrangement with a customer. These amounts were partially offset by cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.4 million was primarily due to an increase of $9.0 million in contract liabilities primarily due to deferred revenues from a licensing arrangement, partially offset by a decrease of $6.1 million in customer deposit. The cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities also included a decrease of $1.6 million in inventories due to timing of inventories received, a decrease of $0.2 million in prepaid and other current assets and an increase of $0.7 million in accounts payable due to timing of payments.
Investing Activities
During 2021, cash used in investing activities was $132.7 million, which was primarily used to purchase short-term investments of $341.0 million, purchase property, plant and equipment of $5.6 million and invest in notes receivable of $0.8 million, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of short-term investments of $214.6 million.
During 2020, cash used in investing activities was $134.5 million, which was primarily used to purchase short-term investments of $145.7 million and purchase property, plant and equipment of $3.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of our Morgan Hill building of $12.3 million and sales and maturities of short-term investments of $2.2 million.
Our machinery and equipment is depreciated over a useful life of approximately five years.
Financing Activities
During 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $72.8 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $89.3 million from exercises of public warrants and $3.6 million from employee option exercises and ESPP share purchases, partially offset by $20.0 million cash paid for transaction costs related to the Business Combination.
During 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $347.7 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $247.0 million from the Business Combination and PIPE offering, $73.7 million from exercises of public warrants, $19.9 million from issuance of preferred stock and proceeds of $10.0 million from the PPP loan, partially offset by $1.1 million cash paid for IPO costs and $1.8 million cash paid for repurchases of common stock.