Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information which Volta’s management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of its consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read the following discussion and analysis of Volta’s financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to plans and strategy for Volta’s business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the section entitled “Risk Factors”, Volta’s actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, capital expenditures, economic and competitive conditions, regulatory changes and other uncertainties, as well as those factors discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements. Please also see the section entitled "Forward-Looking Statements."
Percentage amounts included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of rounded figures, but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may vary from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain other amounts that appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may not sum due to rounding.
Business Overview
Volta’s mission is to build the fueling infrastructure of the future. Volta’s vision is to create an electric vehicle (“EV”) charging network that capitalizes on and catalyzes the shift from gas cars to electric cars. Volta places its charging stations in high traffic public locations that driver and consumer behavior data suggest are stopping points in EV drivers' daily routines. Located near the entrances of the retail and other commercial facilities at these locations, the digital display screens on Volta's media enabled stations offer its media partners the opportunity to advertise to potential consumers just before they enter that facility. By both attracting EV drivers to a particular location to run an errand that was on their to-do list and providing a high impact advertising opportunity just before a purchasing decision may be made, Volta's charging stations allow it to enhance its site and media partners' core commercial interests.
Volta’s business entails partnering with real estate and retail partners with national and regional multi-site portfolios of commercial and retail properties, as well as municipalities and local business owners, to locate and deploy its EV charging stations in premier locations. The site hosts Volta partners with span a wide array of industries and locations, including retail centers, grocery stores, pharmacies, movie theaters, parking lots, healthcare/medical facilities, municipalities, sport and entertainment venues, parks and recreation areas, restaurants, schools and universities, certain transit and fueling locations, office buildings and other locations. Volta generally signs long-term contracts to locate its charging stations at site host properties and grows its footprint over time as its station utilization justifies further capital investment in its EV charging infrastructure. Volta also sells charging stations to certain business partners, while continuing to perform related installation, operation and maintenance services. For both Volta-owned and partner-owned charging stations, Volta sells media display time on the media-enabled charging stations’ digital displays to its media and advertising partners. In addition, while Volta currently provides sponsored charging services to drivers that use its charging stations, Volta intends to introduce a pay-for-use charging model in the future, which it has begun testing in limited locations. As of December 31, 2021, Volta had installed 2,264 chargers across 23 states and territories that have generated over 210,000 estimated charging sessions per month, forming one of the most utilized charging networks in the United States on a station basis.
Volta’s unique business model aims to maximize deployment of capital to deliver compelling value per unit and dollars per mile of capital invested. Volta’s current business model is capable of generating revenue from multiple sources: Behavior and Commerce, Network Development, Charging Network Operations and Network Intelligence.
•Behavior and Commerce revenue is derived from the sale of advertising to Volta partners that purchase media display time on its content-driven charging stations to conduct their media and advertising campaigns to generate commerce or influence targeted driver behavior.
•Network Development revenue is generated by providing site development, installation, operating and maintenance services, and the sale of Volta’s charging products to select site hosts. Network Development revenue is also generated from contracts with utility companies for the sale of installed electrical infrastructure. Volta’s Network Development customers consist of select site hosts that purchase Volta charging stations and receive associated installation and maintenance services, utility companies with whom Volta contracts to perform electrical infrastructure development activities, and select site partners for whom Volta performs the development work required to prepare a site for EV charging infrastructure. Currently, there is immaterial overlap between Volta’s Behavior and Commerce and Network Development customers.
•Charging Network Operations revenue is generated by tracking the delivery of electricity through the use of Volta’s charging stations, generating LCFS credits which Volta sells to third parties under the regulatory framework currently in effect. Volta intends to implement pay-for-use charging features in the future and anticipates that its “Charging Network Operations” revenue will also include fees received for its paid charging services and that its Charging Network Operations customers will include drivers that utilize Volta’s paid charging services.
•Network Intelligence revenue consists of license or service fees from the sale of Volta’s proprietary software tools related to its EV charging network analysis. Volta offers access to the PredictEVTM tool, a machine-learning built software tool that Volta uses for network planning, to utility companies, channel partners and other third parties as a SaaS offering to help them assess the impact that EV adoption and the shift to electric mobility will have on electricity demand in their service areas.
Acquisitions
Effective April 21, 2021, Volta purchased all the intellectual property of 2Predict, Inc. (“2Predict”) from a related party, Praveen Mandal, Chief Technology Officer of Volta. The total purchase consideration was $1.4 million. As a result of the acquisition, Volta will further expand their technology through 2Predict's team of experts in advanced machine learning solutions.
Please refer to “Note 4 - Acquisitions”, of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Key Performance Measures
Volta management reviews certain key performance measures, discussed below, to evaluate its business and results of operations, measure performance, identify trends, formulate plans and make strategic decisions. Volta management believes that the presentation of such metrics is useful to Volta’s investors and counterparties because they are used to measure and benchmark the performance of companies, such as Volta and its peers.
Total Stations Installed, including Site Partners
Volta management defines “Total Stations Installed” as the total size of its installed charging network at the end of the period, including Volta-owned and site partner-owned charging stations. Volta’s management uses Total Stations Installed for internal network planning and forecasting purposes, including to evaluate the potential Behavior and Commerce revenue generating capacity of its charging network, which is generated through delivery of content by Volta’s partners across both Volta-owned and its site partner-owned charging stations. In addition, Total Stations Installed provides the basis for Volta’s assessment of its charging network operations as well. Volta believes that this performance measure provides meaningful, supplemental information regarding the Volta charging network that helps illustrate trends in its business and operating performance. Volta believes that this performance
measure is helpful to its investors as it is used by management in assessing the growth of the Volta charging network.
Total Stalls Connected, including Site Partners
Volta management team defines “Total Stalls” as the total operational charging capacity in Volta's network of charging stations. A stall is attributed to a station based on the number of vehicles that can charge concurrently and there are certain configurations of Volta sites where one station is capable of charging more than one vehicle at a time.
However, this information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the financial and other information presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, other companies, including companies in Volta’s industry, may calculate similarly titled performance measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of this performance measure as a tool for comparison.
The following table sets forth this key performance measure, together with total revenue, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The increase in revenue is primarily driven by the addition of 709 stalls, including site partner station installations, which represents an increase of 43.7%. For more information on the increase of total revenue, refer to the subsection entitled “Results of Operations” below.
Key Factors Affecting Operational Results
Volta’s future operating results and cash flows are dependent upon a number of opportunities, challenges and other factors, including macroeconomic conditions, human resources, supply chain, customer retention, adoption of EVs and related technology, regulatory environment, competition, and installation and construction costs.
Macroeconomic Conditions
Volta derives a significant portion of its revenues from providing paid content on its EV charging stations. Current or prospective buyers’ spending priorities could be altered by a decline in the economy in general, the economic prospects of such buyers’, and/or the economy of any individual geographic market or industry. Any such changes, particularly in a market in which Volta conducts a substantial portion of its business or an industry from which it derives a significant portion of its content, could adversely affect Volta’s revenues. Additionally, disruptions to buyers’ product plans or launches could affect revenue.
Volta is dependent upon the availability of electricity at its current and future charging sites. Increases in electricity costs, the need to upgrade or bring in additional power infrastructure at locations, delays, new or increased taxation or regulations, power shortages and/or other restrictions on the availability or cost of electricity could adversely affect Volta’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Human Resources
Volta’s ability to achieve revenue growth, profitability and expand its charging network and strategic content partnerships to achieve broader market acceptance will depend on its ability to effectively expand its sales, content, marketing, technology and operational teams and capabilities. Volta’s success depends, in part, on its continuing ability to identify, hire, attract, train, develop and retain highly qualified personnel. To achieve its growth objectives, Volta needs to continue to expand its team and geographic footprint aggressively.
Supply Chain
Volta’s future operating results and ability to expand its network of charging stations depends in part on the global supply chain and the ability of Volta’s limited number of suppliers and manufacturers to timely and correctly deliver Volta’s charging stations. Volta has developed close relationships with vendors of key components. As Volta intends to grow and expand the charging network, there is a risk of the unavailability of certain components from vendors.
Customer Retention
Volta intends to introduce, and has begun testing, a pay-for-use by the driver model for charging, as well as idle fees for EVs that remain connected to a charging station for more than a specified period of time after charging is complete. As Volta migrates from EV charging, that has been free to the driver, to include a pay-for-use model, it could risk losing drivers who have become accustomed to its free charging and do not wish to use paid charging services and reduce demand for its stations from media and site partners.
Adoption of EVs and Related Technology
Volta's future growth and success is aligned with the continuing rapid adoption of EVs for passenger and fleet applications and the desire of site partners to provide this amenity on their properties that allows Volta to access the vehicle and foot traffic at these sites. The success of alternative fuels, competing technologies or alternative transportation options could considerably undermine Volta’s prospects to offer this amenity.
The EV charging market is characterized by rapid technological change, which requires Volta to continue to develop new products, innovate, and maintain and expand its intellectual property portfolio. Any delays in such developments could adversely affect market adoption of its products and its financial results. Volta’s ability to grow its business and consumer base depends, in part, upon the effective operation of its mobile applications that Volta deploys on various mobile operating systems, cellular and payment networks and external charging standards that it does not control.
The evolution of the EV market informs the evolution of the EV charging market. Volta’s success depends in large part on the ability to model demand for EV charging and deploy charging stations that meet market demand for charging speeds for a variety of EV charging capabilities. This further needs to be appropriately matched to dwell time at a particular location. As EV batteries increasingly become able to accept higher levels of charge, Volta is responding to a greater demand for DCFC chargers at certain locations, like pharmacies, that typically have shorter dwell times.
Volta is developing and operating in an emerging technology sector. Computer malware, viruses, ransomware, hacking, phishing attacks and other network disruptions could result in security and privacy breaches, loss of proprietary information and interruption in service, which could harm Volta’s business. Unauthorized disclosure of personal or sensitive data or confidential information, whether through electronic security breaches or otherwise, could severely hurt Volta’s business.
Regulatory Environment
Volta’s business and its ability to execute operational plans could be highly impacted by the regulatory environment in which it operates on all levels. Regulatory factors affecting Volta’s business include infrastructure financing or support, carbon offset programs, EV-related tax incentives and tax policy, utility and power regulation, payment
regulations, data privacy and security, software reporting tools, transportation policy and construction, electrical and sign code permitting.
Restrictions on certain digital outdoor media content products, services or other content are or may be imposed by laws and regulations, as well as contracts with Volta’s host sites. Digital displays were introduced to the market relatively recently, and existing media signage regulations could be revised or new regulations could be enacted to impose greater restrictions on digital content or displays. In addition, Volta may be also impacted if various levels of government enact rules or legislation to tax revenues derived from the sale of digital media. Any such regulatory changes could adversely affect Volta’s financial condition and results of operations.
Competition
Volta currently faces competition from a number of companies in the U.S. and Europe, in both the EV charging industry and in the media industry. Volta expects to face significant competition in the future as the markets for EV charging and content evolve. Increased competition in these industries could create a talent war, making it more challenging to attract and retain talent.
The EV charging business may become more competitive and Volta may face increased pressure on network utilization. Competition is expected to continue to increase as the number of EVs sold increases and as new competitors or alliances emerge that may have greater market share or access to capital than Volta. If Volta’s content competitors offer media content display rates below the rates it charges, Volta could lose potential partners and be pressured to reduce its rates. This could have an adverse effect on Volta’s financial position. Volta’s future growth and success is dependent upon the desirability of its charging stations as content space. The success of alternative media content options employed by agencies, brands or other purchasers of content could undermine Volta’s prospects.
Industry Standards
Volta currently operates in alignment with industry best practices to measure and determine impressions delivered. Should industry best practices change Volta may incur additional costs to implement these changes or lose potential partners if Volta does not maintain industry best practices.
Relationships with Real Estate and Retail Partners
In order to build its charging network, Volta will need to continue to establish and maintain relationships with real estate partners, retail partners and site partners with national, multi-state and local portfolios of commercial and retail properties. Site hosts can span a diverse array of industries and locations, and if such hosts believe the benefits offered by Volta’s competitors exceed the benefits of partnering with Volta, Volta may lose access to high quality property owners that it needs to achieve profitability.
Seasonality
Volta’s content business has experienced and is expected to continue to experience fluctuations as it continues to scale its EV charging footprint in various markets. This is primarily due to, among other things, seasonal buying patterns and seasonal influences on media markets. Typically, media spend is highest in the fourth quarter, during the holiday shopping season, and lowest in the first quarter, as buyers adjust their spending following the holiday shopping season and prepare annual budgets.
Installation and Construction Cost Drivers
Volta’s business is subject to risks associated with construction, cost overruns and delays and other contingencies that may arise in the course of completing installations. The timing of obtaining permits from state and local governments to install charging stations is often out of Volta’s control, and could result in delays of operations. In
addition, Volta relies on a limited number of suppliers and manufacturers for the manufacture and supply of its charging stations, some of which are also early-stage companies.
Volta’s EV chargers are typically located in publicly accessible outdoor or garage areas and may be subject to damage from a number of sources, including exposure to the elements and weather-related impacts, and wear and tear and inadvertent or accidental damage by drivers, including due to vehicle collisions or charger misuse. Volta’s charging stations may also be subject to intentional damage and abuse, including vandalism or other intentional property damage, any of which would increase wear and tear of the charging equipment and could result in such equipment being irreparably damaged or destroyed.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. Volta management is closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of Volta’s business. Volta has taken measures in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including closing its offices for a period, implementing a work from home policy for its workforce and actively managing its site installations. Volta may take further actions that alter its business operations, as may be required by government authorities or that it determines are in the best interests of its employees, contractors and stockholders. See the “Risk Factors” section for further information on the risks related to Volta's business. Volta faces risks related to health pandemics, which could have a material adverse effect on its business and results of operations. For example, impacts to Volta’s business as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic included slow-down of permitting and construction activities during shutdowns, shut-down of properties where Volta’s stations are located, drop off in media spend, shut-down of offices and a transition to remote work forces, impacting revenue potential and usage.
After shelter-in-place orders were issued in March 2020, construction activities halted until June 1, 2020 and management revised its planned construction activity and budget, resulting in a 43% forecasted reduction in capital expenditures from Volta’s original budget for the 2020 fiscal year. Volta’s supply chain was delayed due to high global demand for key components of its stations. The process of obtaining permits slowed down, as over the counter permits were scaled back due to work from home arrangements in jurisdictions where Volta was installing stations.
In addition, during the first and second quarter of the year ended December 31, 2020, Volta’s revenues declined due to COVID-19. Customer demand for paid content space on Volta charging station digital displays declined due to the decrease in foot traffic at Volta’s site hosts as drivers were subject to shelter-in-place orders around the United States. In addition, delays in construction resulting from shelter-in-place orders reduced the overall network station installation cadence, resulting in fewer screens being available for paid media content than Volta initially projected. As a result, Volta’s Behavior and Commerce revenue decreased by $0.6 million, or 7%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to postponed and canceled media campaigns as a result of the COVID-19 shelter-in-place and other measures taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Impacts from COVID-19 during the year ended December 31, 2021 were immaterial to Volta’s Behavior and Commerce activities. Also, while there were continuing delays for permits and installations due to continuing impacts from COVID-19 in the construction industry generally, given the nature of Volta’s partnerships and contractual obligations, Volta does not believe there will be a material impact to its business and operations as a result of these delays going forward.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Volta’s management implemented several plans to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on Volta’s financial performance, including operating cost containment measures, payroll reductions, reduced capital expenditures, re-prioritization of construction at sites that were open and provided essential services, and raising capital through debt and equity transactions. For example, Volta implemented a plan to reduce personnel costs through a temporary hiring freeze and reduction in non-essential contractors. Volta further reduced program spend, representing a combined 38% reduction against its original budget for the 2020 fiscal year. On April 27, 2020, Volta received the PPP Loan in the amount of $3.2 million with fixed interest of 1% per annum as part of the CARES Act related relief, which despite having been granted full forgiveness, it repaid in full on October 12, 2021. In the second half of 2020, construction projects and the permitting process for new sites resumed. Beginning in the
first quarter of 2021, there was a trend of increasing availability and administration of vaccines against COVID-19, as well as an easing of restrictions on social, business, travel, and governmental activities and functions. On the other hand, infection rates and regulations continue to fluctuate in various regions and there are ongoing global impacts resulting from the pandemic, including challenges and increases in costs for logistics and supply chains.
The COVID-19 pandemic, the measures taken by the governmental authorities and businesses affected and the resulting economic impact may materially and adversely affect Volta’s business, results of operations, cash flows and financial positions as well as its drivers that use its charging stations. Despite such recent events, Volta management does not anticipate the COVID-19 pandemic will significantly impact future operations, as demonstrated by the launch of several new automotive media campaigns in February 2021. Volta believes that its content network remains attractive to buyers, given that many of its charging stations are installed in close proximity to essential and daily use businesses such as grocery stores. pharmacies, and shopping centers. In addition, despite the adverse impacts, there are no indications that the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a material decline in the carrying value of any of Volta’s assets, or a material change in the estimate of any contingent amounts recorded in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. As economic activity has resumed in 2021 and new EV sales have increased, revenue has increased since the last pre-COVID fiscal year. See “Note 3 - Liquidity” the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information. However, the estimates of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Volta’s business may change based on new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions to contain it or treat its impact, including any variants that may arise, and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. Volta’s management continues to monitor the impact of the global situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry and workforce. See also the subsection entitled “Key Factors Affecting Operational Results” for further discussion of the possible impact of COVID-19 on Volta’s business.
Basis of Presentation
Substantially all of Volta’s long-lived assets are maintained in, and its losses are attributable to, the United States. The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Volta and its wholly owned subsidiaries. See, “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Behavior and Commerce
Behavior and Commerce revenue is principally generated through the delivery of paid content across the charging network.
Network Development
Network Development revenue is generated from installation, operating and maintenance services of the charging stations to select site partners. Network Development also includes revenue from select site partners related to the sale of Volta’s charging products and the performance of development work necessary to prepare a site for EV infrastructure as well as revenue from contracts with utility companies for installing electrical infrastructure.
Charging Network Operations
Charging Network Operations revenue is generated by utilization of Volta’s charging stations and through the sale of LCFS credits.
Network Intelligence
Network Intelligence revenue consists of license or service fee revenue from proprietary software tools derived from the charging network. Volta offers access to the PredictEVTM tool to utility companies, channel partners and other third parties through a SaaS business model.
Cost of Services
Cost of services consist primarily of contracted labor for sales of installation and maintenance services and costs related to station rent, electricity, insurance, communication, and business property taxes related to Volta’s site leases. Volta expects cost of services to increase in future periods primarily due to increased costs associated with operating a national charging network due to increasing rent and electricity costs as site hosts seek to monetize customer parking spaces.
Cost of Products
Cost of products consist primarily of hardware related costs of AC and DCFC stations which includes the station chassis, high-resolution, outdoor screen displays on media-enabled stations, the EV chargers, routers, and computers. While the cost of products has increased for the current generation of Volta’s award-winning charging stations, which include intuitive lighting features and a new chassis design, Volta seeks to drive cost down of the next generation of stations through scaling purchasing with its manufacturing partners.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share based compensation, professional fees for legal, accounting, other consulting services, software and licenses, and information technology development services costs. Volta expects to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and NYSE listing standards, additional insurance expenses (including directors’ and officers’ insurance), investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. Volta also expects to increase the size of its selling, general and administrative function to support the growth of its business.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization primarily relate to the depreciation of Volta-owned charging stations and its tenant improvements, technology equipment and other tools. Volta anticipates these expenses will continue to increase over time as it continues to build its network.
Other Operating (Income) Expenses
Other operating expenses primarily relate to write offs of expenses related to projects discontinued prior to construction disposal of assets, and obsolete inventory.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest related to its loan interest, amortization of debt issuance costs and costs related to early termination of debt.
Other (Income) Expense, net
Other (income) expense, net includes expenses related to an accrual for disputed invoices and various local and state government agencies.
Income Tax Expense
Volta’s income tax provision consists of an estimate of federal and state taxes, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax law and valuation allowance.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with Volta’s consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the related notes included elsewhere in this document. The following tables set forth Volta’s consolidated results of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues
The following table summarizes the changes in revenue from the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Behavior and Commerce revenue increased by $17.9 million, or 224%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to large sales of media campaigns with several national brands in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Network Development revenue decreased by $5.4 million, or 51%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to a decrease in installation activity as there were 51 installations of stations sold to customers completed in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 218 completed in the year ended December 31, 2020 (see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies).
Cost of Revenues
The following table summarizes cost of revenues by products and services:
Costs of services increased by $5.6 million, or 32%, to $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to an increase of $4.5 million in station rent due to an increase in the cumulative number of leases that commenced over the prior four quarters, an increase of $1.0 million in advertising and media costs each primarily due to the impacts of lifting COVID-19 shelter-in-place mandate orders in the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.6 million in network costs due to data services as a result of higher usage, and an increase of $0.4 million in network costs due to an increased fee for station data plans in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in infrastructure costs.
Costs of products decreased by $1.0 million, or 38%, from the years ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to the decrease of site partner owned charging stations constructed and installed at site partners from the years ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, totaling 218 and 51 completed station installations, respectively. The decrease was partially offset due to the increase in adoption of DCFC stations, which increases the average cost per station.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $218.5 million, or 496%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase primarily relates to a $171.1 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation, driven by $163.1 million related to the issuance of and restricted stock units ("RSUs") to the Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") and President. Of this amount, $96.9 million in non-cash stock-based compensation related to shares issued under the Founder's Incentive Plan ("FIP"), with the remaining $66.2 million relating to awards with service and performance conditions. Refer to Note 12 - Stockholders (Deficit) Equity and Stock-Based Compensation of the accompanying financial statements for further discussion. Further, selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $9.0 million in outside services related to the completion of the recapitalization, an increase of $18.5 million and $9.1 million in payroll and related costs and, bonus and commissions due to an increase in Volta’s employee headcount to 353 from 143. Included in the increase in selling general, and administrative expenses, operating and setup expenses related to the Company's international expansion was $4.3 million, which includes employee compensation of 20 employees in EU and nine in Canada. Additionally, there was an increase of $3.6 million in other selling general, and administrative expenses related to additions of insurance services, an increase of $1.1 million in travel, meal and related expenses from the increase in business activity due to the easing of COVID-19 travel restrictions and an increase in headcount. Advertising, promotion, and event expenses increased $0.7 million primarily due to an increase in marketing spend in line with business growth. Software license expenses increased by $0.6 million due to increased purchases of prepaid software licenses and subscriptions. Rent and facilities expenses increased $0.4 million due to an increase in warehouse expense for costs associated with storing the Company's hardware and station assets.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased by $4.7 million, or 72%, to $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase of 637 Volta-owned installations in service during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Operating (Income) Expense
Other operating (income) expense increased by $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to greater losses on disposals of assets, disqualified projects prior to construction, and obsolete inventory during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations increased by $216.9 million, or 423%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses of $218.5 million of which, $171.1 million was attributable to an increase in stock-based compensation, an increase in other operating (income) expense of $1.9 million, an increase in costs of services of $5.6 million, a decrease in costs of products of $1.0 million and an increase in depreciation and amortization expenses of $4.7 million, partially offset by an increase in revenue of $12.9 million.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense decreased by $11.9 million, or 65% from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to the conversion of the Company's convertible notes in connection with the Series D funding round in 2020, for which there was none in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net increased by $0.1 million or 21% from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $9.1 thousand and $39.1 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, which was primarily attributable to state taxes.
Net Loss
Net loss increased $206.0 million, or 292%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase of $229.8 million in total costs and expenses, partially offset by a decrease in total other expenses of $10.9 million and an increase in revenue of $12.9 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Volta has incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since its inception. To date, Volta has funded its operations primarily with proceeds from the issuance of Volta Preferred Stock, borrowings under its loan facilities, including its term loan, a Paycheck Protection Program loan under the Small Business Administration (SBA), and other term loans. Until Volta is cash-flow positive, Volta may need to consider raising funds through the issuance of debt or equity securities or additional borrowings in the future.
Volta’s operations are dependent on its ability to generate meaningful long-term revenue and will highly depend on driver behavior trends as well as increased and sustained driver demand for EVs and related charging services. If the market for EVs does not develop as Volta expects or develops more slowly than it expects, or if there is a decrease in driver demand for EV charging services, Volta’s business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations will be harmed. The market for EV charging is relatively new, rapidly evolving, characterized by rapidly changing technologies, volatile electricity pricing, additional competitors, evolving government regulation (including carbon credits) and industry standards, frequent new vehicle announcements and changing driver demands and behaviors. Any number of changes in the industry could negatively affect revenue generation from Behavior and Commerce and EV charging.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $276.6 million and had negative cash flows from operating activities of $93.3 million. Volta has a cash balance of $262.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
The Company entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Tortoise Acquisition Corp. II. on February 7, 2021 and following the Closing on August 26, 2021, Volta Inc. began trading on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Please refer to “Note 1 - Description of Business” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 for additional information. Additional cash obligations in the next twelve months are expected to include investments in the operations and purchases to expand the business. Management has considered conditions and events which provide substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern for the 12 months following the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. The Company concluded that there is substantial doubt that the Company cannot continue as a going concern in the next twelve months based on reasonable information available to us as of the date of this analysis. No assurances can be provided that additional funding will be available at terms acceptable to the Company, if at all. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, the Company may significantly curtail its operations, modify strategic plans and/or dispose of certain operations or assets.
Liquidity Policy
As an early-stage company, Volta maintains a focus on liquidity and defines its liquidity risk tolerance based on sources and uses to maintain a sufficient liquidity position to meet its obligations under both normal and stressed conditions. Volta manages its liquidity to provide access to sufficient funding to meet its business needs and financial obligations, as well as capital allocation and growth objectives.
Debt Profile
The following table summarizes Volta’s debt balances and key related loan information:
(1)The entire balance of the PPP loan has been paid by the Company as of October 12, 2021 and is no longer available. Please see Note 10 - Debt Facilities to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(2)The interest rate on the term loan as of June 19, 2019 was a fixed rate of 12% per annum. Please see Note 10 - Debt Facilities to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(3) The interest rate on the PPP Loan, as of April 27, 2020, was a fixed rate of 1% per annum. Please see Note 10 - Debt Facilities to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
On June 19, 2019, Volta entered into a senior secured term loan agreement, and has drawn a total of $49.0 million over the life of the term loan. Volta drew an initial amount of $24.0 million under the term loan during the year ended December 31, 2019 and drew an additional $25.0 million under the term loan during the year ended December 31, 2020 to help fund network expansion and operating activities. The term loan agreement is fully funded based on capital expenditures and is secured by stations and other assets. The loan agreement states there are no limits or restrictions on the use of funds drawn. Interest on the outstanding balance of the term loan is equal to 12% per annum, and principal payments are due in equal monthly installments which began on July 1, 2021.
In addition, on April 4, 2020, Volta obtained a PPP Loan under the SBA program in the amount of $3.2 million. Subject to certain qualifications and exclusions, the amount of loan forgiveness would have been reduced if Volta terminated employees or reduced salaries during the covered period. Although the PPP Loan was fully forgiven, Volta repaid the full amount of the loan by its stated maturity date and subsequent to the completion of the Reverse Recapitalization. Please refer to “Note 1 - Description of Business,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, which includes additional information.
The following table summarizes Volta’s financing obligations:
Volta entered into multiple sale-leaseback arrangements of digital media screens that do not qualify as asset sales and are accounted for as financing obligations. These financing obligations have been amortized over the 5-year term at Volta's incremental borrowing rate at the time of the transaction which has ranged between 6.0% - 16.7%.
Please refer to “Note 10 - Debt Facilities”, of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Material Cash Requirements
In the normal course of business, Volta enters into obligations and commitments that require future contractual payments. The commitments result primarily from operating leases and long-term debt. The following table summarizes Volta’s contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2021:
The Company's material cash requirements include the following commitments and contractual obligations:
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes Volta’s cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $36.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to the increase of $30.2 million in net loss adjusted for non-cash items, an increase of $9.6 million in operating lease ROU asset, and an increase of $1.6 million in net working capital, excluding operating lease liabilities. The increase is offset by a $9.7 million increase
in operating lease liability, $5.6 million increase in other noncurrent liabilities.
With the use of cash for operating activities to expand the business, Volta has considered conditions and events which provide substantial doubt about the Company's ability to meet cash requirements to support its operations over the 12 months following the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. See Note 3 - Liquidity, of Volta’s of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $40.7 million, or 244%, to $57.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to $39.6 million increase in purchases of property and equipment, net partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in capitalization of internal-use software for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $231.8 million, or 190%, to $353.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $122.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily driven by an increase of $350.1 million from the completion of the Reverse Recapitalization, an increase of $28.7 million in proceeds from issuance of Volta Industries, Inc. (“Legacy Volta”) Series D Preferred Stock, and a decrease of $2.5 million in the payment of issuance costs related to Series D and D-1 Preferred Stock partially offset by a decrease of $99.3 million in proceeds from issuance of Series D and D-1 Preferred Stock, a decrease of $24.7 million in proceeds of long term debt, an increase of $8.3 million in amount due from employees for taxes paid on partial recourse notes, an increase of $9.0 million in payment of transaction costs, the repayment of the PPP loan of $3.2 million, a payment of long term debt of $8.2 million, a decrease of $0.4 million in proceeds from financing activity, a decrease of $3.2 million in PPP loan proceeds, and a $0.3 million increase in the payment of financing activity principal for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Subsequent Events
Please refer to “Note 18 - Subsequent Events,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to its financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, Volta believes the following non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating its operating performance. Volta uses the following non-GAAP financial measure to evaluate its ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. Volta believes that this non-GAAP financial measure, when taken together with the corresponding U.S. GAAP financial measure, provides meaningful, supplemental information regarding its performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of its business, results of operations or outlook. Volta considers EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in its business and its historical operating performance on a more consistent basis. Volta believes that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is helpful to its investors as it is a metric used by management in assessing the health of its business and its operating performance.
However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, other companies, including companies in Volta’s industry, may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of Volta’s non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison. A reconciliation is provided below for the non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly
comparable financial measure stated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related U.S. GAAP financial measure and the reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate Volta’s business.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
In order to provide investors with greater insight and allow for a more comprehensive understanding of the information used by management and the board of directors in its financial and operational decision-making, Volta has supplemented the Consolidated Financial Statements presented on a U.S. GAAP basis in this Annual Report on Form 10-K with Adjusted EBITDA as a non-GAAP financial measure. Volta believes Adjusted EBITDA provides its board of directors, management and investors with a helpful measure for comparing its operating performance with the performance of other companies that have different financing and capital structures or tax rates. Volta also believes that EBITDA is a measure frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in its industry, and is a measure contained in its debt covenants. However, while Volta considers EBITDA to be an important measure of operating performance, EBITDA and other non-GAAP financial measures have limitations, and investors should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of Volta’s results as reported under U.S. GAAP.
The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure reported in Volta’s consolidated financial statements for the following periods:
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $43.7 million, or 109%, to $(83.8) million in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $(40.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is primarily attributable to a $12.9 million increase in revenues, offset by an increase of $18.5 million in payroll and related costs, an increase of $9.1 million in bonus and commissions due to an increase in Volta’s salaried employee headcount to 353 from 143, and an $9.7 million increase in outside services due to the completion of the Reverse Recapitalization. Operating and setup expenses related to the Company's international expansion was $4.3 million, which includes employee compensation of 20 employees in EU and nine in Canada. Additionally, there was an increase of $3.6 million in other selling general and administrative expenses related to additions of insurance services, an increase of $1.1 million in travel, meal and related expenses from the easing of COVID-19 travel restrictions and an increase in headcount. Advertising, promotion, and event expenses increased $0.7 million primarily due to an increase in marketing spend in line with business growth. Software license expenses increased by $0.6 million due to increased purchases of prepaid software licenses and subscriptions. Rent and facilities expenses increased $0.4 million due to an in increase in warehouse expense for costs associated with storing the Company's hardware and station assets. Lastly, cost of services increased by $5.6 million due to an increase in the cumulative number of leases that commenced over the
prior four quarters and increase in advertising and media costs due to the impacts of lifting COVID-19 shelter in place mandate orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Volta prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires it to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts it reports as in its financial statements and the related disclosures. Volta bases its estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances. Volta’s actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Volta believes that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding its historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Please refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of Volta’s accounting policies in detail. Volta believes the following accounting policies require the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Pursuant to Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act, an emerging growth company is provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting standards that may be issued by FASB or the SEC either (a) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (b) within the same time periods as private companies. Volta intends to take advantage of the exemption for complying with certain new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies, such as current expected credit losses and income tax.
Volta also intends to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act, including, but not limited to not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.
Volta will cease to be an emerging growth company on the date that is the earliest of (a) the last day of the fiscal year in which it has total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (b) the last day of its fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of its initial public offering; (c) the date on which it has issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (d) the last day of the fiscal year in which it is deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of its common stock held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such fiscal year.
Network Development Revenue
Volta generates Network Development revenue from the sales of products including charging stations to select site partners and infrastructure to utility companies as well as related installation services and operations and maintenance services on charging stations owned by third parties. Some of Volta’s agreements include non-standard terms and conditions and include promises to transfer multiple goods and services. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is required to determine the appropriate accounting for these transactions, including: (1) whether performance obligations are considered distinct that should be accounted for separately versus together, how the price should be allocated among the performance obligations, and when to recognize revenue for each performance obligation; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) of each distinct performance obligation; (3) combining contracts that may impact the allocation of the transaction price between product and services; and (4) estimating the consideration payable to a customer as a reduction of the transaction price.
When an agreement contains multiple performance obligations, Volta identifies each component to the contract and allocates the transaction price based on a relative SSP. If the arrangement contains a lease it is accounted for in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. In some arrangements, Volta has executed a sale and leaseback of the digital media screens (sale leaseback) and has also acquired the right to control the use of the location to advertise over a set term (location lease). During the construction phase, Volta does not control the underlying asset on the customer’s property. When the sale leaseback qualifies as a financing lease, Volta will not record a sale for accounting purposes of the digital media screen and depreciates that asset over its useful life. For contractual lease payments that do not exceed the fair value of the location lease obligation, Volta records a lease liability and an associated right-of-use ("ROU") asset based on the discounted lease payments. In some instances, Volta may receive a lease incentive from the lessor which is recorded as a reduction to the lease payments. In arrangements where Volta pays consideration to a customer for a distinct good or service, the consideration payable to a customer is limited to the fair value of the distinct good or service received by the customer. If the contractual payments for the location lease of this arrangement are in excess of fair value, then Volta will estimate the excess contractual payments over fair value and record that amount as a reduction to the transaction price in the arrangement. The reduction to transaction price for consideration payable to a customer is recognized at the later of when Volta pays or promises to pay the consideration or when Volta recognizes the related revenue for the transferred products and services.
The determination of SSP for performance obligations to customers is judgmental and is based on the price that Volta would charge for the same good or service if sold separately on a standalone basis to similar clients in similar circumstances. Volta estimates SSP based on reasonably available data that maximizes the use of observable inputs that may vary over time. Typically, the SSP of Volta’s performance obligations are based on expected cost plus a margin. The margin reflects what the market would be willing to pay adjusted for differences in products, geographies, customers, and other factors.
Sales of charging stations and installed infrastructure is recognized at a point in time when control has been transferred to the customer and is classified as product revenue on our statement of operations. Installation services are recognized over time using an input method based on costs incurred to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. Revenue from operation and maintenance services is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement as the services are performed. Payments are typically due within one month after billed.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition. Please refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 for additional information on revenue recognition.
Equity Based Compensation
Volta’s stock-based compensation consists of options and RSUs that are granted to employees and non-employees as part of their compensation package. As the Company does not have a trading history for its common stock prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, Volta’s management must make assumptions to estimate the fair value.
The grant-date fair value of employee and non-employee stock options are determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model using various inputs, including estimates of expected volatility, term, risk-free rate, and future dividends. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. Compensation cost is recognized over the vesting period of the applicable award using the straight-line method.
Changes in the following assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
Given Volta's limited public trading history, the Volta Board considers numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of Volta common stock. These factors include, but are not limited to (i) contemporaneous valuations of Volta common stock performed by an independent valuation specialist; (ii) developments in the business and stage of development; (iii) operational and financial performance and condition; (iv) issuances of Volta
Preferred Stock and the rights and preferences of Volta preferred stock relative to Volta common stock; (v) the current condition of capital markets and the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of Volta; (vi) the lack of marketability of the Volta common stock; and (vii) experience of management and hiring of key personnel.
The grant date fair value of Volta common stock was determined using valuation methodologies which utilize certain assumptions, including probability weighting events, volatility, time to liquidation, a risk-free interest rate, and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability.
Volta used the market approach to determine the fair value of the Volta common stock. This approach measures the value of an asset or business through an analysis of recent sales or offerings of comparable investments or assets and gives consideration to the financial condition and operating performance of an entity relative to those of public entities operating in the same or similar lines of business. Volta applies the market approach by utilizing the Backsolve method, which uses a Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the implied value based on the recent transaction price. For purposes of allocating the fair value of common stock, Volta used the Option Pricing Method (“OPM”). Under the OPM, shares are valued by creating a series of call options with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences and conversion terms of each equity class. The estimated fair values of the Preferred and common stock are inferred by analyzing these options. This method is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is so difficult to predict that estimates would be highly speculative, and dissolution or liquidation is not imminent.
For financial reporting purposes, Volta considers the amount of time between the valuation date and the grant date to determine whether to use the latest common stock valuation or a straight-line interpolation between the two valuation dates. The determination includes an evaluation of whether the subsequent valuation indicates that any significant change in valuation had occurred between the previous valuation and the grant date.
The following table summarizes the key share-based payment valuation assumptions:
Expected Dividend Yield
Volta does not expect, and is not contractually obligated, to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
Risk-free Interest Rate
The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yields currently available from the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve over the expected term.
Expected Volatility
Expected volatility is a measure of the amount of fluctuation in the value of Volta’s share price over a specific time period. Volatility is generally calculated as the standard deviation of the continuously compounding rates of return on the share over a specified period and is typically expressed as annualized returns. Judgment is required to select a method to estimate expected volatility for nonpublic companies. As Volta does not have a trading history prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, sufficient historical information related to the fair value of Volta’s options is not available. Nonpublic entities may use average volatility for comparable public companies to form a reasonable basis for the
assumption of expected volatility. To identify similar entities, Volta considered characteristics of each, such as industry, stage of life cycle, size and financial leverage. The average volatility actually used in the fair value determination for stock options was 38%-58% for grants issued in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 58%-68% for awards granted in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Expected Term (in years)
Volta uses the practical expedient in ASC 718 which allows nonpublic entities to follow a simplified approach for calculating expected term. For service vesting conditions, the expected term is the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the option. For performance vesting conditions, the expected term is determined based on the probability of occurrence. When the occurrence is probable, the expected term is the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the option. If the occurrence is other than probable, the expected term is the contractual term when the service period is not stated, or the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term if the requisite service period or vesting period is stated.
Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Volta classifies Legacy Volta Preferred Stock Warrants and the Public and Private Warrants as long-term liabilities at their estimated fair value. The liability is subject to remeasurement at each consolidated balance sheet date, with changes in fair value recorded in change in fair value of warrant liability in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Volta will continue to revalue all warrants until exercise, expiration, conversion or until they are no longer redeemable. As of December 31, 2021, none of the Legacy Volta Preferred Stock Warrants and all of the Private Warrants remain outstanding. As of December 31, 2021, 275 shares of the Public Warrants have been exercised.
Volta estimates the fair value of the Public and Private Warrants using the Binomial Lattice Valuation Model (“BLM”). Volta is required to make assumptions and estimates in determining an appropriate risk-free interest rate, volatility, term, dividend yield, discount due to exercise restrictions and the fair value of Volta common stock. Any significant adjustments to the unobservable inputs would have a direct impact on the fair value of the warrant liability. Please refer to “Note 7 - Fair Value Measurements,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Long Lived Assets
Property and equipment, net, which primarily consists of charging stations and construction in progress station hardware, is reported at historical cost less accumulated depreciation. Volta estimates the useful lives of the stations to be between five and ten years, based on its historical experience and its plans regarding how it intends to use those assets.
Volta’s experience indicates that the estimated useful lives applied to its portfolio of assets have been reasonable, and it does not expect significant changes to the estimated useful lives of its long-lived assets in the future. When Volta determines that stations or other equipment will be disposed of prior to the end of their initially estimated useful lives, it estimates the revised useful lives and depreciates the assets over the revised period.
Volta also reviews property and equipment for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that depreciable property and equipment might be impaired, and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amounts of those assets. When specific assets are determined to be unrecoverable, the cost basis of the asset is reduced to reflect the current fair market value.
Volta uses various assumptions in determining the remaining useful lives of assets to be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives and in determining the current fair market value of long-lived assets that are determined to be unrecoverable. Estimated useful lives and fair values are sensitive to factors including contractual commitments, regulatory requirements and future expected cash flows. Volta’s impairment loss calculations require management to
apply judgment in estimating future cash flows, including forecasting useful lives of the assets and selecting the discount rate that reflects the risk inherent in future cash flows.
Leases
Volta maintains multiple lease arrangements depending on negotiating contracts with customers relating to installed charging stations. The charging stations have two units of account: the charging station and digital media screen. Volta recognizes a financing transaction on the digital media screen, which remains on Volta’s consolidated balance sheet based on the cost of the digital media screen and is depreciated over its useful life. Volta also leases the location of the charging stations and this is recognized as an operating lease arrangement, with a lease liability and ROU asset under ASC 842. Volta voluntarily early adopted accounting standards for the treatment of leases under ASC 842 prior to the required adoption after December 15, 2021 given its business and operations in relation to leased properties on a go-forward basis.
Volta uses significant estimates in accounting for lease liabilities and ROU assets, which are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. The lease interest rate used to determine the present value of future lease payments is based on Volta’s incremental borrowing rate. Volta’s leases are all long term, extending beyond a twelve-month period, and include periods under options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain Volta will exercise such options. Volta identifies separate lease and non-lease components, and the non-lease components are typically composed of electricity reimbursements to the landlord.
Volta has elected the practical expedient to account for lease and non-lease components as a combined single lease component, increasing the amount of Volta’s lease liabilities and ROU assets.
Please refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” and “Note 14 - Leases,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information about leases.
Income Taxes
Volta utilizes the liability method in accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the estimated future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax expense or benefit is the result of changes in the deferred tax asset and liability. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets where it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Volta makes estimates, assumptions and judgments to determine its provision for its income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. Volta assesses the likelihood that its deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent it believes that recovery is not likely, it establishes a valuation allowance.
Volta recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has recorded $2 million in uncertain tax position related to deferred revenue.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of the consolidated balance sheet dates of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Volta has not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of recent accounting pronouncements.
Related Party Transactions
Refer to “Note 17 - Related Party Transactions,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information for related party transactions.