Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for Vimeo
Spin-off
On May 25, 2021, Vimeo completed its separation from the remaining businesses of IAC/InterActiveCorp ("IAC") through a series of transactions (which we refer to as the “Spin-off”) that resulted in the pre-transaction stockholders of IAC directly owning shares in both IAC and Vimeo, and in Vimeo becoming a separately traded public company.
The Spin-off was structured to include the following steps:
•Certain restructuring transactions, including, among other things, the transfer to Vimeo of IAC’s equity interests in Vimeo.com, Inc. ("Vimeo OpCo," formerly known as Vimeo, Inc.), and the repayment by Vimeo OpCo of all outstanding intercompany debt owed to IAC and its subsidiaries (other than Vimeo OpCo’s subsidiaries).
•Amending IAC’s certificate of incorporation to provide for:
◦the reclassification of each share of IAC common stock, par value $0.001 into (i) one share of IAC common stock, par value $0.0001 and (ii) 1/100th of a share of IAC Series 1 mandatorily exchangeable preferred stock that was automatically exchanged for a number of shares of Vimeo common stock equal to an exchange ratio of 1.6235 (the "Spin-off Exchange Ratio," with holders receiving cash in lieu of any fractional shares of Vimeo common stock resulting, after aggregation, from the reclassification); and
◦the reclassification of each share of IAC Class B common stock, par value $0.001 into (i) one share of IAC Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 and (ii) 1/100th of a share of IAC Series 2 mandatorily exchangeable preferred stock that was automatically exchanged for a number of shares of Vimeo Class B common stock equal to the Spin-off Exchange Ratio (with holders receiving cash in lieu of any fractional shares of Vimeo Class B common stock resulting, after aggregation, from the reclassification).
•The effectiveness of certain other amendments to IAC's certificate of incorporation.
Prior to the Spin-off, IAC indirectly owned approximately 88% of Vimeo OpCo's outstanding shares, with the remaining Vimeo OpCo shares held by third parties. In connection with the Spin-off, the Vimeo OpCo shareholders agreement required IAC to cause the conversion of the Vimeo OpCo shares held by such non-IAC Vimeo OpCo stockholders into Vimeo common stock, which we refer to as the “Vimeo minority exchange.” The shareholders agreement also required that the non-IAC Vimeo OpCo stockholders be compensated (in the form of additional Vimeo equity) for dilution resulting from the issuance of Vimeo options in respect of vested IAC employee option awards that were adjusted in the Spin-off. Each such Vimeo OpCo shareholder was compensated for their ratable portion of 50% of the intrinsic value of the Vimeo options so issued, measured at the time of the Spin-off. The Vimeo Merger, as defined below, was completed pre-market on May 25, 2021 and satisfied these obligations.
On the terms and subject to the conditions of the Agreement and Plan of Merger, as amended and restated on March 12, 2021 (the “Vimeo Merger Agreement”), following the Spin-off on May 25, 2021, Stream Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of Vimeo (“Merger Sub”) merged with and into Vimeo OpCo, with Vimeo OpCo surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Vimeo (the “Vimeo Merger”). Each share of Vimeo OpCo capital stock held prior to the Vimeo Merger by a non-IAC Vimeo OpCo stockholder was converted into 1.0143 ("Vimeo Merger Exchange Ratio") shares of Vimeo common stock (with holders receiving cash in lieu of any fractional shares of Vimeo common stock resulting, after aggregation, from the Vimeo Merger).
Additionally, each restricted stock unit ("RSU") corresponding to shares of Vimeo OpCo ("Vimeo OpCo RSU") was converted into an RSU corresponding to shares of Vimeo common stock (“Vimeo RSU”), with the number of shares covered by such Vimeo RSU equal to the number of shares covered by the Vimeo OpCo RSU times the Vimeo Merger Exchange Ratio. Each stock appreciation right ("SAR") corresponding to shares of Vimeo OpCo (“Vimeo OpCo SAR”) was converted into a SAR corresponding to shares of Vimeo common stock (“Vimeo SAR”), with the number of shares covered by such Vimeo SAR equal to the number of shares covered by the Vimeo OpCo SAR times the Vimeo Merger Exchange Ratio and the per share exercise price of such Vimeo SAR equal to the per share exercise price of the Vimeo OpCo SAR divided by the Vimeo Merger Exchange Ratio.
Key Terms:
When the following terms appear in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for Vimeo, they have the meanings indicated below:
•Subscribers - is the number of users who have an active subscription to one of Vimeo's paid plans measured at the end of the relevant period. We count each account with a subscription plan as a subscriber. In the case of sales-assisted customers (formerly referred to as "enterprise customers") who maintain multiple accounts across our platforms as part of a single sales-assisted subscription plan, we count only one subscriber. We do not count team members who have access to a subscriber’s account as additional subscribers.
•Average Subscribers - is the sum of the number of Subscribers at the beginning and at the end of the relevant measurement period divided by two.
•Average Revenue per User (“ARPU”) - is the annualized revenue for the relevant period divided by Average Subscribers. For periods that are less than a full year, annualized revenue is calculated by dividing the revenue for that particular period by the number of calendar days in the period and multiplying this value by the number of days in that year.
•Gross Margin - is revenue less cost of revenue, divided by revenue.
•Cost of revenue - consists primarily of hosting fees, credit card processing fees, compensation expense (including stock-based compensation expense) and other employee-related costs for personnel engaged in customer care functions, traffic acquisition costs, which includes the amortization of in-app purchase fees, outsourced customer care personnel costs, rent expense and facilities costs. In-app purchase fees are monies paid to Apple and Google in connection with the processing of in-app purchases of subscriptions and product features through the in-app payment systems provided by Apple and Google.
•Research and development expense - consists primarily of compensation expense (including stock-based compensation expense) and other employee-related costs that are not capitalized for personnel engaged in the design, development, testing and enhancement of product offerings and related technology, software license and maintenance costs, rent expense and facilities costs.
•Sales and marketing expense - consists primarily of advertising expenditures, which include online marketing, including fees paid to search engines, social media sites, e-mail campaigns, display advertising, video advertising and affiliate marketing, and offline marketing, which includes conferences and events, compensation expense (including stock-based compensation expense) and other employee-related costs for Vimeo's sales force and marketing personnel, software license and maintenance costs, rent expense and facilities costs.
•General and administrative expense - consists primarily of compensation expense (including stock-based compensation expense) and other employee-related costs for personnel engaged in executive management, finance, legal, tax, information technology and human resources, fees for professional services (including transaction-related costs related to the Spin-off and acquisitions), rent expense, facilities costs, and software license and maintenance costs.
•Credit Facility - On February 12, 2021, Vimeo OpCo entered into a $100 million revolving credit facility that expires on February 12, 2026. At December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility.
•Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ("Adjusted EBITDA") - is a non-GAAP financial measure. See "Principles of Financial Reporting" for the definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net loss to operating loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
MANAGEMENT OVERVIEW
Vimeo is the world’s leading all-in-one video software solution, providing the full breadth of video tools through a software-as-a-service model. Vimeo’s comprehensive and cloud-based tools empower its users to create, collaborate and communicate with video on a single, turnkey platform.
Sources of Revenue
Vimeo's revenue is derived primarily from SaaS subscription fees paid by customers for self-serve and sales-assisted subscription plans (formerly referred to as "enterprise subscription plans"). Revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the contractual term of the arrangement beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer. Subscription periods generally range from one month to three years with the most common being an annual subscription and are generally non-cancellable.
Distribution, Marketing and Advertiser Relationships
Vimeo pays to market and distribute its services on third-party search engines and social media websites, and through e-mail campaigns, display advertising, video advertising and affiliate marketing. Vimeo also pays traffic acquisition costs, which consist of fees paid to Apple and Google related to the distribution and the facilitation of in-app purchases of product features. These distribution channels might also offer other third parties services and products, which compete with those Vimeo offers.
Vimeo also markets and offers its services and products through branded websites, allowing customers to transact directly with it in a convenient manner. Vimeo has made, and expects to continue to make, significant investments in online marketing to drive traffic to its websites.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and the annual audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 and notes thereto included in the registration statement on Form S-1 of Vimeo, Inc. filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 26, 2021.
Results of operations for the periods presented as a percentage of our revenue are as follows:
Revenue
Revenue increased $108.5 million, or 38%, driven primarily by a 17% increase in Average Subscribers and an 18% increase in ARPU. The growth in Average Subscribers was due to the increase in customers as individuals, businesses and organizations continued to adopt video to communicate due, in part, to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. ARPU increased primarily due to the growth in sales-assisted subscribers, for which average annual contract values are much greater than self-serve subscribers. We expect revenue to continue to grow over time, though not at the same pace as in 2021.
Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation shown separately below) and Gross profit
Cost of revenue increased $13.5 million, or 15%, due primarily to increases of $6.3 million in hosting fees, $5.2 million in credit card processing fees and in-app purchase fees, and $2.1 million in compensation expense. The increase in hosting fees was due to the increase in Average Subscribers, partially offset by cost optimization initiatives. The increase in credit card processing fees and in-app purchase fees was due primarily to the increase in Average Subscribers.
Gross profit margin increased due primarily to revenue growth as well as cost optimization initiatives for hosting, which decreased as a percentage of revenue.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expense increased $41.3 million, or 64%, due primarily to increased investment in products. The increased investment included $35.6 million in compensation expense (including an increase of $13.2 million in stock-based compensation expense), $2.5 million in software license and maintenance costs, and $1.7 million in consulting costs. The increase in compensation expense was primarily due to increased headcount, the issuance of new equity awards in 2021, and the modification of certain equity awards in connection with the Spin-off and Vimeo Merger.
Sales and marketing expense increased $47.1 million, or 45%, due primarily to increases of $22.1 million in compensation expense (including an increase of $4.1 million in stock-based compensation expense), $21.8 million in advertising costs, and $1.8 million in software license and maintenance costs. The increase in compensation expense was primarily due to growth in
the sales force and the issuance of new equity awards in 2021. The increase in advertising costs was a result of increased investment in paid media as the business scales.
General and administrative expense increased $35.3 million, or 71%, due primarily to increases of $21.7 million in compensation expense (including an increase of $15.5 million in stock-based compensation expense), $9.2 million in professional fees, and $1.9 million in software license and maintenance costs. The increase in compensation expense was due to increased headcount, the issuance of new equity awards in 2021 (including the Vimeo Restricted Shares as described in "Note 10-Stock-Based Compensation"), and the modification of certain equity awards in connection with the Spin-off and Vimeo Merger. The increase in professional fees was primarily due to costs associated with the implementation of new enterprise systems, acquisitions, and third party recruiting services, partially offset by a decrease in costs associated with the Spin-off.
Depreciation increased $0.5 million, or 101%, due primarily to the reduction in the estimated useful life of certain leasehold improvements.
Amortization of intangibles decreased $8.9 million, or 60%, due primarily to certain intangibles that were fully amortized in the second half of 2020.
Operating loss
Operating loss increased $20.2 million, or 50%, due to an increase in operating expenses of $115.2 million, partially offset by an increase in gross profit of $95.0 million. The increase in operating expenses was due primarily to increases in compensation expense of $79.4 million (including an increase of $32.8 million in stock-based compensation), advertising costs of $21.8 million, professional fees of $12.6 million and software license and maintenance costs of $6.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in amortization of intangibles of $8.9 million. The increase in gross profit was due to higher revenue and improved gross margin (74% in 2021 compared to 69% in 2020).
Adjusted EBITDA
For a reconciliation of net loss to operating loss to Adjusted EBITDA, see "Principles of Financial Reporting."
Adjusted EBITDA increased $4.6 million to $9.4 million of a loss, due primarily to higher revenue and improved gross margin percentages, partially offset by increases in compensation expense, advertising costs, professional fees, and software license and maintenance costs.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense relates to amortization of deferred financing costs and commitment fees associated with the Credit Facility, which commenced on February 12, 2021. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Revolving Credit Facility” for additional information about the Credit Facility.
Interest expense-related party relates to interest expense charged by IAC and its subsidiaries on the related party notes. The notes were repaid to IAC in January 2021.
Other income (expense), net generally relates to net foreign exchange gains and losses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Other income (expense), net also includes a net gain of $10.2 million related to the sale of Vimeo’s retained interest in its former hardware business. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Other income (expense), net includes a gain of $0.5 million related to funds released from escrow related to the acquisition of Magisto and a gain of $0.3 million related to the sale of an investment.
Income tax provision
For further details of income tax matters, see "Note 3-Income Taxes" to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Vimeo is in a net operating loss ("NOL") position for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes and certain foreign jurisdictions. The largest deferred tax assets are NOLs. Vimeo has recorded a valuation allowance for its net deferred tax assets because it has concluded that it is more likely than not that the NOLs will not be utilized due to its history of pre-tax losses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020, the income tax provision primarily relates to international and state taxes for jurisdictions in which Vimeo conducts business, and was flat as pre-tax income in these jurisdictions did not change significantly.
PRINCIPLES OF FINANCIAL REPORTING
We have provided Adjusted EBITDA in this report to supplement our financial information presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). We use this non-GAAP financial measure internally in analyzing our financial results and believe that use of this non-GAAP financial measure is useful to investors as an additional tool to evaluate ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial results with other companies in our industry, many of which present a similar non-GAAP financial measure. However, our presentation of this non-GAAP financial measure may differ from the presentation of similarly titled measures by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA is the metric on which our internal budgets are based and also the metric by which management is compensated. We believe that investors should have access to, and we are obligated to provide, the same set of tools that we use in analyzing our results. This non-GAAP measure should be considered in addition to results prepared in accordance with GAAP, but should not be considered a substitute for or superior to GAAP results. We endeavor to compensate for the limitations of the non-GAAP measure presented by providing the comparable GAAP measure with equal or greater prominence and descriptions of the reconciling items, including quantifying such items, to derive the non-GAAP measure. We encourage investors to examine the reconciling adjustments between the GAAP and corresponding non-GAAP measure, which we discuss below.
Definition of Non-GAAP Measure
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ("Adjusted EBITDA") is defined as operating loss excluding: (1) stock-based compensation expense; (2) depreciation; and (3) acquisition-related items consisting of (i) amortization of intangible assets, (ii) impairments of goodwill and intangible assets, if applicable, and (iii) gains and losses recognized on changes in the fair value of contingent consideration arrangements. We believe this measure is useful for analysts and investors as this measure allows a more meaningful comparison between our performance and that of our competitors. The above items are excluded from our Adjusted EBITDA measure because these items are non-cash in nature. Adjusted EBITDA has certain limitations because it excludes the impact of these expenses.
The reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA is as follows:
Non-Cash Expenses That Are Excluded From Non-GAAP Measure
Stock-based compensation expense consists of expense associated with the grants of restricted stock units, Vimeo restricted shares, and stock appreciation rights ("SARs"), including performance-based SARs. These expenses are not paid in cash and we view the economic costs of stock-based awards to be the dilution to our share base. We also consider the dilutive impact of stock-based awards in GAAP diluted earnings per share, to the extent such impact is dilutive. Stock-based awards are generally settled on a gross basis in shares of Vimeo common stock such that individual award holders will pay their withholding tax obligation, generally by selling shares of Vimeo common stock (including a portion of the shares received in connection with the applicable exercise).
Depreciation is a non-cash expense relating to our leasehold improvements and equipment and is computed using the straight-line method to allocate the cost of depreciable assets to operations over their estimated useful lives, or, in the case of leasehold improvements, the lease term, if shorter.
Amortization of intangible assets and impairments of goodwill and intangible assets are non-cash expenses related to acquisitions. At the time of an acquisition, the identifiable definite-lived intangible assets of the acquired company, such as customer relationships, technology and trade names, are valued and amortized over their estimated lives. An impairment is recorded when the carrying value of an intangible asset or goodwill exceeds its fair value. We believe that intangible assets represent costs incurred by the acquired company to build value prior to acquisition and the related amortization and impairments of intangible assets or goodwill, if applicable, are not ongoing costs of doing business.
Gains and losses recognized on changes in the fair value of contingent consideration arrangements are accounting adjustments to report contingent consideration liabilities at fair value. These adjustments can be highly variable and are excluded from our assessment of performance because they are considered non-operational in nature and, therefore, are not indicative of current or future performance or the ongoing cost of doing business.
VIMEO'S FINANCIAL POSITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Financial Position
Vimeo's international cash can be repatriated without significant tax consequences.
For a detailed description of Debt-related party, see "Note 14-Related Party Transactions" to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Cash Flow Information
Net cash provided by operating activities consists of earnings adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments include stock-based compensation expense, gain on the sale of an asset, amortization of intangibles, provision for credit losses, and depreciation.
Year ended December 31, 2021
Adjustments to net loss consist primarily of $44.9 million of stock-based compensation expense, a $10.2 million net gain related to the sale of Vimeo's retained interest in its former hardware business, and $5.8 million of amortization of intangibles. The increase from changes in working capital primarily consists of increases in deferred revenue of $36.7 million and accounts payable and other liabilities of $14.1 million, partially offset by increases in accounts receivable of $19.2 million and prepaid expenses and other assets of $6.4 million. The increase in deferred revenue was due primarily to growth in sales of annual subscriptions. The increase in accounts payable and other liabilities was primarily due to the timing of invoice payments, partially offset by the payment of related-party accrued interest. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to the implementation of a new billing system and growth in the business. The increase in prepaid expenses and other assets was primarily due to an increase in prepaid software license and maintenance costs and insurance.
Net cash used in investing activities includes the acquisitions of Wibbitz and WIREWAX, net of cash acquired of $14.2 million, and proceeds of $7.9 million related to the sale of Vimeo's retained interest in its former hardware business, partially offset by capital expenditures of $0.4 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities includes $299.8 million in net proceeds from the issuance of 9.0 million shares of Vimeo OpCo's Class A common stock and $3.4 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by the repayment of related-party debt of $94.6 million, withholding taxes paid related to the exercise of equity awards of $4.1 million, and $1.4 million of deferred financing costs related to the Credit Facility.
Year ended December 31, 2020
Adjustments to net loss consist primarily of $14.7 million of amortization of intangibles, $11.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $1.8 million of provision for credit losses. The increase from changes in working capital primarily consists of increases in deferred revenue of $56.3 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $7.4 million. The increase in deferred revenue was primarily due to growth in sales of annual subscriptions. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily related to growth in customers due, in part, to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the timing of cash receipts.
Net cash provided by investing activities includes $0.5 million in funds released from escrow related to the 2019 acquisition of Magisto and $0.3 million in proceeds from the sale of an investment, partially offset by capital expenditures of $0.8 million, primarily related to leasehold improvements.
Net cash provided by financing activities includes $149.6 million in proceeds from the issuance of 8.7 million shares of Class A common stock and $32.6 million of proceeds from the issuance of related-party debt, partially offset by $35.5 million in principal payments on related-party debt, $31.1 million of dividends paid to Class A and Class B Vimeo OpCo common stockholders, $11.6 million for cash reimbursed to IAC for IAC common shares issued to settle Vimeo OpCo stock appreciation rights that were exercised in November and December of 2020, and $10.1 million of cash reimbursed to IAC for withholding taxes paid on behalf of Vimeo employees for the exercise of stock appreciation rights.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Funding of Vimeo OpCo by IAC Prior to the Vimeo OpCo Primary Equity Raise in November 2020
Prior to Vimeo OpCo's November 10, 2020 primary equity sale, described below, Vimeo OpCo's principal source of liquidity had been the funding received from IAC and its subsidiaries, which was provided, in part, through IAC’s centrally managed U.S. treasury function. The funding by IAC had been sufficient to enable Vimeo OpCo to fund its normal operating requirements, including capital expenditures and acquisitions.
November 2020 Primary Equity Raise and Dividend
On November 10, 2020, Vimeo OpCo raised $150 million of equity capital via the sale of approximately 8.7 million shares of Vimeo OpCo Class A Voting common stock at a price of $17.33 per share, based on a pre-money valuation of $2.75 billion. During November 2020, Vimeo OpCo paid a cash dividend of $0.22 per share of Vimeo OpCo Class A Voting common stock and Vimeo OpCo Class B non-voting common stock to holders of record on November 5, 2020, for approximately $31 million in aggregate, of which $30.7 million was paid to IAC.
January 2021 Primary Equity Raise and Repayment of Debt Payable to IAC
In January 2021, Vimeo OpCo raised $300 million of equity capital via the sale of 6.2 million shares of Vimeo OpCo Class A Voting common stock for $200 million, or $32.41 per share, at a $5.2 billion pre-money valuation, and 2.8 million shares of Vimeo OpCo Class A Voting common stock for $100 million, or $35.35 per share, at a $5.7 billion pre-money valuation. A portion of the proceeds from the January 2021 primary equity raise was used to repay the debt payable to IAC, including accrued interest.
Revolving Credit Facility
On February 12, 2021, Vimeo OpCo entered into a $100 million revolving credit facility (the "Credit Facility"), which expires on February 12, 2026. Any borrowings under the Credit Facility are guaranteed by Vimeo's wholly-owned material domestic subsidiaries, if any, and are secured by substantially all assets of Vimeo and any guarantors, subject to certain exceptions. At December 31, 2021, the commitment fee, which is based on the consolidated net leverage ratio most recently reported and the average daily amount of the available revolving commitments, was 20 basis points. Any borrowings under the Credit Facility would bear interest, at Vimeo's option, at either a base rate or LIBOR, in each case plus an applicable margin, which is determined by reference to a pricing grid based on Vimeo’s consolidated net leverage ratio. The financial covenants require Vimeo to maintain a minimum liquidity of not less than $50.0 million until December 31, 2022 and, thereafter, at the end of each quarterly test period, a consolidated net leverage ratio (as defined in the agreement) of not more than 5.5 to 1.0. The Credit Facility also contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants that would limit Vimeo’s ability to pay dividends or make distributions on or repurchase certain equity interests in the event a default has occurred or Vimeo’s consolidated net leverage ratio exceeds 4.0 to 1.0. At December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings
under the Credit Facility. In December 2021, Vimeo agreed to cease any borrowings under certain non-USD currencies and certain USD tenors due to the applicable LIBOR benchmark rates no longer being available publicly from and after December 31, 2021 and until an amendment is made to the Credit Facility to replace LIBOR with an alternative benchmark.
Outstanding Stock-based Awards
Prior to the Spin-off, equity awards were settled on a net basis, with the award holder entitled to receive shares of IAC common stock with a value equal to the intrinsic value of the Vimeo OpCo award upon settlement less an amount equal to the required cash tax withholding payment, which was paid by IAC on behalf of the employee. Vimeo reimbursed IAC in cash for the withholding taxes remitted on behalf of the Vimeo employees and generally reimbursed IAC for the IAC shares through the issuance of shares of Vimeo common stock.
After the Spin-off, equity awards are settled in shares of Vimeo common stock, generally on a gross basis, such that individual award holders will be required to pay their withholding tax obligation, which they will generally be able to do by selling shares of Vimeo common stock (including a portion of the shares received in connection with the applicable settlement).
Liquidity Assessment
At December 31, 2021, Vimeo had approximately $321.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and no debt. At December 31, 2021, approximately 87% of Vimeo’s subscribers were on annual subscription plans.
Vimeo believes its existing cash and cash equivalents and expected positive cash flows generated from operations will be sufficient to fund its normal operating requirements, including capital expenditures, and other commitments for the foreseeable future. This assessment includes the effect of non-cancellable purchase obligations, which primarily relate to cloud computing arrangements, and operating leases, which primarily relate to office space.. For further details, see "Note 12-Leases" and "Note 13-Commitments and Contingencies" to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Historically, Vimeo's capital expenditures have not been material; however, 2022 capital expenditures are expected to be higher than 2021 capital expenditures, driven primarily by increased leasehold improvements. The $100 million of available borrowings under Vimeo’s Credit Facility will be a potential source of additional financial flexibility and liquidity, if needed.
Vimeo’s liquidity could be negatively affected by a decrease in demand for our products and services, or the occurrence of unexpected expenses. Vimeo may need to raise additional capital through future debt or equity financings to make additional acquisitions and investments or to provide for greater financial flexibility. Additional financing may not be available on terms favorable to Vimeo or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than the purchase obligations described in “Note 13- Commitments and Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Vimeo does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The following disclosure is provided to supplement the descriptions of Vimeo's accounting policies contained in "Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in regard to significant areas of judgment. Management of Vimeo is required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions during the preparation of its consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). These estimates, judgments and assumptions impact the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the related disclosure of assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Because of the size of the financial statement elements to which they relate, some of Vimeo's accounting policies and estimates have a more significant impact on its consolidated financial statements than others. What follows is a discussion of Vimeo's critical accounting policies and estimates.
Business Combinations
Vimeo invested $14.2 million in acquisitions of businesses in 2021. Management makes a critical determination at the time of an acquisition related to the allocation of the purchase price of the business to the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based upon their fair values including identifiable intangible assets that either arise from a contractual or legal right or are separable from goodwill.
The allocation of purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is based upon their fair values on the acquisition date and is complex because of the judgments involved in determining these values. The determination of purchase price and the fair value of monetary assets acquired and liabilities assumed is typically less complex and involves less judgment than the valuation of intangible assets. Vimeo usually obtains the assistance of outside valuation experts in the allocation of the purchase price to the identifiable intangible assets acquired, such as acquired technology, customer relationships, trade names and trademarks. While outside valuation experts may be used, management has ultimate responsibility for the valuation methods, models and inputs used and the resulting purchase price allocation. The excess purchase price over the value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
In connection with certain business combinations, Vimeo has entered into contingent consideration arrangements that are determined to be part of the purchase price. Accrued contingent consideration as of December 31, 2021 was $12.2 million. There were no contingent consideration arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
The premise underlying the accounting for contingent consideration arrangements is that there are divergent views as to the acquired company’s valuation between Vimeo and the selling shareholders of the acquiree. Therefore, future payments of a portion of the purchase price may be linked to one or more financial (e.g., revenue and/or profit performance) and/or operating (e.g., number of subscribers or integration) metrics or milestones that will be achieved over a specified time frame in the future based upon the performance of the business. Each of these arrangements is evaluated to determine if contingent payments are part of the purchase price or post-acquisition compensation expense which would be recognized over any future service period. If determined to be part of the purchase price, such contingent payments are initially recorded at its fair value at the time of the acquisition and the fair value is included in the aggregate purchase price. Vimeo determines the fair value of the contingent consideration arrangements by using probability weighted analyses to determine the amounts of the gross liability, and, if the arrangement is long-term in nature, applying a discount rate that appropriately captures the risk associated with the obligation to determine the net amount reflected in the financial statements. The contingent consideration arrangements are reassessed and measured at fair value at each subsequent reporting period thereafter until settled. The changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration arrangements during each reporting period, including the accretion of the discount, if applicable, are recognized in “General and administrative expense” in the statement of operations. Significant changes in the specified forecasted financial or operating metrics can result in significant adjustments to fair value, which can result in volatility of general and administrative expense as the resulting remeasurement gains and losses are recorded.
Recoverability of Goodwill
Goodwill is Vimeo's largest asset, with a carrying value of $242.6 million and $219.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Vimeo assesses goodwill for impairment annually as of October 1 or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce its fair value below its carrying value. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level which is either the “operating segment level,” or one level below, which is referred to as a “component.” The level at which the impairment test is performed requires judgment in identifying operating segments and components, and whether or not any components can be aggregated for purposes of the impairment test. Management has determined that there is
one operating segment and no components below that level, resulting in a single reporting unit at the overall Vimeo level for purposes of testing goodwill for impairment.
In assessing goodwill for impairment, Vimeo has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If Vimeo determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, it is not required to perform any additional tests in assessing goodwill for impairment. However, if Vimeo concludes otherwise or elects not to perform the qualitative assessment, then it is required to perform a quantitative assessment to determine the fair value of its reporting units. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment equal to the excess is recorded.
For Vimeo's annual goodwill test at October 1, 2021, a qualitative assessment of goodwill was performed because Vimeo concluded it was more likely than not that its fair value was in excess of its carrying value. The primary factor that the Company considered in determining that no impairment exists was that Vimeo’s October 1, 2021 market capitalization of $5.0 billion exceeded its carrying value by approximately $4.6 billion.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is one of the ways Vimeo attracts, retains, inspires and rewards our management team and employees, including those employed by recently acquired companies, by allowing them to benefit directly from the value they help to create. Vimeo recorded stock-based compensation expense of $44.9 million, $11.7 million, and $5.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. Included in stock-based compensation expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 is a modification charge of $9.5 million in connection with the Spin-off and Vimeo Merger. The form of awards granted to the Company’s employees and non-employee directors in 2021 were generally restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and in previous years, stock appreciation rights ("SARs") and in the case of certain executives, performance-based SARs. Additionally, Vimeo entered into a Restricted Stock Agreement (the “RSA”) with Joseph Levin, Chairman of the Vimeo Board of Directors and IAC’s Chief Executive Officer, which provided for a grant of 4,870,500 shares of Vimeo common stock (“Vimeo Restricted Shares”).
RSUs
The grant-date fair value of a Vimeo RSU was determined based on the closing sale price of Vimeo’s common stock on the date of grant. For Vimeo OpCo RSUs granted (prior to the Spin-off) in 2021, the grant date-fair value was determined by reference to the pre-money valuation of Vimeo OpCo's January 2021 Primary Equity Raise which was the most recently completed equity transaction prior to the grant-date between Vimeo OpCo and unrelated third-parties.
SARs
The fair value of a SAR or performance-based SAR is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the inputs to the model, which include estimating the expected term from grant date to exercise, the expected volatility of the underlying shares, the risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield.
Vimeo Restricted Shares
The terms of the RSA were determined pursuant to the existing requirements of Mr. Levin’s restricted stock agreement with IAC ("IAC RSA") as in effect prior to the Spin-off. The Vimeo Restricted Shares cliff vest on November 5, 2030, based on the satisfaction of certain Vimeo stock price targets and Mr. Levin’s continuous service as a Vimeo director through the vesting date. The number of Vimeo Restricted Shares subject to the RSA is the result of the 3,000,000 shares of IAC Restricted common stock, subject to the IAC RSA, multiplied by the Spin-off Exchange Ratio.
The Vimeo Restricted Shares contain both a service and market condition and the fair value was determined using a lattice model that incorporated a Monte Carlo simulation of Vimeo's stock price and IAC’s stock price. The attribution of the estimated fair values of the awards (the sum of the grant date fair value of the original IAC award, plus any incremental value as a result of the modification of original IAC award) between IAC and Vimeo, was determined on a proportional basis as a function of the estimated fair value of each respective award as of the date of the Spin-off. The amount allocated to Vimeo was $87.3 million and is expected to be recognized over the remaining requisite service period through November 2030 subject to Mr. Levin’s continuous service as a Vimeo director.
Recoverability and Estimated Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets
Vimeo reviews the carrying value of all long-lived assets, comprising right-of-use assets ("ROU assets"), leasehold improvements and equipment, and intangible assets with definite lives, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The carrying value of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. If the carrying value is deemed not to be recoverable, an impairment loss is recorded equal to the amount by which the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. In addition, Vimeo reviews the useful lives of its long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that these lives may be changed. The carrying value of these long-lived assets is $27.4 million and $15.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Income Taxes
Vimeo regularly assesses the realizability of deferred tax assets considering all available evidence including, to the extent applicable, the nature, frequency and severity of prior cumulative losses, forecasts of future taxable income, tax filing status, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, available tax planning and historical experience. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Vimeo is in a three-year cumulative loss position and has recorded a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets of $52.0 million and $51.7 million, respectively.
Vimeo evaluates and accounts for uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. Recognition (step one) occurs when Vimeo concludes that a tax position, based solely on its technical merits, is more-likely-than-not to be sustainable upon examination. Measurement (step two) determines the amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. De-recognition of a tax position that was previously recognized would occur when Vimeo subsequently determines that a tax position no longer meets the more-likely-than-not threshold of being sustained. This measurement step is inherently difficult and requires subjective estimations of such amounts to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, Vimeo has unrecognized tax benefits of $2.5 million and $1.9 million, respectively. Vimeo considers many factors when evaluating and estimating its tax positions and unrecognized tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustment and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes. Although management currently believes changes to unrecognized tax benefits from period to period and differences between amounts paid, if any, upon resolution of issues raised in audits and amounts previously provided will not have a material impact on the liquidity, results of operations, or financial condition of Vimeo, these matters are subject to inherent uncertainties and management’s view of these matters may change in the future.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see "Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.