ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday closest to January 31. Fiscal years 2021 and 2020 ended on January 29, 2022 (“fiscal 2021”) and January 30, 2021 (“fiscal 2020”), respectively. Fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 each consisted of 52 weeks. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. All amounts disclosed are in thousands except store counts, share and per share data and percentages.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements involving risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause our results to differ materially from expectations. For a discussion of the risks facing our business, see “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report.
COVID-19
The spread of COVID-19, which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020, remains highly volatile, particularly in light of ongoing vaccination efforts and emerging strains of the virus. In response, we implemented various measures to effectively manage our business as well as the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including (i) serving our customers through our online e-commerce websites during the periods in which we were forced to shut down retail locations or operate with reduced shopping hours, alongside other retailers, including our wholesale partners, in accordance with state and local regulations related to the COVID-19 pandemic; (ii) engaging with our lenders to provide additional liquidity and increased operational flexibility; (iii) temporarily reducing retained employee salaries and suspending board retainer fees; (iv) engaging with our landlords to address the current operating environment, including amending existing lease terms; and (v) streamlining our expense structure and carefully managing operational initiatives to align with the business environment and sales opportunities.
The unpredictable nature of the COVID-19 pandemic could negatively affect the outcome of the measures intended to address its impact and/or our current expectations of our future business performance. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - “Risks Related to Our Business and Industry - The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, our business, financial condition, cash flow, liquidity and results of operations” for additional discussion regarding risks to our business associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Executive Overview
We are a global contemporary group, consisting of three brands: Vince, Rebecca Taylor and Parker.
Vince, established in 2002, is a leading global luxury apparel and accessories brand best known for creating elevated yet understated pieces for every day effortless style. Known for its range of luxury products, Vince offers women’s and men’s ready-to-wear, footwear and accessories through 50 full-price retail stores, 18 outlet stores, its e-commerce site, vince.com, and through its subscription service Vince Unfold, vinceunfold.com, as well as through premium wholesale channels globally.
Rebecca Taylor, founded in 1996 in New York City, is a contemporary womenswear line lauded for its signature prints, romantic detailing and vintage inspired aesthetic, reimagined for a modern era. The Rebecca Taylor collection is available at 10 full-price retail stores, 8 outlet stores, through its e-commerce site, rebeccataylor.com, and through its subscription service Rebecca Taylor RNTD, rebeccataylorrntd.com, as well as through major department and specialty stores worldwide.
Parker, founded in 2008 in New York City, is a contemporary women’s fashion brand that is trend focused. While we continue to believe that the Parker brand complements our portfolio, during the first half of fiscal 2020 the Company decided to pause the creation of new products to focus resources on the operations of the Vince and Rebecca Taylor brands. The Parker collection was previously available through major department stores and specialty stores worldwide as well as through its e-commerce website.
We serve our customers through a variety of channels that reinforce our brand images. Our diversified channel strategy allows us to introduce our products to customers through multiple distribution points that are presented in three reportable segments: Vince Wholesale, Vince Direct-to-consumer and Rebecca Taylor and Parker.
Results of Operations
Comparable Sales
Comparable sales include our e-commerce sales in order to align with how we manage our brick-and-mortar retail stores and e-commerce online stores as a combined single direct-to-consumer channel of distribution. As a result of our omni-channel sales and inventory strategy, as well as cross-channel customer shopping patterns, there is less distinction between our brick-and-mortar retail stores and our e-commerce online stores and we believe the inclusion of e-commerce sales in our comparable sales metric is a more meaningful representation of these results and provides a more comprehensive view of our year over year comparable sales metric.
A store is included in the comparable sales calculation after it has completed 13 full fiscal months of operations and includes stores, if any, that have been remodeled or relocated within the same geographic market the Company served prior to the relocation. Non-comparable sales include new stores which have not completed 13 full fiscal months of operations, sales from closed stores, and relocated stores serving a new geographic market. For 53-week fiscal years, we continue to adjust comparable sales to exclude the additional week. There may be variations in the way in which some of our competitors and other retailers calculate comparable sales.
As a result of the extensive temporary store closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, comparable sales are not a meaningful metric for the years ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 and we have not included a discussion within our Results of Operations.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, our operating results as a percentage of net sales as well as earnings (loss) per share data:
Net sales for fiscal 2021 were $322,683, increasing $102,813, or 46.8%, versus $219,870 for fiscal 2020.
Gross profit increased $57,973, or 65.4%, to $146,570 in fiscal 2021 from $88,597 in fiscal 2020. As a percentage of sales, gross margin was 45.4%, compared with 40.3% in the prior year. The total gross margin rate increase was primarily driven by the following factors:
•
The favorable impact of year-over-year adjustments to inventory reserves contributed positively by approximately 400 basis points as the prior year reflected higher inventory reserves related to the risk associated with the impact of COVID-19;
•
The favorable impact from lower promotional activity contributed positively by approximately 300 basis points due to higher promotional activity as a result of COVID-19 in the direct-to-consumer channel in the prior year; and
•
The unfavorable impact of higher freight costs as a result of challenges in our supply chain driven by COVID-19 contributed negatively by approximately 350 basis points.
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets for fiscal 2020 was $13,848 which includes the impairment of $9,462 related to goodwill and $4,386 related to indefinite-lived tradenames. There was no impairment of goodwill and intangible assets taken in fiscal 2021.
Impairment of long-lived assets for fiscal 2020 was $13,026 which includes the impairment of $4,470 related to property and equipment and $8,556 related to ROU assets. There was no impairment of long-lived assets taken in fiscal 2021.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for fiscal 2021 were $146,087, increasing $23,284, or 19.0%, versus $122,803 for fiscal 2020. SG&A expenses as a percentage of sales were 45.3% and 55.9% for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. The change in SG&A expenses compared to the prior year period was primarily due to:
•
$13,336 of increased compensation and benefits, as lower expense in the prior year was primarily due to the actions taken in response to COVID-19, which included furloughing our retail store associates as well as a significant portion of our corporate associates, temporarily reducing retained employee salaries and reducing bonus expense;
•
$4,437 of increased marketing and advertising costs, primarily due to investments in digital marketing;
•
$4,167 of increased rent expense, primarily due to lower expense in the prior year which reflected the impact of rent abatements, rent deferrals, rent reductions and other concessions, resulting from negotiations with landlords in the prior year;
•
$1,584 of increased banking and transaction fees as a result of increased sales; and
•
$1,300 of increased product development costs.
The above increases were partially offset by:
•
$1,780 of decreased bad debt expense as higher expense in the prior year was related to the risk associated with our ability to collect outstanding receivables from our customers as a result of COVID-19.
Interest expense, net increased $3,599, or 71.9%, to $8,606 in fiscal 2021 from $5,007 in fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher interest rates as a result of the composition of debt, as well as a $758 write-off of deferred financing costs and a $743 prepayment penalty, both associated with the termination of the 2018 Term Loan Facility during fiscal 2021.
Other income, net in fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to a benefit from the re-measurement of the liability related to the Tax Receivable Agreement. See “Critical Accounting Policies - Tax Receivable Agreement” below and Note 13 “Related Party Transactions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Provision for income taxes for fiscal 2021 was $4,581 as compared to $1,866 for fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 was (56.4)% and (2.9)%, respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the increase in deferred tax liabilities attributable to indefinite-lived goodwill and intangible assets and the impact of the valuation allowance established against additional deferred tax assets. See Note 10 “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of the valuation allowance established against our deferred tax assets partly offset by state taxes.
Performance by Segment
The Company has identified three reportable segments as further described below:
•
Vince Wholesale segment-consists of the Company’s operations to distribute Vince brand products to major department stores and specialty stores in the United States and select international markets;
•
Vince Direct-to-consumer segment-consists of the Company’s operations to distribute Vince brand products directly to the consumer through its Vince branded full-price specialty retail stores, outlet stores, and e-commerce platform, and its subscription service Vince Unfold; and
•
Rebecca Taylor and Parker segment-consists of the Company’s operations to distribute Rebecca Taylor and Parker brand products to major department stores and specialty stores in the U.S. and select international markets, directly to the consumer through their own branded e-commerce platforms and Rebecca Taylor retail and outlet stores, and through its subscription service Rebecca Taylor RNTD.
Unallocated corporate expenses are related to the Vince brand and are comprised of SG&A expenses attributable to corporate and administrative activities (such as marketing, design, finance, information technology, legal and human resources departments), and other charges that are not directly attributable to the Company’s Vince Wholesale and Vince Direct-to-consumer reportable segments.
Beginning with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company changed the allocation methodology for certain corporate operational expenses between the Vince Wholesale and Vince Direct-to-consumer segments. The prior period has been updated to conform to the current allocation methodology. These changes did not impact the Company’s previously reported consolidated financial results.
Vince Wholesale
Net sales from our Vince Wholesale segment increased $42,080, or 39.8%, to $147,817 in fiscal 2021 from $105,737 in fiscal 2020, primarily due to higher shipments as the prior year reflected the delay and cancellation of order receipts as a result of the temporary closure of our wholesale partner’s doors due to COVID-19.
Income from operations from our Vince Wholesale segment increased $11,377, or 33.0%, to $45,839 in fiscal 2021 from $34,462 in fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher net sales as noted above and lower adjustments to inventory and bad debt reserves, partly offset by higher freight costs as a result of challenges in our supply chain driven by COVID-19.
Vince Direct-to-consumer
Net sales from our Vince Direct-to-consumer segment increased $49,394, or 57.2%, to $135,720 in fiscal 2021 from $86,326 in fiscal 2020. The increase in sales was primarily due to increased store traffic as the prior year reflected the temporary store closures of our domestic and international retail locations due to COVID-19. Since the end of fiscal 2020, six net stores have opened, bringing our total retail store count to 68 (consisting of 50 full price stores and 18 outlet stores) as of January 29, 2022, compared to 62 (consisting of 47 full price stores and 15 outlet stores) as of January 30, 2021.
Our Vince Direct-to-consumer segment had income from operations of $10,873 in fiscal 2021 compared to a loss from operations of $25,137 in fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher net sales as noted above, lower promotional activity and lower adjustments to inventory reserves, partly offset by higher freight costs as a result of challenges in our supply chain driven by COVID-19 as well as increased SG&A expenses. Additionally, the loss from operations in the prior year included a non-cash impairment charge of $11,725 related to property and equipment and ROU assets.
Rebecca Taylor and Parker
Net sales from our Rebecca Taylor and Parker segment increased $11,339, or 40.8%, to $39,146 in fiscal 2021 from $27,807 in fiscal 2020 primarily due to (a) a $7,237 increase in wholesale sales, primarily due to higher Rebecca Taylor shipments (as the prior year reflected temporary closure of our wholesale partner’s doors due to COVID-19), partly offset by our pause in the development of new product for the Parker brand, and (b) a $4,102 increase in the direct-to-consumer channels primarily due to increased store traffic as the prior year reflected the temporary store closures of our retail locations due to COVID-19, partly offset by reduced e-commerce traffic resulting from our strategic decisions to refresh the Rebecca Taylor brand.
Loss from operations from our Rebecca Taylor and Parker segment decreased $6,899, or 42.8%, to $9,213 in fiscal 2021 from $16,112, in fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by higher net sales as noted above. Additionally, the loss from operations in the prior year included a non-cash impairment charge of $1,687 related to indefinite lived intangible assets, property and equipment and ROU assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, if any, borrowings available under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility (as amended and restated) and our ability to access capital markets, including our Open Market Sale AgreementSM entered into with Jefferies LLC in September 2021 (see Note 8 “Stockholders’ Equity” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information). Our primary cash needs are funding working capital requirements, meeting our debt service requirements and capital expenditures for new stores and related leasehold improvements. The most significant components of our working capital are cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventories, accounts payable and other current liabilities. Based on our current expectations, we believe that our sources of liquidity will generate sufficient cash flows to meet our
obligations during the next twelve months from the date these financial statements are issued. Our recent financial results have been, and our future financial results may be, subject to substantial fluctuations, and may be impacted by business conditions and macroeconomic factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the armed conflict between Ukraine and Russia. Our ability to continue to meet our obligations is dependent on our ability to generate positive cash flow from a combination of initiatives and any failure to successfully implement these initiatives could require us to implement alternative plans to satisfy our liquidity needs. In the event that we are unable to timely service our debt, meet other contractual payment obligations or fund our other liquidity needs, we may need to refinance all or a portion of our indebtedness before maturity, seek waivers of or amendments to our contractual obligations for payment, reduce or delay scheduled expansions and capital expenditures, sell material assets or operations or seek other financing opportunities.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2021 was $221, which consisted of a net loss of $12,704, impacted by non-cash items of $17,319 and cash used by working capital of $4,836. Net cash used by working capital resulted from a cash outflow in inventory of $10,341 primarily due to the timing of receipts and reduced inventory purchases in the prior year, partly offset by a cash inflow in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $6,024 primarily due to the timing of payments to vendors.
Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2020 was $25,071 which consisted of a net loss of $65,649, impacted by non-cash items of $37,630 and cash provided by working capital of $2,948. Net cash provided by working capital resulted from a cash inflow in receivables, net of $6,594 driven largely by the timing of collections offset by a cash outflow in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $6,563 primarily due to the timing of payments to vendors and a cash outflow in inventories of $1,823 as higher aged inventory (which was driven by the impact of COVID-19) was mostly offset by reduced inventory purchases and the timing of inventory receipts.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $5,055 during fiscal 2021 represents capital expenditures primarily related to retail store buildouts, including leasehold improvements and store fixtures, as well as the investment in our information technology systems.
Net cash used in investing activities of $3,497 during fiscal 2020 represents capital expenditures related to retail store build-outs, including leasehold improvements and store fixtures.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,514 during fiscal 2021, primarily consisting of $35,000 of proceeds received from the Term Loan Credit Facility, partly offset by the repayment of $24,750 of borrowings under the 2018 Term Loan Facility, $5,775 net repayment of borrowings under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility and financing fees of $2,156 (which includes a $743 prepayment penalty associated with the termination of the 2018 Term Loan Facility during fiscal 2021).
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31,787 during fiscal 2020, primarily consisting of $20,000 of net proceeds from borrowings under the Third Lien Credit Facility and $12,676 of net proceeds from borrowings under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility.
Term Loan Credit Facility
On September 7, 2021, Vince, LLC entered into a new term loan credit facility as described below. The proceeds were used to repay in full all outstanding amounts under the 2018 Term Loan Facility and a portion of the borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. The 2018 Term Loan Facility was terminated.
Vince, LLC entered into a new $35,000 senior secured term loan credit facility (the “Term Loan Credit Facility”) pursuant to a Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) by and among Vince, LLC, as the borrower, the guarantors named therein, PLC Agent, LLC (“Pathlight”), as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other lenders from time to time party thereto. Vince Holding Corp. and Vince Intermediate Holding, LLC (“Vince Intermediate”) are guarantors under the Term Loan Credit Facility. The Term Loan Credit Facility matures on the earlier of September 7, 2026 and 91 days after the maturity date of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below).
The Term Loan Credit Facility is subject to quarterly amortization of $875 commencing on July 1, 2022, with the balance payable at final maturity. Interest is payable on loans under the Term Loan Credit Facility at a rate equal to the 90-day LIBOR rate, or an alternate applicable reference rate in the event LIBOR is no longer available, subject, in either case, to a 1.0% floor, plus 7.0%. During the continuance of certain specified events of default, interest will accrue on the overdue amount of any loan at a rate of 2.0% in excess of the rate otherwise applicable to such amount. In addition, the Term Loan Credit Agreement requires mandatory prepayments upon the occurrence of certain events, including but not limited to, an Excess Cash Flow payment (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement), subject to reductions for voluntary prepayments made during such fiscal year, commencing with the fiscal year ending January 28, 2023.
The Term Loan Credit Facility contains a requirement that Vince, LLC will maintain an availability under its 2018 Revolving Credit Facility of the greater of 10% of the commitments thereunder or $9,500. The Term Loan Credit Facility does not permit dividends prior to April 30, 2022, or an earlier date designated by Vince, LLC (the period until such date, the “Accommodation Period”) and thereafter permits them to the extent that no default or event of default is continuing or would result from a contemplated dividend, so long as after giving pro forma effect to the contemplated dividend subtracting any accounts payable amounts that are or are projected to be past due for the following six months, excess availability for such six month period will be at least the greater of 25.0% of the aggregate lending commitments and $15,000. In addition, the Term Loan Credit Facility contains customary representations and warranties, other covenants, and events of default, including but not limited to, limitations on the incurrence of additional indebtedness, liens, burdensome agreements, guarantees, investments, loans, asset sales, mergers, acquisitions, prepayment
of other debt, the repurchase of capital stock, transactions with affiliates, and the ability to change the nature of its business or its fiscal year, and distributions and dividends. Furthermore, the Term Loan Credit Facility is subject to a Borrowing Base (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) which can, under certain conditions result in the imposition of a reserve under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility.
All obligations under the Term Loan Credit Facility are guaranteed by Vince Intermediate and the Company and any future material domestic restricted subsidiaries of Vince, LLC and secured by a lien on substantially all of the assets of the Company, Vince, LLC and Vince Intermediate and any future material domestic restricted subsidiaries.
Through January 29, 2022, on an inception to date basis, the Company had not made any repayments on the Term Loan Credit Facility.
2018 Term Loan Facility
On August 21, 2018, Vince, LLC entered into a $27,500 senior secured term loan facility (the “2018 Term Loan Facility”) pursuant to a credit agreement by and among Vince, LLC, as the borrower, VHC and Vince Intermediate, a direct subsidiary of VHC and the direct parent company of Vince, LLC, as guarantors, Crystal Financial, LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other lenders from time to time party thereto. The 2018 Term Loan Facility was subject to quarterly amortization of principal equal to 2.5% of the original aggregate principal amount of the 2018 Term Loan Facility, as amended from time to time, with the balance payable at final maturity. The 2018 Term Loan Facility would have matured on the earlier of August 21, 2023 and the maturity date of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below).
On September 7, 2021, Vince, LLC entered into the Term Loan Credit Facility as described above. All outstanding amounts of $25,960, including interest and a prepayment penalty of $743 (which is included within financing fees on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows), under the 2018 Term Loan Facility were repaid in full and the 2018 Term Loan Facility was terminated. Additionally, the Company recorded expense of $758 related to the write-off of the remaining deferred financing costs.
2018 Revolving Credit Facility
On August 21, 2018, Vince, LLC entered into an $80,000 senior secured revolving credit facility (the “2018 Revolving Credit Facility”) pursuant to a credit agreement by and among Vince, LLC, as the borrower, VHC and Vince Intermediate, as guarantors, Citizens Bank, N.A. (“Citizens”), as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other lenders from time to time party thereto. The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $80,000, subject to a Loan Cap, which is the lesser of (i) the Borrowing Base as defined in the credit agreement for the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility and (ii) the aggregate commitments, as well as a letter of credit sublimit of $25,000. It also provides for an increase in aggregate commitments of up to $20,000.
Interest is payable on the loans under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility at either the LIBOR or the Base Rate, in each case, with applicable margins subject to a pricing grid based on an average daily excess availability calculation. The “Base Rate” means, for any day, a fluctuating rate per annum equal to the highest of (i) the rate of interest in effect for such day as publicly announced from time to time by Citizens as its prime rate; (ii) the Federal Funds Rate for such day, plus 0.5%; and (iii) the LIBOR Rate for a one month interest period as determined on such day, plus 1.00%. During the continuance of certain specified events of default, at the election of Citizens, interest will accrue at a rate of 2.0% in excess of the applicable non-default rate.
The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility contains a requirement that, at any point when Excess Availability (as defined in the credit agreement for the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility) is less than 10.0% of the loan cap and continuing until Excess Availability exceeds the greater of such amounts for 30 consecutive days, Vince, LLC must maintain during that time a Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the credit agreement for the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility) equal to or greater than 1.0 to 1.0 measured as of the last day of each fiscal month during such period.
The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility contains representations and warranties, other covenants and events of default that are customary for this type of financing, including covenants with respect to limitations on the incurrence of additional indebtedness, liens, burdensome agreements, guarantees, investments, loans, asset sales, mergers, acquisitions, prepayment of other debt, the repurchase of capital stock, transactions with affiliates, and the ability to change the nature of the Company’s business or its fiscal year. The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility generally permits dividends in the absence of any event of default (including any event of default arising from a contemplated dividend), so long as (i) after giving pro forma effect to the contemplated dividend and for the following six months Excess Availability will be at least the greater of 20.0% of the Loan Cap and $10,000 and (ii) after giving pro forma effect to the contemplated dividend, the Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the 12 months preceding such dividend will be greater than or equal to 1.0 to 1.0 (provided that the Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio may be less than 1.0 to 1.0 if, after giving pro forma effect to the contemplated dividend, Excess Availability for the six fiscal months following the dividend is at least the greater of 25.0% of the Loan Cap and $12,500).
On November 1, 2019, Vince, LLC entered into the First Amendment (the “First Revolver Amendment”) to the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility, which provided the borrower the ability to elect the Daily LIBOR Rate in lieu of the Base Rate to be applied to the borrowings upon applicable notice. The “Daily LIBOR Rate” means a rate equal to the Adjusted LIBOR Rate in effect on such day for deposits for a one day period, provided that, upon notice and not more than once every 90 days, such rate may be substituted for a one week or one month period for the Adjusted LIBOR Rate for a one day period.
On November 4, 2019, Vince, LLC entered into the Second Amendment (the “Second Revolver Amendment”) to the credit agreement of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. The Second Revolver Amendment increased the aggregate commitments under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility by $20,000 to $100,000. Pursuant to the terms of the Second Revolver Amendment, the Acquired Businesses became guarantors under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility and jointly and severally liable for the obligations thereunder.
On June 8, 2020, Vince, LLC entered into the Third Amendment (the “Third Revolver Amendment”) to the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. The Third Revolver Amendment, among others, increased availability under the facility’s borrowing base by (i) temporarily increasing the aggregate commitments under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility to $110,000 through November 30, 2020 (such period, the “Third Amendment Accommodation Period”) (ii) temporarily revising the eligibility of certain account debtors during the Third Amendment Accommodation Period by extending by 30 days the period during which those accounts may remain outstanding past due as well as increasing the concentration limits of certain account debtors and (iii) for any fiscal four quarter period ending prior to or on October 30, 2021, increasing the cap on certain items eligible to be added back to Consolidated EBITDA to 27.5% from 22.5%.
The Third Revolver Amendment also (a) waived events of default; (b) temporarily increased the applicable margin on all borrowings of revolving loans by 0.75% per annum during the Third Amendment Accommodation Period and increased the LIBOR floor from 0% to 1.0%; (c) eliminated Vince LLC’s and any loan party’s ability to designate subsidiaries as unrestricted and to make certain payments, restricted payments and investments during the Third Amendment Extended Accommodation Period; (d) temporarily suspended the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio covenant through the Third Amendment Extended Accommodation Period; (e) required Vince, LLC to maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 in the event the excess availability under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility was less than (x) $10,000 between September 6, 2020 and January 9, 2021, (y) $12,500 between January 10, 2021 and January 31, 2021 and (z) $15,000 at all other times during the Third Amendment Extended Accommodation Period; (f) imposed a requirement (y) to pay down the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility to the extent cash on hand exceeded $5,000 on the last day of each week and (z) that, after giving effect to any borrowing thereunder, Vince, LLC may have no more than $5,000 of cash on hand; (g) permitted Vince, LLC to incur up to $8,000 of additional secured debt (in addition to any interest accrued or paid in kind), to the extent subordinated to the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility on terms reasonably acceptable to Citizens; (h) established a method for imposing a successor reference rate if LIBOR should become unavailable, (i) extended the delivery periods for (x) annual financial statements for the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020 to June 15, 2020 and (y) quarterly financial statements for the fiscal quarters ended May 2, 2020 and August 1, 2020 to July 31, 2020 and October 29, 2020, respectively, and (j) granted ongoing relief through September 30, 2020 with respect to certain covenants regarding the payment of lease obligations.
As a result of the Third Revolver Amendment, the Company incurred $376 of additional deferred financing costs. In accordance with ASC Topic 470, “Debt”, the Company accounted for this amendment as a debt modification and recorded the additional deferred financing costs as deferred debt issuance costs which will be amortized over the remaining term of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility.
On December 11, 2020, Vince, LLC entered into the Fifth Amendment (the “Fifth Revolver Amendment”) to the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. The Fifth Revolver Amendment, among other things, (i) extended the period from November 30, 2020 to July 31, 2021 (such period, “Accommodation Period”), during which the eligibility of certain account debtors was revised by extending by 30 days the time those accounts may remain outstanding past due as well as increasing the concentration limits of certain account debtors; (ii) extended the period through which the applicable margin on all borrowings of revolving loans by 0.75% per annum during such Accommodation Period; (iii) extended the period from October 30, 2021 to January 29, 2022, during which the cap on which certain items eligible to be added back to “Consolidated EBITDA” (as defined in the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility) was increased to 27.5% from 22.5%; (iv) extended the temporary suspension of the Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (“FCCR”) covenant through the delivery of a compliance certificate relating to the fiscal quarter ended January 29, 2022 (such period, the “Extended Accommodation Period”), other than the fiscal quarter ending January 29, 2022; (v) required Vince, LLC to maintain an FCCR of 1.0 to 1.0 in the event the excess availability under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility was less than (x) $7,500 through the end of the Accommodation Period; and (y) $10,000 from August 1, 2020 through the end of the Extended Accommodation Period; (vi) permitted Vince, LLC to incur the debt under the Third Lien Credit Facility (as described below); (vii) revised the definition of “Cash Dominion Trigger Amount” to mean $15,000 through the end of the Extended Accommodation Period and at all other times thereafter, 12.5% of the loan cap and $5,000, whichever is greater; (viii) deemed the Cash Dominion Event (as defined in the credit agreement for the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility) as triggered during the Accommodation Period; and (ix) required an engagement by the Company of a financial advisor from February 1, 2021 until March 31, 2021 (or until the excess availability was greater than 25% of the loan cap for a period of at least thirty days, whichever is later) to assist in the preparation of certain financial reports, including the review of the weekly cashflow reports and other items. As of April 2021, the requirement to engage a financial advisor had been satisfied.
As a result of the Fifth Revolver Amendment, the Company incurred $204 of additional deferred financing costs. In accordance with ASC Topic 470, “Debt”, the Company accounted for this amendment as a debt modification and recorded the additional deferred financing costs as deferred debt issuance costs which will be amortized over the remaining term of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility.
On September 7, 2021, concurrently with the Term Loan Credit Facility, Vince, LLC entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “A&R Revolving Credit Facility Agreement”) which, among other things, contains amendments to reflect the terms of the Term Loan Credit Facility and extends the maturity of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility to the earlier of June 8, 2026 and 91 days prior to the maturity of the Term Loan Credit Facility.
In addition, the A&R Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, among others: (i) lowers all applicable margins by 0.75%; (ii) revises the end of the Accommodation Period (as defined therein) to April 30, 2022 or an earlier date as elected by Vince, LLC; (iii) amends the borrowing base calculation to exclude Eligible Cash On Hand (as defined therein); (iv) revises the threshold under the definition of the Cash Dominion Trigger Event to be the excess availability of the greater of (a) 12.5% of the loan cap and (b) $11,000; (v) deletes the financial covenant and replaces it with a requirement to maintain a minimum excess availability not to be less than the greater of (a) $9,500 and (b) 10% of the commitments at any time; and (vi) revises certain representations and warranties as well as operational covenants.
As of January 29, 2022, the Company was in compliance with applicable covenants. As of January 29, 2022, $40,620 was available under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility, net of the loan cap, and there were $34,624 of borrowings outstanding and $5,345 of letters of credit outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. The weighted average interest rate for borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility as of January 29, 2022 was 1.8%.
As of January 30, 2021, $30,176 was available under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility, net of the loan cap, and there were $40,399 of borrowings outstanding and $5,195 of letters of credit outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. The weighted average interest rate for borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility as of January 30, 2021 was 3.8%.
Third Lien Credit Facility
On December 11, 2020, Vince, LLC entered into a $20,000 subordinated term loan credit facility (the “Third Lien Credit Facility”) pursuant to a credit agreement (the “Third Lien Credit Agreement”), dated December 11, 2020, by and among Vince, LLC, as the borrower, VHC and Vince Intermediate, as guarantors, and SK Financial Services, LLC (“SK Financial”), as administrative agent and collateral agent, and other lenders from time to time party thereto.
SK Financial is an affiliate of Sun Capital, whose affiliates own approximately 71% of the Company’s common stock. The Third Lien Credit Facility was reviewed and approved by the Special Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors, consisting solely of directors not affiliated with Sun Capital, which committee was represented by independent legal advisors.
Interest on loans under the Third Lien Credit Facility is payable in kind at a rate equal to the LIBOR rate (subject to a floor of 1.0%) plus applicable margins subject to a pricing grid based on minimum Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Third Lien Credit Agreement). During the continuance of certain specified events of default, interest may accrue on the loans under the Third Lien Credit Facility at a rate of 2.0% in excess of the rate otherwise applicable to such amount. The Third Lien Credit Facility contains representations, covenants and conditions that were substantially similar to those under the 2018 Term Loan Facility, except the Third Lien Credit Facility does not contain any financial covenants.
The Company incurred $485 in deferred financing costs associated with the Third Lien Credit Facility of which a $400 closing fee is payable in kind and was added to the principal balance. These deferred financing costs are recorded as deferred debt issuance costs which will be amortized over the remaining term of the Third Lien Credit Facility.
All obligations under the Third Lien Credit Facility are guaranteed by the Company, Vince Intermediate and the Company’s existing material domestic restricted subsidiaries as well as any future material domestic restricted subsidiaries and are secured on a junior basis relative to the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility and the 2018 Term Loan Facility by a lien on substantially all of the assets of the Company, Vince Intermediate, Vince, LLC and the Company’s existing material domestic restricted subsidiaries as well as any future material domestic restricted subsidiaries.
The proceeds were received on December 11, 2020 and were used to repay a portion of the borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility.
On September 7, 2021, concurrently with the Term Loan Credit Facility as well as the A&R Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, Vince, LLC entered into an amendment (the “Third Lien First Amendment”) to the Third Lien Credit Facility which amends its terms to extend its maturity to March 6, 2027, revises the interest rate to remove the tiered applicable margins so that the rate is now equal to the 90-day LIBOR rate, or an alternate applicable reference rate in the event LIBOR is no longer available, plus 9.0% at all times, and to reflect the applicable terms of the Term Loan Credit Facility as well as the A&R Revolving Credit Facility Agreement.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 29, 2022:
(1)
Consists primarily of inventory purchase obligations and service contracts.
(2)
VHC entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with the Pre-IPO Stockholders (as described in Note 13 “Related Party Transactions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report).
The summary above does not include the following items:
•
As of January 29, 2022, we have recorded $556 of unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties. We are unable to make reliable estimates of cash flows by period due to the inherent uncertainty surrounding the effective settlement of these positions.
•
Interest payable under the Term Loan Facility, which is calculated at a rate equal to the 90-day LIBOR rate, or an alternate applicable reference rate in the event LIBOR is no longer available, subject, in either case, to a 1.0% floor, plus 7.0%. See Note 4 “Long-Term Debt and Financing Arrangements” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional information.
•
Interest payable under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility (as amended and restated), which is calculated at either the LIBOR rate or the Base Rate, in each case, with applicable margins subject to a pricing grid based on an average daily excess availability calculation. The “Base Rate” means, for any day, a fluctuating rate per annum equal to the highest of (i) the rate of interest in effect for such day as publicly announced from time to time by Citizens as its prime rate; (ii) the Federal Funds Rate for such day, plus 0.5%; and (iii) the LIBOR Rate for a one month interest period as determined on such day, plus 1.00%. See Note 4 “Long-Term Debt and Financing Arrangements” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional information.
•
Interest payable under the Third Lien Credit Facility is payable in kind at a rate equal to the 90-day LIBOR rate, or an alternate applicable reference rate in the event LIBOR is no longer available, plus 9.0% at all times. See Note 4 “Long-Term Debt and Financing Arrangements” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional information.
Seasonality
The apparel and fashion industry in which we operate is cyclical and, consequently, our revenues are affected by general economic conditions and the seasonal trends characteristic to the apparel and fashion industry. Purchases of apparel are sensitive to a number of factors that influence the level of consumer spending, including economic conditions and the level of disposable consumer income, consumer debt, interest rates and consumer confidence as well as the impact of adverse weather conditions. In addition, fluctuations in the amount of sales in any fiscal quarter are affected by the timing of seasonal wholesale shipments and other events affecting direct-to-consumer sales; as such, the financial results for any particular quarter may not be indicative of results for the fiscal year. We expect such seasonality to continue.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Management bases estimates on historical experience and other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances and evaluates these estimates on an on-going basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent consolidated results of operations. For more information on our accounting policies, please refer to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition and Reserves for Allowances
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations identified under the terms of contracts with its customers are satisfied, which generally occurs upon the transfer of control in accordance with the contractual terms and conditions of the sale. Sales are recognized when the control of the goods are transferred to the customer for the Company’s wholesale businesses, upon receipt by the customer for the Company’s e-commerce businesses, and at the time of sale to the consumer for the Company’s retail businesses. Sales are measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods, which includes estimates for variable consideration. Variable consideration mainly includes discounts, chargebacks, markdown allowances, cooperative advertising programs, and sales returns. Estimated amounts of discounts, chargebacks, markdown allowances, cooperative advertising programs, and sales returns are accounted for as reductions of sales when the associated sale occurs. These estimated amounts are adjusted periodically based on changes in facts and circumstances when the changes become known. On the Company’s consolidated balance sheet, reserves for sales returns are included within other accrued liabilities, and the value of inventory associated with reserves for sales returns are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets. The Company continues to estimate the amount of sales returns based on known trends and historical return rates.
Accounts receivable are recorded net of allowances for expected future chargebacks and estimated margin support from wholesale partners. It is the nature of the apparel and fashion industry that suppliers like us face significant pressure from wholesale partners in the retail industry to provide allowances to compensate for their margin shortfalls. This pressure often takes the form of customers requiring us to provide price concessions on prior shipments as a prerequisite for obtaining future orders. Pressure for these concessions is largely determined by overall retail sales performance and, more specifically, the performance of our products at retail. To the extent our wholesale partners have more of our goods on hand at the end of the season, there will be greater pressure for us to grant markdown concessions on prior shipments. Our accounts receivable balances are reported net of expected allowances for these matters based on the historical level of concessions required and our estimates of the level of markdowns and allowances that will be required in the coming season. We evaluate the allowance balances on a continual basis and adjust them as necessary to reflect changes in anticipated allowance activity.
At January 29, 2022, a hypothetical 1% change in the reserves for allowances would have resulted in a change of $66 in accounts receivable and net sales.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory values are reduced to net realizable value when there are factors indicating that certain inventories will not be sold on terms sufficient to recover their cost. Out-of-season inventories may be sold to off-price retailers and other customers who serve a customer base that will purchase prior year fashions and may be liquidated through our outlets and our e-commerce websites. The amount, if any, that these customers will pay for prior year fashions is determined by the desirability of the inventory itself as well as the general level of prior year goods available to these customers. The assessment of inventory value, as a result, is highly subjective and requires an assessment of the seasonality of the inventory, its future desirability, and future price levels in the off-price sector.
In our wholesale businesses, some of our products are purchased for and sold to specific customers’ orders. For the remainder of our business, products are purchased in anticipation of selling them to a specific customer based on historical trends. The loss of a major customer, whether due to the customer’s financial difficulty or other reasons, could have a significant negative impact on the value of the inventory expected to be sold to that customer. This negative impact can also extend to purchase obligations for goods that have not yet been received. These obligations involve product to be received into inventory over the next one to six months.
At January 29, 2022, a hypothetical 1% change in the inventory obsolescence reserve would have resulted in a change of $41 in inventory, net of cost of products sold.
Fair Value Assessments of Goodwill and Other Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually and in an interim period if a triggering event occurs. As discussed in further detail below, we determined that a triggering event occurred during the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
An entity may elect to perform a qualitative impairment assessment for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. If adverse qualitative trends are identified during the qualitative assessment that indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative impairment test is required. “Step one” of the quantitative impairment test for goodwill requires an entity to determine the fair value of each reporting unit and compare
such fair value to the respective carrying amount. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired, and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recorded for the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. The goodwill impairment test is dependent on a number of factors, including estimates of projected revenues, EBITDA margins, long-term growth rates, working capital, discount rates and other variables. We base our estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates.
We estimate the fair value of our tradename intangible assets using a discounted cash flow valuation analysis, which is based on the “relief from royalty” methodology. This methodology assumes that in lieu of ownership, a third party would be willing to pay a royalty in order to exploit the related benefits of these types of assets. The relief from royalty approach is dependent on a number of factors, including estimates of projected revenues, royalty rates in the category of intellectual property, discount rates and other variables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the tradename intangible asset is less than the carrying value.
An entity may pass on performing the qualitative assessment for a reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset and directly perform the quantitative assessment. This determination can be made on an asset by asset basis, and an entity may resume performing a qualitative assessment in subsequent periods.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company determined that a triggering event had occurred as a result of changes to the Company’s long-term projections driven by the impacts of COVID-19. The change in performance was primarily driven by the shutdown of the wholesale partners’ retail locations domestically and internationally, resulting in reduced orders, decreased revenue and lower current and expected future cash flow. The Company performed an interim quantitative impairment assessment of goodwill and intangible assets.
A quantitative impairment test on the goodwill allocated to the Vince Wholesale reporting unit determined that the fair value was below the carrying value. The Company estimated the fair value using a combination of discounted cash flows and market comparisons. “Step one” of the assessment determined that the fair value was below the carrying amount by $9,462, and as a result the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $9,462 within Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) in fiscal 2020.
The Company estimated the fair value of the Vince and Rebecca Taylor tradename indefinite-lived intangible assets using a discounted cash flow valuation analysis, which is based on the relief from royalty method and determined that the fair value of the Vince and Rebecca Taylor tradenames were below their carrying amounts. Accordingly, the Company recorded an impairment charge for the Vince and Rebecca Taylor tradename indefinite-lived intangible assets of $4,386 which was recorded within Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) in fiscal 2020.
In both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, the Company performed its annual impairment test during the fourth quarter.
In fiscal 2021, the Company elected to perform a quantitative impairment test on goodwill allocated to the Company’s Vince Wholesale reporting unit. The results of the quantitative test did not result in any impairment because the fair value of the Company’s Vince Wholesale reporting unit exceeded its carrying value. The fair value of the Company’s Vince Wholesale reporting unit was estimated using a combination of the income approach (the discounted cash flows method) and the market approach (guideline public company method). The more significant assumptions used in projecting the discounted cash flows included: a discount rate of 18.5%, which was determined from relevant market comparisons and adjusted for company specific risks and projected EBITDA margins of low double-digits based upon our current and past performance as well as industry data. The guideline public company method applies a representative market multiple derived from revenue and EBITDA for a group of comparable public companies to the Company’s financial forecasts. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the valuation model.
In fiscal 2020, the Company elected to perform a quantitative impairment test on goodwill allocated to the Company’s Vince Wholesale reporting unit. The results of the quantitative test did not result in any impairment because the fair value of the Company’s Vince Wholesale reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by less than 1%. The more significant assumptions used in projecting the discounted cash flows included: a discount rate of 19%, which was determined from relevant market comparisons and adjusted for company specific risks and projected EBITDA margins of low double-digits based upon our current and past performance as well as industry data. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the valuation model.
Goodwill was $31,973 as of both January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company elected to perform a quantitative impairment test on its Vince tradename and the Rebecca Taylor tradename indefinite-lived intangible assets. The results of the quantitative test did not result in any impairment because the fair value of the Company’s Vince tradename and Rebecca Taylor tradename intangible assets exceeded their carrying values. The more significant assumptions used in projecting the discounted cash flows included: a discount rate of 18.5% and 19.5% for the Vince and Rebecca Taylor tradenames, respectively, which was determined from relevant market comparisons and adjusted for
company specific risks; low single-digit royalty rates and projected revenues based upon our current and past performance as well as industry data. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the valuation model.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company also elected to perform a quantitative impairment test on its Vince tradename and the Rebecca Taylor tradename indefinite-lived intangible assets. The results of the quantitative test did not result in any impairment because the fair value of the Company’s Vince tradename and Rebecca Taylor tradename intangible assets exceeded their carrying values by 2% and 9%, respectively. The more significant assumptions used in projecting the discounted cash flows included: a discount rate of 19% and 20% for the Vince and Rebecca Taylor tradenames, respectively, which was determined from relevant market comparisons and adjusted for company specific risks; low single-digit royalty rates and projected revenues based upon our current and past performance as well as industry data. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the valuation model.
Indefinite-lived tradename intangible assets were $71,800 as of both January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, which is included within Intangible assets, net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Property and Equipment, Operating Lease Assets and Other Finite-Lived Intangible Assets
The Company reviews its property and equipment, operating lease assets and finite-lived intangible assets for impairment when the existence of facts and circumstances indicate that the useful life is shorter than previously estimated or that the carrying amount of the asset groups to which these assets relate may not be recoverable. The asset group is defined as the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are available and largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets, which for our retail stores is at the store level. Recoverability of these assets is evaluated by comparing the carrying value of the asset group with its estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If the comparisons indicate that the value of the asset is not recoverable, an impairment loss is calculated as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the assets within the asset group and the loss is recognized during that period. The estimates regarding recoverability and fair value can be affected by factors such as future store results, real estate demand, store closure plans, and economic conditions that can be difficult to predict.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2020, as a result of temporary store closures and the decline in projected cash flows driven by the impacts of COVID-19, the Company determined the need to assess recoverability for a significant portion of its asset groups. Specific to its retail operations, the Company first assessed all of its retail store asset groups, which included a significant portion of the Company’s total operating lease right-of-use assets, to determine if the carrying value was recoverable. This was determined by comparing the net carrying value of the retail store asset group to the undiscounted net cash flows to be generated from the use and eventual disposition of that asset group. For the retail store asset groups that failed the recoverability test, an impairment loss was measured, in part, as the amount by which the carrying value of the operating lease right-of-use assets exceeded its fair value. The results of this assessment indicated that the estimated fair value of a portion of the Company’s operating lease right-of-use assets did not exceed the carrying value and an impairment charge was recorded in the amount of $8,556 to the operating lease right-of-use assets balance. The fair value of the operating lease right-of-use assets was determined from the perspective of a market participant considering various factors. The judgments and assumptions used in determining the fair value of the operating lease right-of-use assets were the current comparable market rents for similar properties and a store discount rate. Additionally, as it relates to the retail store asset groups that did not pass the recoverability assessment, the Company recorded non-cash asset impairment charges of $4,470 related to property and equipment. The fair value of the property and equipment was based on its estimated liquidation value.
The finite-lived intangible assets are comprised of Vince customer relationships which are being amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives of 20 years and the Parker tradename intangible asset which is being amortized on a straight-line basis over its useful life of 10 years.
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the consummation of the IPO, we entered into a Tax Receivable Agreement with the Pre-IPO Stockholders. The Tax Receivable Agreement provides for payments to the Pre-IPO Stockholders in an amount equal to 85% of the aggregate reduction in taxes payable realized by the Company and its subsidiaries from the utilization of the Pre-IPO Tax Benefits. Amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreement are contingent upon, among other things, (i) generation of future taxable income over the term of the Tax Receivable Agreement and (ii) changes in tax laws. If we do not generate sufficient taxable income in the aggregate over the term of the Tax Receivable Agreement to utilize the tax benefits, then we would not be required to make the related payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Therefore, we would only recognize a liability for the Tax Receivable Agreement obligation if we determine if it is probable that we will generate sufficient future taxable income over the term of the Tax Receivable Agreement to utilize the related tax benefits. Estimating future taxable income is inherently uncertain and requires judgment. In projecting future taxable income, we consider our historical results and incorporate certain assumptions, including revenue growth, operating margins, and projected retail location openings, among others. If we determine in the future that we will not be able to fully utilize all or part of the related tax benefits, we would derecognize the portion of the liability related to benefits not expected to be utilized. Alternatively, if we generate additional future taxable income beyond our current estimate, we
would recognize additional liability related to benefits expected to be utilized. See Note 13 “Related Party Transactions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional information.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2020, the obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreement was adjusted as a result of changes in the levels of projected pre-tax income, primarily as a result of COVID-19. The adjustment resulted in a net decrease of $2,320 to the liability under the Tax Receivable Agreement with the corresponding adjustment accounted for within Other income, net on the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). As of January 29, 2022, the Company’s total obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreement was estimated to be $0 based on projected future pre-tax income.
Income taxes and Valuation Allowances
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities at enacted rates. We assess the likelihood of the realization of deferred tax assets and adjust the carrying amount of these deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe it more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of deferred tax assets, including recent earnings results within taxing jurisdictions, expectations of future taxable income, the carryforward periods available and other relevant factors. Changes in the required valuation allowance are recorded in income in the period such determination is made. Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes. Changes in estimates may create volatility in our effective tax rate in future periods for various reasons, including changes in tax laws or rates, changes in forecasted amounts of pretax income (loss), settlements with various tax authorities, either favorable or unfavorable, the expiration of the statute of limitations on some tax positions and obtaining new information about particular tax positions that may cause management to change its estimates. The ultimate tax outcome is uncertain for certain transactions. We recognize tax positions in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with tax authorities assuming full knowledge of the position and all relevant facts.
Due to the uncertain nature of the realization of our deferred income tax assets, during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we recorded valuation allowances within Provision for income taxes on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). During fiscal 2021, the Company recorded additional valuation allowances in the amount of $7,215 and maintained a full valuation allowance on all deferred tax assets that have a definite life as we do not believe it is more likely than not that such deferred tax assets will be recognized. Indefinite-lived net operating losses have been recognized to the extent we believe they can be utilized against indefinite-lived deferred tax liabilities. This valuation allowance is subject to periodic review, and if the allowance is reduced, the tax benefit will be recorded in the future operations as a reduction of our income tax expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on certain recently issued or proposed accounting standards which may impact the Company, please refer to the notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.