ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, should be read in conjunction with our condensed consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this annual report.
Revenues
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we had revenue of $100,476 compared to $22,474 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $78,002. The increase in revenue is primarily attributable to the lessening of the impact of COVID-19, thus allowing us to sponsor one live concert.
Direct Costs of Revenues
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we had direct costs of revenue of $153,181 compared to $8,509 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $144,672. The increase in costs are attributable to our expense related to one large concert event that we sponsored in the fourth quarter of 2021. We expect to generate positive gross margins from higher sales volumes in the future, although there can be no assurances.
General and Administrative Expenses
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we had general and administrative expense of $932,134 compared to $601,022 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $331,112. This increase in 2021 is primarily attributable to an increase in professional fees of approximately $211,000, an increase in officer compensation of approximately $50,000, and an increase in research and development expenses of $55,000.
Other Income (Expenses), Net
We recorded other income of $3,905,221 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to other expense of $3,996,719 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The significant increase in other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 period was primarily attributable to a reduction of $5,390,655 in the change in the fair value of the Company’s derivative liability related to convertible notes, and $1,172,789 related to other income recorded from the reversal of a 2020 accrued liability.
Net Income (Loss)
As result of the foregoing, we recorded net income of $2,920,382 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with a net loss of $4,553,777 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through private offerings of our equity securities and loans.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used cash in operations of $1,430,312 and as of December 31, 2021, had an accumulated deficit of $13,835,294 and negative working capital of $2,793,040. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date of the financial statements being issued. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to raise additional funds and implement its business plan. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
On December 31, 2021, the Company had cash on hand of $36,958. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to obtain necessary debt or equity financing to continue operations until it begins generating positive cash flow. Historically, the Company has been able to fund its operations from the proceeds of notes payable and convertible notes.
On June 22, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with GHS Investments, LLC (the “Purchaser”), a Nevada limited liability company, pursuant to which the Company will have the right in its sole discretion for a period of one year from the date of the SPA, to sell up to $8 million of Common Stock for a period of one year ending on June 21, 2022 (subject to certain limitations) to GHS Investments. The transaction is considered an Equity Line of Credit (“ELOC”).
As of the date of this annual report, the Company is relying on its ELOC with GHS Investments, The Company believes that this ELOC will provide sufficient liquidity for the immediate future, however, the ELOC credit is subject to certain limitations based on the trading price of the Company’s common stock, which may not enable the Company to continue to advance funds. We are currently looking for new opportunities to fund the Company to supplement our credit line. No assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company can obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which were prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to our financial results and to the understanding of our past and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s estimates and assumptions. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (1) it requires us to make assumptions because the information was not available at the time or it included matters that were highly uncertain at the time we were making our estimate; and (2) changes in the estimate could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions and Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Critical accounting estimates are estimates for which (a) the nature of the estimate is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and (b) the impact of the estimate on financial condition or operating performance is material. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in relation to the financial statements taken as a whole under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management regularly evaluates the key factors and assumptions used to develop the estimates utilizing currently available information, changes in facts and circumstances, historical experience, and reasonable assumptions. After such evaluations, if deemed appropriate, those estimates are adjusted accordingly. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the assumptions used to determine the value of the derivative liabilities, the valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset, and the accruals for potential liabilities.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the condensed consolidated statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not the net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company periodically issues stock options and warrants to employees and non-employees in non-capital raising transactions for services and financing costs. The Company accounts for stock option and warrant grants issued and vesting to employees based on the authoritative guidance provided by FASB where the value of the award is measured on the date of grant and recognized as compensation expense on the straight-line basis over the vesting period. The Company accounts for stock option and warrant grants issued and vesting to non-employees in accordance with the authoritative guidance of the FASB where the value of the stock compensation is based upon the measurement date as determined at either a) the date at which a performance commitment is reached, or b) at the date at which the necessary performance to earn the equity instruments is complete. Options granted to non-employees are revalued each reporting period to determine the amount to be recorded as an expense in the respective period. As the options vest, they are valued on each vesting date and an adjustment is recorded for the difference between the value already recorded and the then-current value on the date of vesting. In certain circumstances where there are no future performance requirements by the non-employee, option grants are immediately vested and the total stock-based compensation charge is recorded in the period of the measurement date.
The fair value of the Company’s stock option and warrant grants are estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing model, which uses certain assumptions related to risk-free interest rates, expected volatility, expected life of the stock options or warrants, and future dividends. Compensation expense is recorded based upon the value derived from the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing model, and based on actual experience. The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing model could materially affect compensation expense recorded in future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statement herein for management’s discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Selected Financial Data
Not applicable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.