Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A")
This section should be read in conjunction with the "Cautionary Statements" and "Risk Factors" in Item 1A of Part I, and Item 8 of Part II, "Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
We begin Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations with an overview of the business, including our strategy to give the reader a summary of the goals of our business and the direction in which our business is moving. This is followed by a discussion of the Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. In the next section, we discuss our Results of Operations for the year ended February 28, 2022 compared to the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020. Next, we present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended February 28, 2022 compared to the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 in order to provide a useful and appropriate supplemental measure of our performance. We then provide an analysis of changes in our balance sheet and cash flows and discuss our financial commitments in the sections entitled "Liquidity and Capital Resources." We conclude this MD&A with a discussion of "Related Party Transactions" and "Recent Accounting Pronouncements."
Business Overview and Strategy
VOXX International Corporation is a leading international distributor, manufacturer and value-added service provider in the automotive electronics, consumer electronics and biometrics industries. We conduct our business through nineteen wholly-owned subsidiaries and one majority owned subsidiary. Voxx has a broad portfolio of brand names used to market our products as well as private labels through a large domestic and international distribution network. We also function as an OEM ("Original Equipment Manufacturer") supplier to several customers, as well as market a number of products under exclusive distribution agreements.
In recent years, we have focused our attention on acquiring synergistic businesses with the addition of several new subsidiaries. These subsidiaries have helped us to expand our core business and broaden our presence in the accessory and OEM markets. Our acquisition of a controlling interest in EyeLock Inc. and EyeLock Corporation allowed us to enter the growing and innovative biometrics market. The Company has also made strategic asset purchases in order to strengthen its product offerings and increase market share, such as the acquisition of certain assets and assumption of certain liabilities of Rosen Electronics LLC in Fiscal 2018, Vehicle Safety Holding Corp. in Fiscal 2020, Directed LLC and Directed Electronics Canada Inc. in Fiscal 2021, and Onkyo Home Entertainment Corporation in Fiscal 2022. Our intention is to continue to pursue business opportunities which will allow us to further expand our business model while leveraging overhead and exploring specialized niche markets in the electronics industry. Notwithstanding the above acquisitions, if the appropriate opportunity arises, the Company has been willing to explore the potential divestiture of a product line or business, such as with the sale of the Company's Hirschmann subsidiary in Fiscal 2018.
The Company classifies its operations in the following three reportable segments: Automotive Electronics, Consumer Electronics, and Biometrics. The characteristics of our operations that are relied on in making and reviewing business decisions within these segments include the similarities in our products, the commonality of our customers, suppliers and product developers across multiple brands, our unified marketing and distribution strategy, our centralized inventory management and logistics, and the nature of the financial information used by our Chief Operating Decision Maker ("CODM"). The CODM reviews the financial results of the Company based on the performance of the Automotive Electronics, Consumer Electronics, and Biometrics segments.
The Company’s domestic and international business is subject to retail industry trends and conditions and the sales of new and used vehicles. Worldwide economic conditions impact consumer spending and if the global macroeconomic environment deteriorates, this could have a negative effect on the Company’s revenues and earnings. In an attempt to offset any negative market conditions, the Company continues to explore strategies and alternatives to reduce its operating expenses, such as the consolidation of facilities and IT systems, and has been introducing new products to obtain a greater market share.
Although we believe our product groups have expanding market opportunities, there are certain levels of volatility related to domestic and international markets, new car sales, increased competition by manufacturers, private labels, technological advancements, customer acceptance, discretionary consumer spending and general economic conditions. Also, all of our products are subject to price fluctuations which could affect the carrying value of inventories and gross margins in the future.
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of COVID-19, which began spreading during the fourth quarter of our 2020 fiscal year. The pandemic has significantly impacted the economic conditions in the United States, as federal, state, and local governments have reacted to the public health crisis, creating significant uncertainties in the United States, as well as the global economy. In the interest of public health and safety, U.S. jurisdictions (national, state, and local) where our primary operations and those of many of our customers are located, required mandatory business closures and capacity limitations during Fiscal 2021, or other restrictions for those that were permitted to continue to operate. During Fiscal 2022, all of our operating locations were able to re-open, some of which were at a reduced in-office employee presence at certain times during the year in response to COVID-19 variant spread.
As a result of these events, the Company has experienced certain adverse impacts on its revenues, results of operations and cash flows during Fiscal 2022. The situation is still rapidly changing and additional impacts to the Company’s business may arise that we are not aware of currently. We cannot predict whether, when, or the manner in which the conditions surrounding COVID-19 will change, including the timing of the imposition or lifting of restrictions, closure requirements, or any other limitations. Due to the changing situation, the results of the first quarter ending May 31, 2022 and the full fiscal year ending February 28, 2023 could be impacted in ways we are not able to predict today, including, but not limited to, non-cash write-downs and impairments; foreign currency fluctuations; potential adjustments to the carrying value of inventory; and the delayed collections of, or inability to collect, accounts receivable. The Company continues to focus on cash flow and anticipates having sufficient resources to operate during Fiscal 2023.
Acquisitions and Dispositions
We have acquired and integrated several businesses, as well as divested certain businesses, the most recent of which are outlined in the Acquisitions section of Part I and presented in detail in Note 2 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates (see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
General
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions can be subjective and complex and may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues, and expenses reported in those financial statements. As a result, actual results could differ from such estimates and assumptions. During Fiscal 2022, there have been continuous changes to the global economic situation as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is possible that this could cause changes to estimates as a result of the financial circumstances of the markets in which the Company operates, the price of the Company’s publicly traded equity in comparison to the Company’s carrying value, and the health of the global economy. Such changes to estimates could potentially result in impacts that would be material to the consolidated financial statements, particularly with respect to the fair value of the Company’s reporting units in relation to potential goodwill impairment and the fair value of long-lived assets in relation to potential impairment.
The significant accounting policies and estimates which we believe are the most critical in fully understanding and evaluating the reported consolidated financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The core principle of ASC 606 is that an entity recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods and services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. We apply the FASB’s guidance on revenue recognition, which requires us to recognize the amount of revenue and consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for goods and services transferred to our customers. To do this, the Company applies the five-step model prescribed by the FASB, which requires us to: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
We account for a contract or purchase order when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of consideration is probable. Revenue is recognized when control of the product passes to the customer, which is upon shipment, unless otherwise specified within the customer contract or on the purchase order as delivery, and is recognized at the amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive for the products sold, including various forms of discounts. When revenue is recorded, estimates of returns are made and recorded as a reduction of revenue.
Sales Incentives
Sales incentives are accounted for in accordance with ASC 606. We offer sales incentives to our customers in the form of (1) co-operative advertising allowances; (2) market development funds; (3) volume incentive rebates; and (4) other trade allowances. We accrue the cost of co-operative advertising allowances, volume incentive rebates, and market development funds at the later of when the customer purchases our products or when the sales incentive is offered to the customer. We record the provision for other trade allowances at the later of when the sales incentive is offered or when the related revenue is recognized. Except for other trade allowances, all sales incentives require the customer to purchase our products during a specified period of time. All sales incentives require customers to claim the sales incentive within a certain time period (referred to as the "claim period"). All costs associated with sales incentives are classified as a reduction of net sales.
Depending on the specific facts and circumstances, we utilize either the most likely amount or the expected value methods to estimate the effect of uncertainty on the amount of variable consideration to which we would be entitled. The most likely amount method considers the single most likely amount from a range of possible consideration amounts, while the expected value method is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. Both methods are based upon the contractual terms of the incentives and historical experience with each customer. Although we make our best estimate of sales incentive liabilities, many factors, including significant unanticipated changes in the purchasing volume and the lack of claims from customers could have a significant impact on the liability for sales incentives and reported operating results. We record estimates for cash discounts, promotional rebates, and other promotional allowances in the period the related revenue is recognized (“Customer Credits”). The provision for Customer Credits is recorded as a reduction from gross sales and reserves for Customer Credits are presented within accrued sales incentives on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Unearned sales incentives are volume incentive rebates where the customer did not purchase the required minimum quantities of product during the specified time. Volume incentive rebates are reversed into income in the period when the customer did not reach the required minimum purchases of product during the specified time. Unclaimed sales incentives are sales incentives earned by the customer, but the customer has not claimed payment within the claim period (period after program has ended). Unclaimed sales incentives are investigated in a timely manner after the end of the program and reversed if deemed appropriate.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. The purchase price of each business acquired is allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on information regarding their respective fair values on the date of acquisition. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the separately identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is allocated to goodwill. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management's judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, and market multiples, among other items. We determine the fair values of intangible assets acquired generally in consultation with third-party valuation advisors. The valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires a number of judgments and is subject to revision as additional information about the fair values becomes available. We recognize any adjustments to provisional amounts that are identified during the period not to exceed twelve months from the acquisition date (the "measurement period") in which the adjustments are determined. Acquisition costs are expensed as incurred. The results of operations of businesses acquired are included in the consolidated financial statements from their dates of acquisition.
As part of the agreement to acquire certain subsidiaries, we may be obligated to pay contingent consideration should the acquired entity meet certain earnings or other contractually agreed upon objectives subsequent to the date of acquisition. As of the acquisition date, contingent consideration is recorded at fair value as determined through the use of an appropriate fair value model, depending on the nature of the arrangement. The models could involve the estimation of future subsidiary performance, probability of likelihood, projected cash flows, weighted average
discount rates, and expected long-term growth rates. The fair value is measured subsequent to the acquisition date at least annually and any changes are recorded within cost and operating expenses within our consolidated statement of income until the contingent consideration is settled. Changes in either the growth rates, expected probabilities, related earnings, or the discount rate could result in a material change to the amount of the contingent consideration accrued.
Accounts Receivable
We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers and adjust credit limits based upon payment history and current credit worthiness, as determined by a review of current credit information. We continuously monitor collections from our customers and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based upon historical experience and any specific customer collection issues that have been identified. While such credit losses have historically been within management's expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates that have been experienced in the past. Our five largest customer balances comprise 24% of our accounts receivable balance as of February 28, 2022. A significant change in the liquidity or financial position of any one of these customers could have a material adverse impact on the collectability of accounts receivable and our results of operations.
On March 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” which did not have a material impact on our financial statements. Our financial instruments consist of trade receivables arising from revenue transactions in the ordinary course of business. We extend credit to customers based on pre-defined criteria and trade receivables are generally due within 30 to 60 days.
Inventory
We value our inventory at the lower of the actual cost to purchase or the net realizable value of the inventory. Net realizable value is defined as estimated selling prices, less cost of completion, disposal, and transportation. We regularly review inventory quantities on-hand and record a provision in cost of sales for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on selling prices, indications from customers based upon current price negotiations, and purchase orders. The cost of the inventory is determined primarily on a weighted moving average basis, with a portion valued at standard cost, which approximates actual costs on the first in, first out basis. Our industry is characterized by rapid technological change and frequent new product introductions that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on-hand. In addition, and as necessary, specific reserves for future known or anticipated events may be established.
Estimates of excess and obsolete inventory may prove to be inaccurate, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for excess and obsolete inventory. Although we make every effort to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the carrying value of inventory and our results of operations.
Intangible Asset Impairments
As of February 28, 2022, intangible assets totaled $101,450. Management makes estimates and assumptions in preparing the consolidated financial statements for which actual results will emerge over long periods of time. These estimates and assumptions are closely monitored by management and periodically adjusted as circumstances warrant. For instance, the expected lives of indefinite-lived intangible assets may be shortened or an impairment recorded based upon a change in the expected use of the asset or performance of the related asset group. At the present time, management intends to continue the development, marketing and selling of products associated with its intangible assets, and there are no known restrictions on the continuation of their use.
In connection with the annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, the Company determined that one of its trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment was impaired. The impairment was the result of shortfalls in sales due to reduced demand of the product category. As a result, an impairment charge of $1,300 was recorded for the year ended February 28, 2021 (see Note 1(k)). Related long-lived assets were tested for recoverability and determined to be recoverable and therefore no additional impairments related to long-lived assets were recorded.
In connection with the annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that several of its indefinite-lived trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment, were impaired. The impairments were the result of the Company being unable to secure product placement into customer stores, anticipated shortfalls in sales due to economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced demand from a large traditional brick-and-mortar customer, along with continued declines in the German economy. As a result, several indefinite-lived tradenames in the Consumer Electronics segment were impaired resulting in impairment charges of $2,828 recorded for the year ended February 29, 2020 (see Note 1(k)). Related long-lived assets were tested for recoverability and determined to be recoverable and therefore no additional impairments related to long-lived assets were recorded in the Consumer Electronics segment.
In the Biometrics segment, in connection with the annual impairment test for Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that its indefinite-lived trademark was impaired. The impairment of the trademark was the result of lack of customer acceptance of the related technology, lower than anticipated results, adjusted expectations for demand and anticipated delays of product deployment with target customers due to economic uncertainty given the COVID-19 pandemic. Related long-lived assets in the Biometrics segment were tested for recoverability and determined not to be recoverable. The fair value of the long-lived assets that were not recoverable were estimated, and when compared to their carrying value, were determined to also be impaired. As a result, total impairments in the Biometrics segment of $27,402 for indefinite-lived and definite-lived intangible assets were recorded for the year ended February 29, 2020 (see Note 1 (k)).
The combined impairment charges for both the Consumer Electronics segment and the Biometrics segment aggregated $30,230 for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020.
Approximately 38.2% of our indefinite-lived trademarks ($24,079) are at risk of impairment as of February 28, 2022. When testing indefinite-lived assets for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform the quantitative impairment test; otherwise, no further analysis is required. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider various factors, including macroeconomic conditions, relevant industry and market trends, cost factors, overall financial performance, other entity-specific events, and events affecting the indefinite-lived asset that could indicate a potential change in the fair value of our indefinite-lived assets. We also consider the specific future outlook for the indefinite-lived asset. We may also elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. The Company uses an income approach, based on the relief from royalty method, to value indefinite-lived trademarks as part of its quantitative impairment test. This impairment test involves the use of accounting estimates and assumptions, changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. The critical assumptions in the discounted cash flow model include revenues, long-term growth rates, royalty rates, and discount rates. Management exercises judgment in developing these assumptions. Certain of these assumptions are based upon industry projections, facts specific to the trademarks and consideration of our long-term view for the trademark and the markets we operate in. If we were to experience sales declines, a significant change in operating margins which may impact estimated royalty rates, an increase in our discount rates, and/or a decrease in our projected long-term growth rates, there would be an increased risk of impairment of these indefinite-lived trademarks.
The cost of other intangible assets with definite lives and long-lived assets are amortized on an accelerated or straight-line basis over their respective lives. Management has determined that the current lives of these assets are appropriate.
Long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles are reviewed for impairment in accordance with ASC 360 whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of the assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying value of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying value of these assets are not recoverable on an undiscounted basis, they are then compared to their estimated fair market value. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets.
Voxx’s goodwill totaled $74,320 as of February 28, 2022. Goodwill is tested for impairment as of the last day of each fiscal year at the reporting unit level. When testing goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform the quantitative impairment test; otherwise, no further analysis is required. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider various qualitative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, relevant industry and market trends, cost factors, overall financial performance, other entity-specific events, and events affecting the reporting unit that could indicate a potential change in fair value of our reporting unit or the composition of its carrying values. We also consider the specific future outlook for the reporting unit. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and estimation of the fair value of each reporting unit. Based on the Company's goodwill impairment assessment, all the reporting units with goodwill had estimated fair values as of February 28, 2022 that exceeded their carrying values. As a result of the annual assessment, no impairment charges were recorded related to goodwill during Fiscal 2022, Fiscal 2021, or Fiscal 2020.
Goodwill allocated to our Klipsch, Invision, Rosen, VSM, DEI, and Onkyo reporting units was 62.6% ($46,533), 9.9% ($7,372), 1.2% ($880), 0.8% ($572), 2.2% ($1,600), and 23.4% ($17,363), respectively. The fair values of the Klipsch, Invision, DEI, and Onkyo reporting units are greater than their carrying values by approximately 53.4% ($26,126), 76.1% ($7,286), 54.7% ($12,022) and 45.7% ($3,228), respectively, as of February 28, 2022. The quantitative assessment utilizes either an income approach, a market approach, or a combination of these approaches to determine the fair value of its reporting units. These approaches have a degree of uncertainty. The income approach employs a discounted cash flow model to value the reporting unit as part of its impairment test. This impairment test involves the use of accounting estimates and assumptions, changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. The critical assumptions in the discounted cash flow model are revenues, operating margins, working capital and a discount rate (developed using a weighted average cost of capital analysis). Management exercises judgment in developing these assumptions. Certain of these assumptions are based upon industry projections, facts specific to the reporting unit, market participant assumptions and data, and consideration of our long-term view for the reporting unit and the markets we operate in. The market approach employs market multiples from guideline public companies operating in our industry. Estimates of fair value are derived by applying multiples based on revenue and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”) adjusted for size and performance metrics relative to peer companies. If the Klipsch reporting unit were to experience sales declines, sustained pricing pressures, unfavorable operating margins, lack of new product acceptance by consumers, changes in consumer trends and preferred shopping channels, less than anticipated results for the holiday season, a change in the peer group or performance of the peer companies, an increase to the discount rate, and/or a decrease in our projected long-term growth rates used in the discounted cash flow model, there would be an increased risk of goodwill impairment for the Klipsch reporting unit. If the Invision reporting unit experienced an increase to the discount rate, a lack or delay in new product acceptance, cancellation, or reduction in projected volumes from OEM customers, or a change in projected long-term growth rates used in the discounted cash flow model, there would be an increased risk of goodwill impairment for the Invision reporting unit. If the Rosen, VSM, DEI, and Onkyo reporting units experienced an increase to the discount rate, sales declines, changes in consumer trends, or increases in cost factors, there would be an increased risk of goodwill impairment for the Rosen, VSM, and DEI reporting units.
Warranties
We offer warranties of various lengths depending upon the specific product. Our standard warranties require us to repair or replace defective product returned by both end users and customers during such warranty period at no cost. We do not sell extended warranties. We record an estimate for warranty related costs in cost of sales, based upon historical experience of actual warranty claims and current information on repair costs and contract terms with certain manufacturers. While warranty costs have historically been within expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same warranty return rates or repair costs that have been experienced in the past. A significant increase in product return rates, or a significant increase in the costs to repair products, could have a material adverse impact on our operating results.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the guidance issued under Statement ASC 740, "Income Taxes" (“ASC 740”) with consideration for uncertain tax positions. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount of future tax benefit that is more likely than not to be realized.
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying values of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all positive and negative evidence including the results of recent operations, scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled (see Note 8). The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities from a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued under ASC 740, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company provides loss contingencies for federal, state, and international tax matters relating to potential tax examination issues, planning initiatives and compliance responsibilities. The development of these reserves requires judgments about tax issues, potential outcomes, and timing, which if different, may materially impact the Company's financial condition and results of operations. The Company classifies interest and penalties associated with income taxes as a component of Income tax expense (benefit) on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive (Loss) Income.
Results of Operations
Included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K are the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021 and the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive (Loss) Income, Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity and Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended February 28, 2022, February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020. In order to provide the reader meaningful comparisons, the following analysis provides comparisons of the audited year ended February 28, 2022 with the audited year ended February 28, 2021, and the audited year ended February 28, 2021 with the audited year ended February 29, 2020. We analyze and explain the differences between periods in the specific line items of the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive (Loss) Income.
Year Ended February 28, 2022 Compared to the Years Ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020
Continuing Operations
The tables presented in this section set forth, for the periods indicated, certain Statement of Operations data for the years ended February 28, 2022 ("Fiscal 2022"), February 28, 2021 ("Fiscal 2021") and February 29, 2020 ("Fiscal 2020").
Net Sales
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Automotive Electronics sales, which include both OEM and aftermarket automotive electronics, represented 31.5% of the net sales for the year ended February 28, 2022, compared to 29.1% in the prior year and increased $36,691 for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to the prior year. The primary driver of the sales increase in this segment was sales of aftermarket security products related to the Company’s DEI subsidiary, established in connection with the Company’s acquisition in July 2020. These sales increased approximately $18,600 for the year ended February 28, 2022 to a total of approximately $66,700, as a result of twelve full months of sales included for Fiscal 2022 as compared to five months during the comparable Fiscal 2021 year. The Company’s OEM rear seat entertainment sales experienced a net increase of approximately $13,300 during the year ended February 28, 2022, primarily as a result of the start of new rear seat entertainment programs with Stellantis, Ford, and Nissan that were not present in the prior year. This was offset by a decline in sales for one of the Company’s rear-seat entertainment programs that ended during Fiscal 2022, as well as delays resulting from the global chip shortage. Sales of OEM automotive safety electronics also increased approximately $4,900 for the year ended February 28, 2022, as a result of rebounding sales following the COVID-19 shut-downs of automotive manufacturers. In addition, the Company’s aftermarket security products, which include aftermarket remote starts, and aftermarket rear seat entertainment products increased by approximately $1,300 and $1,100, respectively, for the year ended February 28, 2022, due to rebounding sales following the prior year COVID-19 shut-downs, as well as due to current year component shortages that caused some customers to purchase product earlier in order to avoid future stock outages. Finally, sales of aftermarket accessory products increased approximately $1,100 for the year ended February 28, 2022 due to the successful launch of new soundbars for club cars during the second quarter of the fiscal year. As an offset to these increases, the Company experienced a decrease in sales of satellite radio products during the year ended February 28, 2022 of approximately $2,200, as a result of inventory shortages, which have negatively affected the Company’s ability to fulfill orders. Sales of OEM security products also declined approximately $2,000 as a result of chip shortages and the end of one if the Company’s customer remote start programs. Finally, the Company experienced a decline in sales of aftermarket safety products of approximately $1,100 due primarily to low inventories of vehicles in which these products are generally installed.
Consumer Electronics sales represented 68.2% of net sales for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to 70.7% in the prior year and increased $35,662 for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to the year ended February 28, 2021. The Company’s 11TC subsidiary contributed to an increase in sales of approximately $45,700 for the year ended February 28, 2022 to a total of approximately $59,400. 11TC began selling Onkyo and Pioneer products through distribution agreements during the third quarter of Fiscal 2021 and during the third quarter of Fiscal 2022, the Company completed an acquisition of certain assets of the Onkyo Home Entertainment business with its joint venture partner, resulting in the establishment of the Company’s Onkyo subsidiary. Sales of Onkyo and Pioneer products under the distribution agreements were only present for three months during the prior year period. Within Europe, the Company experienced net increases in its premium audio product and accessories sales of approximately $3,800 as a result of improved online sales, improved export business sales, and better product mix, as well as due to the partial lifting of COVID-19 restrictions during the year ended February 28, 2022, although some restrictions were still noted to be in place during Fiscal 2022. This was offset by sales declines resulting from the absence of trade shows and the loss of certain customer connections due to remaining COVID-19 restrictions that have prevented in-person sales and meetings. The Company also experienced improvements of approximately $1,700 related to wireless accessory speakers during the year ended February 28, 2022, due to the rebound in sales following nationwide COVID-19 brick and mortar business closures and delayed customer orders during the year ended February 28, 2021. Offsetting these increases, the Company experienced declining sales of accessory products, which include hook-up and reception products, totaling approximately $9,600 during the year ended February 28, 2022, as several of these products saw an increase during the comparable prior year period due to the significant number of people working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic. During Fiscal 2022, sales of these products have returned to pre-COVID levels. Additionally, sales of premium wireless speaker products decreased approximately $4,900 during the year ended February 28, 2022 primarily as a result of chip shortages that have caused product backorders, vendor delays, and shipping container and vessel shortages, as well as due to large load in sales of speaker products at warehouse club channels during the year ended February 28, 2021 that did not repeat in the current year. Finally, sales of premium mobility products decreased approximately $2,100 due to many discounted, end of life products sold during Fiscal 2022 in comparison to the prior year when these products were
newer to the market and selling at higher prices. New lines of mobility products have been delayed as a result of product, vendor, and shipping delays.
Biometrics represented 0.1% of our net sales for both of the years ended February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021 and sales increased in the segment by $46 for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to the prior year. Sales for the year ended February 28, 2022 have increased due to product mix, including sales of the NIXT product, which the Company began selling during the second half of Fiscal 2021. The NIXT product can be optionally fitted with iTEMP, a product that can take an individual’s temperature before allowing iris access. During Fiscal 2022, the Company has also begun selling NIXT, iTemp, and NEXT products under the distribution agreement signed with GalvanEyes LLC in April 2021.
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Automotive Electronics sales, which include both OEM and aftermarket automotive electronics, represented 29.1% of the net sales for the year ended February 28, 2021, compared to 28.9% in the prior year. Sales in this segment increased $49,749 for the year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to the prior year. The primary driver of sales increases in this segment was sales of OEM and aftermarket products related to the Company’s VSM and DEI subsidiaries, established in connection with the Company’s acquisitions in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively. Sales from these two new subsidiaries totaled approximately $71,000 and comprised approximately 43% of the segment’s sales for the year ended February 28, 2021. In the prior year, the Company’s VSM subsidiary contributed approximately $2,300 of sales to the Automotive Electronics segment. The Company also saw an increase in sales of its aftermarket security and remote start products of approximately $3,600 during the year ended February 28, 2021, partly due to a boost in demand following business re-openings after the COVID-19 shut-downs, as purchases could not be made by customers during the shutdowns. Offsetting these increases, the segment experienced sales declines in certain product lines during the year ended February 28, 2021 related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as certain other factors. The Company experienced a net decrease in sales of OEM rear seat entertainment products totaling approximately $10,300 due to several automotive manufacturing plant shut-downs beginning in March 2020 as a result of COVID-19, including Ford, GM, FCA, and Subaru. Many plants began to gradually re-open during the second quarter of our fiscal year, and while some of the programs have begun to ramp up production again, others have yet to return to pre-COVID levels, thus negatively impacting sales for the year. Additionally, OEM rear seat entertainment sales were negatively impacted during the year ended February 28, 2021 by the cancellation of a program with one of the Company’s larger customers that had been in production during the prior year. This was partially offset by the successful launch of a new program with a customer in October 2020. The Company’s OEM remote start sales decreased approximately $6,200 during the year ended February 28, 2021 as a result of an increase in the use of Tier 1 factory installed remote start products by many automotive manufacturers (which the Company does not sell) over accessory level remote starts. This has negatively impacted the Company’s sales to certain of its OEM remote start customers. Sales of aftermarket rear seat entertainment products also decreased during the year ended February 28, 2021 by approximately $2,700 due to the COVID-19 related shutdowns of car dealerships and other brick and mortar businesses during the first quarter of the year, followed by stock-outages of several products, which continued to negatively impact sales through the remainder of the fiscal year. Finally, satellite radio fulfillment sales decreased approximately $900 during the year ended February 28, 2021 both as a result of business shut-downs during COVID-19, as well as due to the fact that most new vehicles include this product as a standard option.
Consumer Electronics sales represented 70.7% of net sales for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to 70.8% in the prior year. Sales increased $118,588 for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to the prior year due primarily to the positive sales and promotion of several of the Company’s premium audio products. During Fiscal 2021, the Company experienced greater consumer demand and achieved market share growth in its premium home theater, subwoofer, and premium wireless categories, launching a new premium wireless computer speaker system and selling many of its products through warehouse club channels, as well as through online platforms, which resulted in an increase of approximately $118,400 in sales for the year ended February 28, 2021. The Company’s newly formed subsidiary, 11 Trading Company LLC, also began selling Onkyo and Pioneer products through new distribution agreements during the third quarter of the fiscal year, contributing to an increase of approximately $13,700 in sales for the year ended February 28, 2021. Within Europe, the Company experienced stronger online sales during year ended February 28, 2021 of approximately $6,300 due to many consumers shopping from home during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as an increase in sales in its Do It Yourself (“DIY”) line of products, a new sales channel of discount retailers, and a shift in focus of premium audio products in Europe
from low margin to traditional home theater products. Offsetting these sales increases were decreases in sales related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other factors. The Company experienced decreases in sales of approximately $12,200 in certain consumer electronic and accessory products for the year ended February 28, 2021, such as reception products, remotes, wireless speakers, and other power products, primarily due to nationwide brick and mortar business closures and delayed customer orders related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as due to the Company’s continuing rationalization of SKUs for certain of these products, with the goal of limiting sales of lower margin products. There was also a decrease in sales of the Company’s premium commercial speaker products of approximately $3,100 due to the shut-down of cinemas during the pandemic. Additionally, the Company experienced a decrease in sales of its motion products during the year ended February 28, 2021 of approximately $2,700, as one of the Company’s healthcare programs ended during the fiscal year, and there was a decrease in sales of smart home security products of approximately $800, as the Company began exiting this category during Fiscal 2020. Finally, product sales in the Company’s rest of world locations declined approximately $700 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic due to overseas lockdowns and customer order delays and cancellations.
Biometrics represented 0.1% of our net sales for both of the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 and sales increased in the segment by $375 for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to the prior year. This segment experienced an increase in product sales for the year ended February 28, 2021 due to increased sales of its EXT outdoor perimeter access product, and the updated version of its Nano NXT perimeter access product, both of which launched in the second quarter of Fiscal 2020. Additionally, the Company began selling its NIXT product during the year ended February 28, 2021, which can be optionally fitted with iTEMP, a product that can take an individual’s temperature before allowing iris access.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin Percentage
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Gross margins in the Automotive Electronics segment decreased 40 basis points for the year ended February 28, 2022. The increased cost of materials and shipping, as well as increases in tariffs included in cost of goods sold, have negatively affected margins during the year ended February 28, 2022 for such items as OEM rear seat entertainment, OEM and aftermarket automotive safety products, and aftermarket accessory products, which the Company has been actively working to mitigate through a combination of sales price adjustments and other sourcing strategies, as such supply chain issues are expected to continue into Fiscal 2023. Additionally, certain new OEM rear seat entertainment products that began selling during the year ended February 28, 2022, and that have positively contributed to sales during the year, have generated lower margins than are normally achieved in this segment. Offsetting these negative margin impacts, sales of aftermarket security products related to the Company’s DEI subsidiary, whose products have higher profit margins than those typically achieved by the segment, have contributed positively to margins during the year ended February 28, 2022. Sales from DEI were present in the prior year period for only five months, as it was established in July 2020, and therefore these sales increased significantly for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared the prior year. The decrease in sales of satellite radio products for the year ended February 28, 2022, which typically generate lower margins for the Company, also contributed positively to margins overall.
Gross margins in the Consumer Electronics segment decreased 180 basis points for the year ended February 28, 2022 compared to the prior year. The primary driver of the decline during the year ended February 28, 2022 has
been significant increases to container costs and surcharges affecting cost of sales for many of the products within the segment, which the Company is actively working to mitigate through pricing adjustments and other sourcing strategies, as such supply chain issues are expected to continue into Fiscal 2023. Offsetting these negative margin impacts, sales from the Company’s 11 Trading Company subsidiary positively impacted margins for the year, as these sales were present for only three months of the prior year comparable period and have therefore increased significantly for the year ended February 28, 2022. In addition, the Company saw declines in sales of certain of its premium speaker products sold through warehouse club channels during the year ended February 29, 2022. As these products have been sold at lower margins than those typically associated with the Company’s premium audio products, the decline in sales have contributed positively to the segment’s margins for the year ended February 28, 2022.
Gross margins in the Biometrics segment improved for the year ended February 28, 2022 compared to the prior year. During the year ended February 28, 2021, the Company reduced pricing on many products, which helped generate sales in the prior year, but resulted in lower margins for the segment. Additionally, the Company incurred more tooling and effective repair costs during the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to the current year, as well as incurred inventory obsolescence charges for certain products, which contributed negatively to margins in the prior year.
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Gross margins in the Automotive Electronics segment increased 370 basis points for the year ended February 28, 2021. The primary driver of the margin increases in this segment has been sales of OEM and aftermarket products related to the Company’s VSM and DEI subsidiaries, whose products have higher profit margins than those typically achieved by the segment. DEI’s sales were not present in the prior year, and VSM contributed to sales for one month of Fiscal 2020, or 2% of the segment’s sales. The increase in sales of higher margin aftermarket remote start and security products also contributed positively to the segment’s margins during the year ended February 28, 2021. Offsetting these positive impacts, the decline in sales of higher margin OEM security and remote start products during the year ended February 28, 2021, due to the shift in demand from accessory level remote starts to production level, factory installed remote starts, caused a decline in margins. In addition, there was a decline in aftermarket headrest sales during the year ended February 28, 2021, which typically generate higher margins for the segment and thus had a negative impact on margins for the year.
Gross margins in the Consumer Electronics segment decreased 120 basis points for the year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the prior year. Margin declines during the year ended February 28, 2021 were primarily driven by the Company’s newest line of premium wireless computer speakers, as well as other premium audio products sold through warehouse club channels, which have contributed positively to sales, but have been sold at lower margins than those typically associated with the Company’s premium wireless speaker products. The Company’s premium headphone margins also negatively impacted the segment’s overall margins during the year ended February 28, 2021 due to close out sales of certain older products in preparation for the launch of its newest line of wireless earbuds, which contributed to an increase in sales of these product, but a decline in the margins. Additionally, although sales in Europe have increased during the year ended February 28, 2021, the increase in sales generated from a new sales channel of discount retail customers has generated lower margins and has had a negative impact on the year. As an offset to these negative impacts, the segment has experienced margin increases during the year ended February 28, 2021 due to factors including a shift in focus of premium audio products in Europe from low margin to traditional home theater products. Additionally, while the Company experienced decreases in sales of certain product lines during the year ended February 28, 2021, such as reception products and remotes, the margins earned on these products improved as compared to the prior year due to the movement of production out of China.
Gross margins in the Biometrics segment improved for the year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase in margins for the year ended February 28, 2021 was primarily a result of prior year events that negatively impacted the segment’s margins in Fiscal 2020. Certain tooling and defective repair costs incurred during the year ended February 29, 2020, as well as the provision of beta samples to certain customers at no cost during the prior year, negatively impacted Fiscal 2020 margins. A large sale made at a loss during the year ended February 29, 2020 also caused lower margins in the prior year. During the year ended February 28, 2021, the Company provided more onsite and remote support to customers, which generates higher margins for the segment. Offsetting these positive margin impacts for the year ended February 28, 2021 has been the reduction in pricing on certain products, which has helped to drive higher sales in Fiscal 2021 but has resulted in lower margins for the segment. In addition,
the release of inventory reserves in the prior year had a positive impact on the segment’s gross margin in Fiscal 2020, thus negatively impacting the current year margin comparisons.
Operating Expenses
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
The Company experienced an overall increase in operating expenses of $25,486 for Fiscal 2022 as compared to Fiscal 2021.
For the year ended February 28, 2022, selling expenses increased $6,721. This increase was primarily attributable to higher salary expenses during the year ended February 28, 2022, as compared to the prior year. Salary and related payroll expenses increased approximately $4,000 due primarily to the additional headcount created by the September 2021 and July 2020 acquisitions resulting in the establishment of the Company’s Onkyo and DEI subsidiaries, respectively, as well as new hires related to the 11 Trading Company and Australia PAC subsidiaries established in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021 and first quarter of Fiscal 2022, respectively. Salary expense also increased as a result of the absence of COVID-19 related furloughs that were present in the comparable prior year. Advertising expenses and web fees increased approximately $1,600 for the year ended February 28, 2022, due to increased advertising, promotions, and social media presence in response to higher online traffic and sales, the lifting of COVID-19 related cost cutting measures, as well as due to the increased price of web advertising compared to the prior year. Credit card fees increased approximately $700 during the year ended February 28, 2022, due primarily to sales generated by the Company’s new DEI subsidiary, as its telematic subscription sales are paid by customers through credit card transactions. Additionally, a larger number of customers have gradually begun using credit cards to pay for orders than in prior periods across the entire Company. The Company also saw an increase in commission expense of approximately $500, as a result of the increase in the Company’s sales for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to prior year. Finally, the Company experienced an increase in travel expenses for the year ended February 28, 2022 of approximately $500 due to the lifting of some of the Company’s COVID-19 related restrictions which have allowed salesmen to begin traveling to customer sites again. Offsetting these increases in selling expenses for the year ended February 28, 2022 was a decrease in trade show expenses of approximately $500, as some trade shows have continued to be either cancelled or held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic and only began to return to in person attendance during the second half of Fiscal 2022, where the Company had lower spending and smaller booths for the first year post-COVID.
General and administrative expenses increased $6,157 during the year ended February 28, 2022, as compared to the prior year period. Professional fees increased approximately $3,100 for the year ended February 28, 2022 due to increased litigation fees related primarily to an arbitration case, as well as consulting fees related to the EyeLock distribution agreement with GalvanEyes LLC, and legal and professional fees related to the Company’s newest 11 Trading Company and Australia PAC subsidiaries established in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021 and the first quarter of Fiscal 2022, respectively. Professional fees were also higher during the year ended February 28, 2022, due to the lifting of many COVID-19 related restrictions, as both the Company and many of its professional service providers had temporary office closures during the year ended February 28, 2021, or provided fee concessions as a result of the pandemic that did not repeat in the current year. Office and occupancy expenses increased approximately $1,700 in total for the year ended February 28, 2022, due to costs related to the Company’s new Onkyo subsidiary resulting from the September 2021 acquisition and a full year of DEI expenses resulting from the July 2020 acquisition. The Company has also returned to normal operations after the lifting of COVID-19 related restrictions, with all of the Company’s locations open and operating, resulting in further increases to office and
occupancy costs. Depreciation and amortization expense also increased approximately $1,400 due to additional expense related to the Company’s Onkyo subsidiary and a full year of expense related to DEI. Additionally, bad debt expense increased approximately $500 for the year ended February 28, 2022 due primarily to the prior year recovery of a receivable balance that did not recur in the current year. Finally, insurance expense, as well as fees related to taxes and licensing both increased approximately $200 each during the year ended February 28, 2022 due to the establishment of Company’s Onkyo subsidiary in September 2021, as well as the DEI, 11 Trading Company, and PAC Australia subsidiaries, and additional licenses obtained and higher insurance premiums incurred related to cyber security. As an offset to these increases in general and administrative expense, the Company experienced a decrease in salary and related payroll expenses of approximately $1,200 during the year ended February 28, 2022, due primarily to lower bonus accruals as compared to the prior year based on Company profitability.
Engineering and technical support expenses increased $10,643 for the year ended February 28, 2022, as compared to the prior year period. The Company experienced an increase in direct labor and related payroll tax expense of approximately $6,400 for the year ended February 28, 2022, as a result of additional headcount created by the July 2020 and September 2021 acquisitions resulting in the establishment of the Company’s DEI and Onkyo subsidiaries, respectively, as well as due to higher reimbursement of engineering labor expense in the prior year, and the absence of Company-wide furloughs that were in place during the year ended February 28, 2021. The Company also experienced a net increase in research and development expense of approximately $4,200 for the year ended February 28, 2022, primarily as a result of the Company’s product development projects related to its new Onkyo subsidiary in the Consumer Electronics segment, and within the Automotive Electronics segment related to projects for Stellantis and Ford, as well as due to additional headcount within the Biometrics segment. This was offset by decreases related to certain Consumer Electronics projects in development during the prior year that have been completed.
Acquisition costs increased $3,265 for the year ended February 28, 2022, as compared to the prior year. During the year ended February 28, 2022, acquisition costs incurred were related to consulting and due diligence fees for the asset purchase agreement signed with Onkyo Home Entertainment Corporation and the joint venture created with Sharp Corporation to complete the transaction. This transaction was completed on September 8, 2021. In the prior year, acquisition costs incurred were related to the Company’s VSHC and DEI acquisitions, completed in January 2020 and July 2020, respectively.
In connection with its annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, the Company determined that one of its trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment was impaired. The impairment was the result of shortfalls in sales due to reduced demand of the product category. As a result, an impairment charge of $1,300 was recorded for the year ended February 28, 2021.
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
The Company experienced an overall decrease in operating expenses of $24,011 for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020; however, in the absence of intangible asset impairment charges in both years, operating expenses would have increased by $4,919.
Selling expenses have increased $4,467 for the year ended February 28, 2021. This increase was primarily due to increased commission expense of approximately $4,600 as a result of higher sales for the fiscal year. A net increase in salary expense of approximately $1,200 was due to the additional headcount created by acquisitions resulting in the establishment of the VSM and DEI subsidiaries in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively, as well as additional hires related to the Company’s new 11 Trading Company subsidiary related to distribution agreements for Onkyo and Pioneer products. This was slightly offset by the furlough of certain employees during the fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Web advertising and platform expenses increased approximately $1,800 for the year ended February 28, 2021 due to an increase in online traffic, with many consumers working and shopping from home during the mandatory quarantines and business shutdowns throughout the country as a result of the pandemic. Additionally, credit card fees increased approximately $600 primarily as a result of the Company’s DEI subsidiary, established in connection with the Company’s acquisition in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, whose subscription sales are transacted online. Offsetting these increases in selling expenses for the year ended February 28, 2021 were decreases due to factors directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in the temporary shut-down of many brick and mortar stores and mandatory quarantine orders during the first quarter of our Fiscal 2021 year, with phased re-openings taking place beginning in the second quarter through the remainder of our fiscal year. The elimination of all non-essential travel Company-wide resulted in a
decrease in travel and entertainment expenses of approximately $1,700. Additionally, trade show expenses decreased approximately $1,800 as all events were either cancelled or held virtually due to COVID-19.
General and administrative expenses increased $925 during the year ended February 28, 2021. Increases in general and administrative expenses were due in part to a net increase in salary expense of approximately $3,300 during the fiscal year. Salary increases were due to higher bonus accruals as a result of the positive performance of the Company for the year ended February 28, 2021, as well as due to increased headcount resulting from the Company’s new DEI and VSM subsidiaries established in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively. This was offset by the furlough of certain employees during the year ended February 28, 2021, as well as due to the prior year grant of 200,000 fully vested shares of Class A Common Stock to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer in accordance with his employment agreement, which resulted in compensation expense of approximately $800 for the year ended February 29, 2020 that did not repeat in the current fiscal year. Professional fees also increased by approximately $1,000 as a result of certain professional services provided in connection with the establishment of the Company’s new DEI and VSM subsidiaries, and insurance expense increased approximately $400 as a result of the deductible related to an IT security incident in the second quarter of the fiscal year, as well as due to the Company’s new VSM, DEI, and 11 Trading Company LLC subsidiaries. As an offset to these general and administrative expense increases were decreases related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other factors. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased approximately $1,300, net, for the year ended February 28, 2021 as a result of the impairment of certain definite-lived intangible assets at EyeLock in Fiscal 2020, which reduced the amortizable base of these assets. This was offset by increases in depreciation and amortization expense related to newly acquired tangible and intangible assets within the VSM and DEI subsidiaries. Bad debt expense decreased approximately $1,100 as a result of the prior year reserves of certain customers who filed bankruptcy, which did not repeat in the current year, as well as due to the recovery of certain balances during the year ended February 28, 2021 that were previously written off. The elimination of all non-essential travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in travel and entertainment expense decreases of approximately $900 for the year ended February 28, 2021. Additionally, office and occupancy expenses decreased approximately $700 due to lower overhead, as certain of the Company’s offices were shut down during the first and second quarters of the fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and many re-opened offices have remained at a reduced capacity through the remainder of the fiscal year.
Engineering and technical support expenses for the year ended February 28, 2021 declined $705 as compared to the prior year. For the year ended February 28, 2021, furloughs and headcount reductions at many of the Company’s locations related to the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in lower labor expenses of approximately $3,000. The elimination of all non-essential travel as a result of the pandemic also resulted in travel and entertainment expense decreases of approximately $500. These decreases were offset by increases in labor of approximately $2,600 as a result of the Company’s new VSM and DEI subsidiaries established in connection with the Company’s acquisitions in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively.
Acquisition costs were $287 for the year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to $55 for the year ended February 29, 2020. During the year ended February 28, 2021, acquisition costs incurred were related to legal and consulting fees related to the Company’s DEI acquisition, completed in July 2020, as well as fees related to the VSHC acquisition that was completed in January 2020. For the year ended February 29, 2020, acquisition costs were related solely to the Company’s January 2020 VSHC acquisition.
In connection with its annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, the Company determined that one of its trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment was impaired. The impairment was the result of shortfalls in sales due to reduced demand of the product category. As a result, an impairment charge of $1,300 was recorded for the year ended February 28, 2021.
In connection with its annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that several of its indefinite-lived intangible assets within the Consumer Electronics segment, as well as certain indefinite-lived and definite-lived intangible assets within the Biometrics segment were impaired. The impairments within the Consumer Electronics segment were the result of the Company being unable to secure product placement into customer stores, anticipated shortfalls in sales due to economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced demand from a large traditional brick-and-mortar customer, along with continued declines in the German economy. The impairments within the Biometrics segment were the result of lack of customer acceptance of the related technology, lower than anticipated results, adjusted expectations for demand, and anticipated delays of product deployment with target customers due to economic uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company recorded total impairment charges of $30,230 for the year ended February 29, 2020 related to these impairments.
Other (Expense)Income
Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Interest and bank charges represent interest expense and fees related to the Company's bank obligations, supply chain financing and factoring agreements, interest related to finance leases, and amortization of debt issuance costs. During the first quarter of Fiscal 2021, the Company made a precautionary borrowing from the Credit Facility of $20,000 related to COVID-19 pandemic concerns. This balance was repaid during the third quarter of Fiscal 2021 and there has been no balance outstanding during the year ended February 28, 2022. This resulted in a decrease in interest expense related to the Credit Facility of $326 for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to the prior year. In addition, interest expense was lower during the year ended February 28, 2022 due to the amendment of the Company’s Credit Facility in April 2021, which resulted in a decrease in amortization of debt issuance costs of $298 for the year ended February 28, 2022 as compared to the prior year. As an offset to these decreases in interest expense, the Company’s new Onkyo subsidiary entered into a shareholder loan payable to the Company’s joint venture partner, Sharp, during the third quarter of Fiscal 2022, for which interest expense was incurred during the year ended February 28, 2022 that was not present in the prior year.
Equity in income of equity investee represents the Company's share of income from its 50% non-controlling ownership interest in ASA Electronics LLC and Subsidiaries ("ASA"). The increase in income for the year ended February 28, 2022 is due to an increase in ASA net income resulting from improved sales across all of its markets due primarily to the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions on customers and end consumers and an increase in demand for product, offset by an increase in both ocean and air freight costs.
For the year ended February 28, 2022, the Company has recorded a charge of $39,444 related to an unfavorable interim arbitration settlement award relating to a breach of contract claim brought against the Company by Seaguard Electronics LLC for a contractual arrangement entered in 2007 for the purchase of products and back-end services. The Company is reviewing its legal options and has moved in the arbitration proceeding to modify the interim award.
During the year ended February 28, 2021, a final pay-out of $42 was received representing proceeds from the Fiscal 2018 sale of the Company’s investment in a non-controlled corporation, consisting of shares of the investee’s preferred stock, as a portion of the proceeds had been held back at the time of sale. The payment was recorded as an investment gain for the year ended February 28, 2021.
Other, net includes net foreign currency gains or losses, interest income, rental income, and other miscellaneous income and expense. Other, net decreased for the year ended February 28, 2022. During the year ended February 28, 2021, the Company received proceeds from a life insurance policy in the amount of $420 related to an executive who passed away during the first quarter of Fiscal 2021, which was not present in Fiscal 2022.
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Interest and bank charges represent expenses for the Company's bank obligations and supply chain financing arrangements, interest related to finance leases, and amortization of deferred financing costs. Interest and bank charges were relatively flat comparing the year ended February 28, 2021 to the prior year. During the second half of Fiscal 2020, the Company repaid the entire outstanding balance of its asset-based lending facility in Germany, thus eliminating the interest expense related to this obligation for the year ended February 28, 2021, which was offset by interest paid on the $20,000 precautionary borrowing from the Company’s Credit Facility in Fiscal 2021, which was outstanding from April 2020 through November 2020.
Equity in income of equity investee represents the Company's share of income from its 50% non-controlling ownership interest in ASA Electronics, LLC ("ASA"). The increase in income for the year ended February 28, 2021 is due to an increase in ASA’s gross profit, lower overhead, and growth in the RV and marine markets.
On September 30, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary Voxx German Holdings Gmbh (the “Seller”), sold its real property in Pulheim, Germany to CLM S.A. RL (the “Purchaser”) for €10,920. Net proceeds received from the transaction were approximately $9,500 after transactional costs and repayment of the outstanding mortgage. Concurrently with the sale, the Seller entered into an operating lease arrangement with the Purchaser for a small portion of the real property to continue to operate its sales office in Germany. The transaction qualified for sale leaseback accounting in accordance with ASC 842 and the Company recognized a gain on the execution of the sale transaction for the year ended February 29, 2020.
During Fiscal 2018, the Company sold its investment in RxNetworks, a non-controlled corporation, consisting of shares of the investee’s preferred stock. Voxx recognized a gain during Fiscal 2018 for the sale of this investment; however, a portion of the cash proceeds were subject to a hold-back provision, which was not included in the gain recognized in Fiscal 2018. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2020, the hold-back provision expired, and the Company received additional proceeds from the sale, recording an investment gain of $775 for the year ended February 29, 2020. A final payout of $42 received in November 2020 was recorded as an investment gain for the year ended February 28, 2021. During the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2019, all of the outstanding common stock of Fathom Systems Inc., a non-controlled corporation in which Voxx was invested, was repurchased by the investee for a price per share significantly below the value when issued. This resulted in a loss on Voxx's investment in Fathom of $530 for the year ended February 28, 2019.
Other, net includes net foreign currency gains or losses, interest income, rental income, and other miscellaneous income and expense. Other, net decreased for the year ended February 28, 2021. During the year ended February 28, 2021, interest income decreased $835 primarily as a result of lower interest rates applicable to the Company’s short term money market investments and lower cash balances available for investment during the year. Additionally, the Company had foreign currency losses of $(862) for the year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to foreign currency gains of $405 for the year ended February 29, 2020.
Income Tax Provision
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under ASC 740, the effects of changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in the period in which the new legislation is enacted. The CARES Act made various tax law changes including among other things (i) increased the limitation under IRC Section 163(j) for 2019 and 2020 to permit additional expensing of interest; (ii) enacted technical correction so that qualified improvement property can be immediately expensed under IRC Section 168(k) (iii) made modifications to the federal net operating loss rules including permitting federal net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to the five preceding taxable years in order to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes, and (iv) enhanced recoverability of alternative minimum credit carryforwards. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on the income tax provision.
During Fiscal 2022, the Company recorded an income tax provision of $1,626 related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The Company's effective tax rate of (6.3)% differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to (i) an increase in valuation allowance as the Company could not conclude that all of its US deferred tax assets were realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis; (ii) permanent differences, including the non-controlling interest and a global intangible low tax income (“GILTI”) inclusion; and (iii) state and local taxes. As of February 28, 2022, the Company continued to maintain a valuation allowance against certain U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
During Fiscal 2021, the Company recorded an income tax provision of $4,272 related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The effective tax rate of 15.5% in Fiscal 2021 differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to (i) partial release of its valuation allowance as a result of recent profitability for which certain of the Company’s deferred tax assets became realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis; (ii) permanent differences, including the non-controlling interest and a global intangible low tax income (“GILTI”) inclusion; (iii) foreign derived intangible income deduction; and (iv) state and local taxes. As of February 28, 2021, the Company continued to maintain a valuation allowance against certain U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
During Fiscal 2020, the Company recorded an income tax provision of $882 related to federal, state and foreign taxes. The effective tax rate of (2.2)% in Fiscal 2020 differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to (i) current year losses for which limited tax benefit was provided; (ii) permanent differences, including the non-controlling interest and a global intangible low tax income (“GILTI”) inclusion; and (iii) an increase in the valuation allowance recorded against foreign deferred tax assets. During Fiscal 2020, the Company maintained a partial and full valuation allowance against certain U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures recognized by GAAP. EBITDA represents net (loss) income, computed in accordance with GAAP, before interest expense and bank charges, taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation expense, life insurance proceeds, certain non-recurring legal and professional fees, settlements and awards, non-recurring gains, acquisition costs, and impairment charges. Depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and impairment charges are non-cash items.
We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in this Form 10-K because we consider them to be useful and appropriate supplemental measures of our performance. Adjusted EBITDA helps us to evaluate our performance without the effects of certain GAAP calculations that may not have a direct cash impact on our current operating performance. In addition, the exclusion of certain costs or gains relating to certain events that occurred during the periods presented allows for a more meaningful comparison of our results from period-to-period. These non-GAAP measures, as we define them, are not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be assessed in isolation from, are not intended to represent, and should not be considered to be more meaningful measures than, or alternatives to, measures of operating performance as determined in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation of GAAP Net (Loss) Income Attributable to VOXX International Corporation to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
(1)
For purposes of calculating Adjusted EBITDA for the Company, interest expense, bank charges, depreciation and amortization, and intangible asset impairment charges added back to net (loss) income have been adjusted in order to exclude the minority interest portion of these expenses attributable to EyeLock LLC and Onkyo.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows, Commitments and Obligations
As of February 28, 2022, we had working capital of $126,756 which includes cash and cash equivalents of $27,788 compared with working capital of $172,543 at February 28, 2021, which included cash and cash equivalents of $59,404. The accrual of the interim arbitration award is the primary reason for the decrease in working capital. We plan to utilize our current cash position as well as collections from accounts receivable, the cash generated from our operations, when applicable, and the income on our investments to fund the current operations of the business. However, we may utilize all or a portion of current capital resources to pursue other business opportunities, including acquisitions, or to further pay down our debt. The following table summarizes our cash flow activity for all periods presented:
Net cash used in/provided by operating activities:
Operating activities used cash of $2,960 for Fiscal 2022, due to the increase in inventory, as well as due to losses incurred by EyeLock LLC. This was offset primarily by the increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and current liabilities (resulting from the interim arbitration award), and accrued sales incentives, as well as sales increases.
During Fiscal 2021, operating activities provided cash of $36,611, due to factors including sales increases, as well as increases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued sales incentives. This was offset by increases in inventory and accounts receivable, which were driven by the increases in sales during the fiscal year, as well as due to losses incurred by EyeLock LLC.
During Fiscal 2020, operating activities used cash of $1,009, due to factors including sales declines and losses incurred by EyeLock LLC, as well as decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued sales incentives. This was offset by decreases in inventory and accounts receivable, which were driven by the decreases in sales.
Net cash used in/provided by investing activities:
Investing activities used cash of $34,308 during Fiscal 2022, primarily due to the acquisition of the home audio/video business of Onkyo Home Entertainment Corporation, as well as capital expenditures.
Investing activities used cash of $13,865 during Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the acquisition of DEI in July 2020 (see Note 2), as well as capital additions made by the Company.
Investing activities used cash of $6,709 during Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the acquisition of VSM in January 2020 (see Note 2), as well as capital additions made by the Company. This was offset by the proceeds received from the sale of the Company’s real property in Pulheim, Germany (see Note 11).
Net cash used in/provided by financing activities:
Financing activities provided cash of $5,285 during Fiscal 2022, due to proceeds received from the issuance of shares and long-term debt to the non-controlling interest of the Company’s Onkyo joint venture, as well as borrowings under the Company’s Euro asset-based loan in Germany. This was offset by repayments of bank debt and finance leases, the purchase of treasury shares, the payment of withholding taxes on the net issuance of a stock award, and the payment of deferred finance fees related to the amendment of the Credit Facility in April 2021.
During Fiscal 2021, financing activities used cash of $1,940, primarily due to the repayment of the Company’s precautionary borrowing of $20,000 from the Credit Facility, payments on the Florida Mortgage, repayments of finance leases, and the payment of deferred finance fees related to the amendment of the Credit Facility in Fiscal 2021, offset by the precautionary borrowing of $20,000 made in April 2020.
During Fiscal 2020, financing activities used cash of $12,593 primarily due to the repayment of outstanding bank obligations, including the entire outstanding balance of Voxx Germany’s Euro asset-based lending facility, and the repurchase of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock.
The Company has a senior secured credit facility (the "Credit Facility") that provides for a revolving credit facility with committed availability of up to $140,000. The Credit Facility also includes a $30,000 sublimit for letters of credit and a $15,000 sublimit for swingline loans. The availability under the revolving credit line within the Credit Facility is subject to a borrowing base, which is based on eligible accounts receivable, eligible inventory and certain real estate, subject to reserves as determined by the lender, and is also limited by amounts outstanding under the Florida Mortgage (see Note 7(b)). As of February 28, 2022, there was no balance outstanding under the revolving credit facility. The availability under the revolving credit line of the Credit Facility was $127,486 as of February 28, 2022.
All amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility will mature and become due on April 19, 2026; however, it is subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The Company may prepay any amounts outstanding at any time, subject to payment of certain breakage and redeployment costs relating to LIBOR Rate Loans. The commitments under the Credit Facility may be irrevocably reduced at any time, without premium or penalty, as set forth in the Credit Facility.
Generally, the Company may designate specific borrowings under the Credit Facility as either Base Rate Loans or LIBOR Rate Loans, except that swingline loans may only be designated as Base Rate Loans. Loans under the Credit Facility designated as LIBOR Rate Loans shall bear interest at a rate equal to the then-applicable LIBOR Rate plus a range of 1.75% - 2.25%. Loans under the Credit Facility designated as Base Rate Loans shall bear interest at a rate equal to the applicable margin for Base Rate Loans of 0.75% - 1.25%, as defined in the Credit Facility.
Provided that the Company is in a Compliance Period (the period commencing on that day in which Excess Availability is less than 20% of the Maximum Revolver Amount and ending on a day in which Excess Availability is equal to or greater than 20% for any consecutive 30-day period thereafter), the Credit Facility requires compliance with a financial covenant calculated as of the last day of each month, consisting of a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio. The Credit Facility also contains covenants, subject to defined carveouts, that limit the ability of the loan parties and certain of their subsidiaries which are not loan parties to, among other things: (i) incur additional indebtedness; (ii) incur liens; (iii) merge, consolidate or dispose of a substantial portion of their business; (iv) transfer or dispose of assets; (v) change their name, organizational identification number, state or province of organization or organizational identity; (vi) make any material change in their nature of business; (vii) prepay or otherwise acquire indebtedness; (viii) cause any Change of Control; (ix) make any Restricted Junior Payment; (x) change their fiscal year or method of accounting; (xi) make advances, loans or investments; (xii) enter into or permit any transaction with an Affiliate of any Borrower or any of their Subsidiaries; (xiii) use proceeds for certain items; (xiv) issue or sell any of their stock; or (xv) consign or sell any of their inventory on certain terms. In addition, if excess availability under the Credit Facility were to fall below certain specified levels, as defined in the agreement, the lenders would have the right to assume dominion and control over the Company's cash. As of February 28, 2022, the Company was not in a Compliance Period.
The obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by a general lien on and security interest in substantially all of the assets of the borrowers and certain of the guarantors, including accounts receivable, equipment, real estate, general intangibles, and inventory. The Company has guaranteed the obligations of the borrowers under the Credit Facility.
The Company has a Euro asset-based loan facility in Germany with a credit limit of €8,000 that expires on July 31, 2023. The Company's subsidiaries Voxx German Holdings GmbH, Oehlbach Kabel GmbH, and Schwaiger GmbH are authorized to borrow funds under this facility for working capital purposes.
The Company also utilizes supply chain financing arrangements and factoring agreements from time to time as a component of its financing for working capital, which accelerates receivable collection and helps to better manage cash flow. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed from time to time to sell certain of its accounts receivable balances to banking institutions who have agreed to advance amounts equal to the net accounts receivable balances due, less a discount as set forth in the respective agreements (see Note 1(h)). The balances under these agreements are accounted for as sales of accounts receivable, as they are sold without recourse. Cash proceeds from these agreements are reflected as operating activities included in the change in accounts receivable in the Company's Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Fees incurred in connection with the agreements are recorded as interest expense by the Company.
As noted elsewhere in this report, we expect the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have an adverse effect on our business. Federal, state, and local governments have taken a variety of actions to contain the spread of COVID-19. Some jurisdictions have required restrictions, including temporary business closures, capacity limitations, and other limitations affecting our operations during Fiscal 2022. We have proactively taken steps to increase available cash including, but not limited to, utilizing existing supply chain financing agreements and amending our Credit Facility in April 2021 in order to both extend the maturity date of the facility and increase our borrowing capacity.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our future material cash requirements from contractual or other obligations at February 28, 2022:
(1)
Represents total principal payments due under finance and operating lease obligations. Total current balances (included in other current liabilities) due under finance and operating leases are $224 and $1,255, respectively, at February 28, 2022. Total long-term balances due under finance and operating leases are $78 and $3,298, respectively at February 28, 2022.
(2)
Represents amounts outstanding under the Company’s domestic Credit Facility and the VOXX Germany asset-based lending facilities at February 28, 2022.
(3)
We issue standby letters of credit to secure certain purchases and insurance requirements. These letters of credit are issued during the ordinary course of business through major domestic banks as requested by certain suppliers.
(4)
This amount represents the outstanding balance of the mortgage for our manufacturing facility in Florida and the shareholder loan payable to Sharp at February 28, 2022.
(5)
Represents the liability for an employer defined benefit pension plan covering certain eligible current and former employees of VOXX Germany.
(6)
Open purchase obligations represent inventory commitments. These obligations are not recorded in the consolidated financial statements until commitments are fulfilled and such obligations are subject to change based on negotiations with manufacturers.
We regularly review our cash funding requirements and attempt to meet those requirements through a combination of cash on hand, cash provided by operations, available borrowings under bank lines of credit and possible future public or private debt and/or equity offerings. At times, we evaluate possible acquisitions of, or investments in, businesses that are complementary to ours, which transactions may require the use of cash. We believe that our cash, other liquid assets, operating cash flows, credit arrangements, and access to equity capital markets, taken together, provides adequate resources to fund ongoing operating expenditures for the next twelve months, including the intercompany loan funding we provide to our majority owned subsidiary, EyeLock LLC. In the event that they do not, we may require additional funds in the future to support our working capital requirements, or for other purposes, and may seek to raise such additional funds through the sale of public or private equity and/or debt financings, as well as from other sources. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available in the future or that if available, such financing will be obtainable on terms favorable when required.
For further information about COVID-19, refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of Inflation and Currency Fluctuation
While it is difficult to accurately measure the impact of inflation due to the imprecise nature of the estimates required, we have experienced varying levels of inflation during the year ended February 28, 2022, resulting in part from various supply chain disruptions, the global chip shortage, increased shipping and transportation costs, increased product costs, increased labor costs in the supply chain and other disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertain economic environment. The Company has been actively working to mitigate these factors through a combination of sales price adjustments and other sourcing strategies, as such issues are expected to continue into Fiscal 2023. Severe increases in inflation could affect the global and U.S. economies and could have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Inflation did not have a material impact on our operations for the years ended February 28, 2021 or February 29, 2020. Discussion of the impact of foreign currency fluctuations is included in