Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For the purposes of the discussion in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the term Voya Financial, Inc. refers to Voya Financial, Inc. and the terms "Company," "we," "our," and "us" refer to Voya Financial, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis presents a review of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. This item should be read in its entirety and in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For discussion and analysis of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer to our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, operations and financial performance based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. See the "Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements."
Overview
We provide our principal products and services through three segments: Wealth Solutions, Investment Management and Health Solutions. Corporate includes activities not directly related to our segments and certain run-off activities that are not meaningful to our business strategy.
In general, our primary sources of revenue include fee income from managing investment portfolios for clients as well as asset management and administrative fees from certain insurance and investment products; investment income on our general account and other funds; and from insurance premiums. Our fee income derives from asset- and participant-based advisory and recordkeeping fees on our retirement products, from management and administrative fees we earn from managing client assets, and from the distribution, servicing and management of mutual funds. We generate investment income on the assets in our general account, primarily fixed income assets, that back our liabilities and surplus. We earn premiums on insurance policies, including stop-loss, group life, voluntary and disability products as well as retirement contracts. Our expenses principally consist of general business expenses, commissions and other costs of selling and servicing our products, interest credited on general account liabilities as well as insurance claims and benefits including changes in the reserves we are required to hold for anticipated future insurance benefits.
Because our fee income is generally tied to account values, our profitability is determined in part by the amount of assets we have under management, administration or advisement, which in turn depends on sales volumes to new and existing clients, net deposits from retirement plan participants, and changes in the market value of account assets. Our profitability also depends on the difference between the investment income we earn on our general account assets, or our portfolio yield, and crediting rates on client accounts. Underwriting income, principally dependent on our ability to price our insurance products at a level that enables us to earn a margin over the costs associated with providing benefits and administering those products, and to effectively manage actuarial and policyholder behavior factors, is another component of our profitability.
Profitability also depends on our ability to effectively deploy capital and utilize our tax assets. Furthermore, profitability depends on our ability to manage expenses to acquire new business, such as commissions and distribution expenses, as well as other operating costs.
Discontinued Operations
The Individual Life Transaction
On January 4, 2021, we completed a series of transactions pursuant to a Master Transaction Agreement (the “Resolution MTA”) entered into on December 18, 2019 with Resolution Life U.S. Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Resolution Life US”), pursuant to which Resolution Life US acquired Security Life of Denver Company ("SLD"), Security Life of Denver International Limited ("SLDI") and Roaring River II, Inc. ("RRII") including several subsidiaries of SLD.
The purchase price we received at the closing was based on estimated amounts and was subject to a post-close true-up mechanism pursuant to which the purchase price was adjusted based on SLD’s adjusted book value as of the closing date. In addition to cash consideration, proceeds included approximately $225 million interest in RLGH and certain other affiliates of Resolution Life US, and $123 million principal amount in surplus notes issued by SLD. In connection with the closing, $100 million was deferred in cash proceeds for a period of up to 42 months, subject to an adjustment mechanism based on certain financial contingencies affecting SLD over that period. In addition, in connection with the unwind of certain guarantee obligations affecting portions of SLD’s business, in lieu of $60 million of cash proceeds, we received approximately $60 million in additional preferred equity interests in Resolution Life US affiliates. During 2021, we completed the post-close true-up process with Resolution Life US which resulted in no material changes to loss on sale recorded upon close. Additionally, we received $100 million from Resolution Life US which was deferred at the time of close as mentioned above.
We determined that the legal entities sold and the Individual Life and Annuities businesses within these entities met the criteria to be classified as held for sale and that the sale represents a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations. Accordingly, the results of operations of the businesses sold have been presented as discontinued operations, and the assets and liabilities of the related businesses have been classified as held for sale and segregated for all periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, we recorded an estimated loss on sale, net of tax, of $1,466 million to write down the carrying value
of the businesses held for sale to estimated fair value, which was based on the estimated sales price of the Individual Life transaction (as defined above) as of December 31, 2020 less cost to sell and other adjustments in accordance with the Resolution MTA. Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes an estimated reduction to loss on sale of $12 million, net of tax. The loss on sale, net of tax as of December 31, 2021 of $1,454 million, represents the excess of the carrying value of the businesses sold over the purchase price, which equals fair value, less cost to sell. As a result of the close of the Individual Life Transaction, the net aggregate reduction in Total shareholders' equity, excluding Accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”), was $0.6 billion. The net aggregate reduction in Total shareholders’ equity, including AOCI, was $2.3 billion. This includes the impact of the cumulative loss on sale as well as the reversal of the AOCI related to the entities sold.
Refer to Reinsurance Note in our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for disclosures related to the reinsurance transactions pursuant to the Resolution MTA.
Upon the close of the Individual Life transaction, we continue to hold an insignificant number of Individual Life, and non-Wealth Solutions annuities policies which together with the businesses sold through divestment or reinsurance will be referred to as "divested businesses".
The following table summarizes the components of Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax related to the Individual Life Transaction (closed on January 4, 2021) for the periods indicated:
Trends and Uncertainties
Throughout this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"), we discuss a number of trends and uncertainties that we believe may materially affect our future liquidity, financial condition or results of operations. Where these trends or uncertainties are specific to a particular aspect of our business, we often include such a discussion under the relevant caption of this MD&A, as part of our broader analysis of that area of our business. In addition, the following factors represent some of the key general trends and uncertainties that have influenced the development of our business and our historical financial performance and that we believe will continue to influence our continuing business operations and financial performance in the future.
COVID-19 and its Effect on the Global Economy
COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, has had a significant adverse effect on the global economy since March of 2020. Even though the pace of vaccinations has increased in many countries, including the United States, the disease continues to spread throughout the world. The persistence of new infections, including the introduction of new variants, has slowed the re-opening of the U.S. economy and, even in regions where restrictions have largely been lifted, economic activity has been slow to recover. In addition, while the ability to impose federal vaccine mandates have been curtailed by the U.S. Supreme Court, we continue to be subject to various state and local vaccine mandates that would require at least a portion of our U.S. employees to be vaccinated, which could potentially impact our work force. Longer-term, the economic outlook is uncertain, but may depend in significant part on progress with respect to effective therapies to treat COVID-19 or the approval of additional vaccines and the pace at which they are administered globally. For further information regarding risks associated with COVID-19, see Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and is likely to continue to have, adverse effects on our financial condition and results of operations in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Effect on Voya Financial - Financial Condition, Capital and Liquidity
Because both public health and economic circumstances are changing so rapidly at present, it is impossible to predict how COVID-19 will affect Voya Financial’s future financial condition. Absent a further significant and prolonged market shock, however, we do not anticipate a material effect on our balance sheet, statutory capital, or liquidity. Our capital levels remain strong and significantly above our targets. As of December 31, 2021, our estimated combined RBC ratio, with adjustments for certain intercompany transactions, was 550%, above our 375% target.
We have completed repurchases of approximately $1,143 million of our common shares as of December 31, 2021. In January and October 2021, we increased our common shareholder dividend by 10% and 21%, respectively. We do not anticipate any reduction in our dividend and continue to monitor the dividends-paying capacity of our insurance subsidiaries. We have distributed $910 million in 2021 from our insurance subsidiaries.
Effect on Voya Financial - Results of Operations
Predicting with accuracy the future consequences of COVID-19 on our results of operations is impossible. To date, the most significant effects of adverse economic conditions have been on our fee-based income, with net investment income experiencing milder effects. Underwriting income, principally affected by increases to mortality and morbidity due to the disease, has also been negatively affected.
Wealth Solutions
In Wealth Solutions, we initially experienced pressure on earnings driven by equity market volatility as well as lower interest rates, with effects weighted more heavily towards our full-service corporate markets business and less on recordkeeping business. While equity market improvements have resulted in higher AUM levels and favorable results in fee-based income, we estimate that low market interest rates will continue to contribute to a lower spread-based income. Longer-term effects will depend significantly on equity market performance and prevailing interest rate levels, as well as unemployment levels. We believe that expense reductions and other management actions would be available to offset a portion of any impact.
Investment Management
In Investment Management, equity market improvements have contributed to AUM levels and higher fee-based margin. In addition, Investment capital has been revaluated higher over the last year, however if the economy declines due to COVID-19 and emerging variants, investment capital results could materially decline. We had seen an elevated level of outflows associated with our retail business at the outset of the pandemic that has since subsided. The pandemic has made generating new business leads more challenging, resulting in a reduction in sales meetings and activities that could result in a lower level of sales activity during the year. If the pandemic persists and the economy fails to grow or declines from current levels, asset values could be negatively impacted resulting in lower management fee revenue and/or investment capital returns.
Health Solutions
In Health Solutions, the effects from COVID-19 have been seen primarily in increased mortality claims on group life policies. We have not seen a significant increase in medical stop loss claims.
We expect mortality claims in group life to be elevated in 2022 due to COVID-19 related deaths, with the magnitude of such claims dependent on mortality rates from the disease. We currently estimate that, for every 10,000 incremental deaths in the United States due to COVID-19, we would see between $2 to $3 million of additional claims. Experience to date is consistent with this expectation.
Market Conditions
While extraordinary monetary accommodation has suppressed volatility in rate, credit and domestic equity markets for an extended period, global capital markets are now past peak accommodation as the U.S. Federal Reserve continues its gradual pace of policy normalization. As global monetary policy becomes less accommodating, an increase in market volatility could affect our business, including through effects on the rate and spread component of yields we earn on invested assets, changes in required reserves and capital, and fluctuations in the value of our assets under management ("AUM"), administration or advisement ("AUA"). These effects could be exacerbated by uncertainty about future fiscal policy, changes in tax policy, the scope of potential deregulation, levels of global trade, and geopolitical risk. In the short- to medium-term, the potential for increased volatility, coupled with prevailing interest rates below historical averages, can pressure sales and reduce demand as consumers hesitate to make financial decisions. In addition, this environment could make it difficult to manufacture products that are consistently both attractive to customers and profitable. Financial performance can be adversely affected by market volatility as fees driven by AUM fluctuate, hedging costs increase and revenue declines due to reduced sales and increased outflows. As a company with strong retirement, investment management and insurance capabilities, however, we believe the market conditions noted above may, over the long term, enhance the attractiveness of our broad portfolio of products and services. We will need to continue to monitor the behavior of our customers and other factors, including mortality rates, morbidity rates, and lapse rates, which adjust in response to changes in market conditions in order to ensure that our products and services remain attractive as well as profitable. For additional information on our sensitivity to interest rates and equity market prices, see Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk in Part II,