Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
References to the “Company,” “VPC Impact Acquisition Holdings II,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to VPC Impact Acquisition Holdings II. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Forward Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on January 13, 2021 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On August 2, 2021, we entered into a business combination agreement (together with the first amendment dated September 29, 2021, the “Business Combination Agreement
”) with FinAccel Pte. Ltd. (“FinAccel
”) and certain other affiliated entities, pursuant to which, among other things, FinAccel would merge with and into our holding company. The Business Combination Agreement was unanimously approved by our board of directors on July 29, 2021.
On March 11, 2022, we entered into a termination and fee agreement (the “Termination Agreement
”) with FinAccel Akshay Garg and certain other affiliated entities. Pursuant to the terms of the Termination Agreement, the parties agreed to mutually terminate the Business Combination Agreement, effective on March 11, 2022, subject to the conditions set forth in the Termination Agreement. In conjunction with the termination of the Business Combination Agreement, the Subscription Agreements, the Investor Rights Agreement, the Founder Holder Agreement and the other Ancillary Documents (as each is defined in the Business Combination Agreement) automatically terminated in accordance with their respective terms as of the same date.
The Termination Agreement provides that we will be entitled to receive (i) an aggregate sum not to exceed $4,000,000 in reimbursement for certain documented out-of-pocket third party expenses incurred by VIH (the “Termination Reimbursement Amount”), which is payable by FinAccel within six months of the date of the Termination Agreement and (ii) if we have not consummated an initial business combination and have determined to redeem our public shares and liquidate or dissolve thereafter (and we do not withdraw such determination, to the extent that such determination can be withdrawn), FinAccel will issue and deliver to VIH a penny warrant, on terms mutually agreeable to FinAccel and us, to purchase a number of FinAccel’s ordinary shares equal to three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the Fully Diluted Share Number (as defined in the Termination Agreement) of FinAccel as of the date of the Termination Agreement, subject to customary
anti-dilution
protections (the “Equity Termination Fee”). If FinAccel engages in any transaction that would be deemed a Sale of the Company (as defined in the Termination Agreement), then the party surviving the sale transaction will assume the foregoing obligation, to satisfy the Equity Termination Fee. If FinAccel fails to pay the Termination Reimbursement Amount, then a default interest of five percent (5%) per annum will accrue on a daily basis from the date the Termination Reimbursement Amount was due and payable until all such unpaid amounts have been paid.
The Termination Agreement contains mutual releases by all parties thereto, for all claims known and unknown, relating and arising out of, or relating to, among other things, the Business Combination Agreement, the ancillary documents to the Business Combination Agreement or the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, subject to certain exceptions with respect to claims that cannot be waived by law, the parties obligations under the Termination Agreement and commercial transactions unrelated to the Business Combination Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a Business Combination after our Initial Public Offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the period from January 13, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,560,847 which consists of transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $609,973 and formation and operating costs of $3,910,750, offset by change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,938,178 and interest earned on investments held in Trust Account of $21,698.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 9, 2021 the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,578,466 units (the “Units”) which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,078,466 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $255,784,660. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the sale of 5,127,129 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to VPC Impact Acquisition Holdings Sponsor II, LLC (the “Sponsor”), generating gross proceeds of $7,690,693.
Transaction costs amounted to $14,564,011, consisting of $5,115,693 of underwriting fees, $8,952,463 of deferred underwriting fees and $495,855 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 13, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,649,807. Net loss of $1,560,847 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $21,698, changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,938,178, transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $609,973, and formation cost paid by Sponsor in exchange for issuance of founder shares of $5,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,255,943 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $255,806,358 consisting of money market funds invested in U.S. Treasury Securities. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete
our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
The Company entered into an agreement, commencing on March 4, 2021, to pay the Sponsor up to $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services. Upon completion of a Business Combination or its liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. For the period from January 13, 2021 (Inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company incurred
$100,000 in fees for these services, of which $90,000 was included in accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,952,463 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $449,338 in its operating bank accounts, $255,806,358 in marketable securities held in the Trust Account to be used for a Business Combination or to repurchase or redeem its ordinary shares in connection therewith and a working capital deficit of 1,806,605.
The Company intends to complete a Business Combination by March 9, 2023. However, in the absence of a completed Business Combination, the Company may require additional capital. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a Business Combination. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until March 9, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after March 9, 2023.
Subscription Agreement
Concurrently with entering into the Business Combination Agreement, Holdco has entered into subscription agreements with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”) (the “Subscription Agreements”), pursuant to which such investors would subscribe for Holdco Class A Ordinary Shares (in the form of Holdco Class A ADSs) in a private placement for $10.00 per share substantially concurrently at the Closing for an aggregate purchase price of $120 million. The proceeds from the private placement would be used for general working capital purposes following the Closing.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, we have terminated the existing Subscription Agreements with all PIPE investors with respect to the now terminated Proposed Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued share purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own ordinary shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our
control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net loss Per Ordinary Share
Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective December 15, 2023 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows, if adopted.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, account standard updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.