Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of VPR Brands, LP (“VPRB” or the “Company”) should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations to “us,” “we,” “our,” and similar terms refer to the Company. This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements, as that term is defined in the federal securities laws, based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. Words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions are used to identify forward-looking statements. We caution you that these statements are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. Reference is made to “Risk Factors”, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We are a company engaged in the electronic cigarette and personal vaporizer industry. We own a portfolio of electronic cigarette and personal vaporizer patents which are the basis for our efforts to:
● Design, market and distribute a line of e liquids under the “HELIUM” brand;
● Design, market and distribute a line vaporizers for essential oils, concentrates, and dry herbs under the “HONEYSTICK” brand;
● Design, market and distribute a line of cannabidiol (“CBD”) products under the “GOLD LINE” brand;
● Design, market and distribute electronic cigarettes and popular vaporizers under the KRAVE brand;
● Prosecute and enforce our patent rights;
● License our intellectual property; and
● Develop private label manufacturing programs.
For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated revenues of $6,222,632 and $3,966,777, respectively; reported net income of $127,174 and a net loss of $563,779, respectively, and negative cash flow from operating activities of $280,900 and $69,607, respectively. As noted in our consolidated financial statements, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $10,215,000 as of December 31, 2021. We anticipate that we will continue to report losses and negative cash flow. Our auditors have raised substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern as a result of our historical recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations. See “Risk Factors-We have a history of operating losses and our auditors have indicated that there is a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.”
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Our revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $6,222,632 and $3,966,777, respectively. The increase was a result of an industry-wide health-related crisis that hampered sales significantly in 2020.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4,087,414 and $2,272,925, respectively. The increase is the result of an increase in sales during 2021. Gross margins decreased from 43% in 2021 to 43% in 2020 due to increased online sales direct to consumer, which have higher margins than wholesale sales offset by a write-off of obsolete inventory.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,933,341, as compared to $1,710,634 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to increased sales activity.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense decreased to $74,702 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $546,997 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is mainly attributable to debt forgiveness of PPP Loans and the settlement of certain litigation, which provided net proceeds of $147,125.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $127,174 compared to a net loss of $563,779 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth a summary of our net cash flows for the periods indicated:
The Company used cash in operating activities of $280,900 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $69,607 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used is mainly a result of increased levels of inventory and accounts receivable, offset by an increase in accounts payables and non-cash forgiveness of PPP loans.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company received loans from related parties and institutional investors of $1,015,007 and $1,258,566, respectively. In 2021, the Company received proceeds from PPP Loans totaling $190,057. Also, the Company paid debt of $921,574 in 2021, as compared to $1,211,756 in 2020. During 2021 and 2020, the Company was provided cash from financing activities of $261,693 and $46,810, respectively.
Assets
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had total assets of $1,254,772 and $908,345, respectively. Assets primarily consist of the cash accounts held by the Company, inventory, vendor deposits, accounts receivable and a right-to-use asset. In 2021, the Company’s inventory was decreased by $163,256 as a result of additional purchases for new products, accounts receivable increased by $310,864 from increased sales, vendor deposits decreased by $53,056, and right of use asset decreased by $77,227.
Liabilities
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had total liabilities of $3,369,566 and $3,150,314, respectively. The increase was primarily due to an increase in accounts payable.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the Company will continue to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The has a working capital deficit of $1,834,867 at December 31, 2021. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon, among other things, the continued financial support from its common unit holders, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary equity or debt financing, and the attainment of profitable operations. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The Company will be required to obtain additional financing and capital and expects to satisfy its cash needs primarily from the additional issuance of equity securities or indebtedness in order to sustain operations until it can achieve profitability and positive cash flows, if ever. There can be no assurances, however, that adequate additional funding will be available on favorable terms, or at all. If such funds are not available in the future, the Company may be required to delay, significantly modify or terminate its operations, all of which could have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Availability of Additional Funds
Our capital requirements going forward will consist of financing our operations until we are able to reach a level of revenues and gross margins adequate to equal or exceed our ongoing operating expenses. We do not have any credit agreement or source of liquidity immediately available to us.
Since inception, our operations have primarily been funded through proceeds from equity and debt financing. At December 31, 2021, we had $2,590 of cash on hand. Although we believe that we have access to capital resources, there are no commitments in place for new financing as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain funds on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. We expect to have ongoing needs for working capital in order to (a) fund operations; plus (b) fund strategic acquisitions. To that end, we may be required to raise additional funds through equity or debt financing. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in securing additional capital. If we are unsuccessful, we may need to (a) initiate cost reductions; (b) forego business development opportunities; (c) seek extensions of time to fund its liabilities, or (d) seek protection from creditors.
In addition, if we are unable to generate adequate cash from operations, and if we are unable to find sources of funding, it may be necessary for us to sell all or a portion of our assets, enter into a business combination, or reduce or eliminate operations. These possibilities, to the extent available, may be on terms that result in significant dilution to our unitholders or that result in our unitholders losing all of their investment in our Company.
If we are able to raise additional capital, we do not know what the terms of any such capital raising would be. In addition, any future sale of our equity securities would dilute the ownership and control of your units and could be at prices substantially below prices at which our units currently trade. Our inability to raise capital could require us to significantly curtail or terminate our operations. We may seek to increase our cash reserves through the sale of additional equity or debt securities. The sale of convertible debt securities or additional equity securities could result in additional and potentially substantial dilution to our unitholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could result in operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations and liquidity. In addition, our ability to obtain additional capital on acceptable terms is subject to a variety of uncertainties.
Our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), which contemplate our continuation as a going concern and the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The carrying amounts of assets and liabilities presented in the financial statements do not necessarily purport to represent realizable or settlement values. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The spread of COVID-19 has affected segments of the global economy and may affect our operations, including the potential interruption of our supply chain. We are monitoring this situation closely, and although operations have not been materially affected by the COVID-19 outbreak to date, the ultimate duration and severity of the outbreak and its impact on the economic environment and our business is uncertain.
The spread of COVID-19, or another infectious disease, could also negatively affect the operations at our third-party manufacturers, which could result in delays or disruptions in the supply of our products. In addition, we may take temporary precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of the virus to our employees, including temporarily requiring all employees to work remotely, suspending all non-essential travel worldwide for our employees, and discouraging employee attendance at industry events and in-person work-related meetings, which could negatively affect our business.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others. In particular, the continued spread of the coronavirus globally could adversely impact our operations, including among others, our manufacturing and supply chain, sales and marketing and could have an adverse impact on our business and our financial results. The COVID-19 outbreak is a widespread health crisis that has adversely affected the economies and financial markets of many countries, resulting in an economic downturn that could affect demand for our products and likely impact our operating results.
Equity Purchase Agreement and Registration Statement
On February 19, 2020 (“Execution Date”), the Company entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement (the “Equity Purchase Agreement”) with DiamondRock, LLC (“Selling Unitholder”) pursuant to which, upon the terms and subject to the conditions thereof, the Selling Unitholder is committed to purchase shares of the Company’s common units (the “Put Shares”) at an aggregate price of up to $5,000,000 (the “Maximum Commitment Amount”) over the course of the commitment period. Pursuant to the terms of the Equity Purchase Agreement, the commitment period will commence upon the initial effective date of this registration statement and will end on the earlier of (i) the date on which the Selling Unitholder has purchased Common Units from us pursuant to the Equity Purchase Agreement (“Put Shares”) equal to the Maximum Commitment Amount, (ii) the date on which there is no longer an effective registration statement for the Put Shares, (iii) 24 months after the initial effectiveness of this registration statement, or (iv) written notice of termination by us to the Selling Unitholder (which will not occur at any time that the Selling Unitholder holds any of the Put Shares).
From time to time over the term of the Equity Purchase Agreement, commencing on the date on which a registration statement registering the Put Shares (the “Registration Statement”) becomes effective, the Company may, in its sole discretion, provide the Selling Unitholder with a put notice (each a “Put Notice”) to purchase a specified number of the Put Shares (each a “Put Amount Requested”) subject to the limitations discussed below and contained in the Equity Purchase Agreement. Within one trading day of the date that the Put Notice is deemed delivered (“Put Date”) pursuant to terms of the Equity Purchase Agreement, the Company shall deliver, or cause to be delivered, to the Selling Unitholder estimated Put Shares equal to the investment amount (“Investment Amount”) indicated in the Put Notice divided by the Initial Pricing per share (the “Estimated Put Shares”) as DWAC Shares. Within one trading day following the Put Date, Selling Unitholder shall pay the Investment Amount to the Company by wire transfer of immediately available funds to an escrow account to be established with the escrow agent for the benefit of the Company.
At the end of the five trading days following the clearing date associated with the applicable Put Notice (“Valuation Period”), the purchase price (“Purchase Price”) shall be computed as 85% of the average daily volume weighted average price of the common units during the Valuation Period and the number of Put Shares shall be determined for a particular Put as the Investment Amount divided by the Purchase Price. If the number of Estimated Put Shares (Investment Amount divided by Initial Pricing) initially delivered to Selling Unitholder is greater than the number of Put Shares (Investment Amount divided by Purchase Price) purchased by the Selling Unitholder pursuant to such Put, then, within two trading days following the end of the Valuation Period, the Selling Unitholder shall deliver to the Company any excess Estimated Put Shares associated with such Put. If the number of Estimated Put Shares (Investment Amount divided by Initial Pricing) delivered to the Selling Unitholder is less than the Put Shares purchased by the Selling Unitholder pursuant to a Put, then within two trading days following the end of the Valuation Period the Company shall deliver to the Selling Unitholder the difference between the Estimated Put Shares and the Put Shares issuable pursuant to such Put.
The Put Amount Requested pursuant to any single Put Notice must have an aggregate value of at least $25,000, and cannot exceed the lesser of (i) $250,000, and (ii) 150% of the average daily trading value of the common units in the five trading days immediately preceding the Put Notice.
In order to deliver a Put Notice, certain conditions set forth in the Equity Purchase Agreement must be met, as provided therein. In addition, the Company is prohibited from delivering a Put Notice if: (i) the sale of Put Shares pursuant to such Put Notice would cause the Company to issue and sell to Selling Unitholder, or Selling Unitholder to acquire or purchase, a number of shares of the Company’s common units that, when aggregated with all shares of common units purchased by Selling Unitholder pursuant to all prior Put Notices issued under the Equity Purchase Agreement, would exceed the Maximum Commitment Amount; or (ii) the issuance of the Commitment Shares pursuant to a request for the Commitment Shares would cause the Company to issue and sell to Selling Unitholder, or Selling Unitholder to acquire or purchase, an aggregate number of shares of common units that would result in Selling Unitholder beneficially owning more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding shares of the Company’s common units.
On the Execution Date, the Company also entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Selling Unitholder pursuant to which the Company is obligated to file the Registration Statement to register the resale of the Put Shares. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the Company must (i) file the Registration Statement within 30 calendar days from the Execution Date, (ii) use reasonable best efforts to cause the Registration Statement to be declared effective under the Securities Act within 90 calendar days after the filing thereof, and (iii) use its reasonable best efforts to keep such Registration Statement continuously effective under the Securities Act until all of the Put Shares have been sold thereunder or pursuant to Rule 144.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are described in notes accompanying the financial statements. The preparation of the financial statements requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements, and accordingly, actual results in future periods could differ from these estimates. Significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements apply critical accounting policies described in the notes to our financial statements.
We consider our recognition of revenues, accounting for the consolidation of operations, accounting for stock-based compensation, accounting for intangible assets and related impairment analyses, the allowance for doubtful accounts and accounting for equity transactions, to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Together with our critical accounting policies set out below, our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of our audited financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Accounts Receivable
The Company analyses the collectability of accounts receivable from continuing operations each accounting period and adjusts its allowance for doubtful accounts accordingly. A considerable amount of judgment is required in assessing the realization of accounts receivables, including the creditworthiness of each customer, current and historical collection history and the related aging of past due balances. The Company evaluates specific accounts when it becomes aware of information indicating that a customer may not be able to meet its financial obligations due to deterioration of its financial condition, lower credit ratings, bankruptcy or other factors affecting the ability to render payment. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no allowance for bad debt.
Inventory
Inventory consisting of finished products is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. At each balance sheet date, the Company evaluates its ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence. This evaluation primarily includes an analysis of forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, among consideration of other factors. The physical condition (e.g., age and quality) of the inventories is also considered in establishing its valuation. Based upon the evaluation, provisions are made to reduce excess or obsolete inventories to their estimated net realizable values. Once established, write-downs are considered permanent adjustments to the cost basis of the respective inventories. These adjustments are estimates, which could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from the amounts that the Company may ultimately realize upon the disposition of inventories if future economic conditions, customer inventory levels, product discontinuances, sales return levels or competitive conditions differ from the Company’s estimates and expectations. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no provision for obsolescence.
Leases
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02 (Topic 842). Topic 842 amended several aspects of lease accounting, including requiring lessees to recognize leases with a term greater than one year as a right-of-use asset and corresponding liability, measured at the present value of the lease payments. In July 2018, the FASB issued supplemental adoption guidance and clarification to Topic 842 within ASU 2018-10 “Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases” and ASU 2018-11 “Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements.” The new guidance aims to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by requiring lessees to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and requiring disclosure of key information about leasing arrangements. A modified retrospective application is required with an option to not restate comparative periods in the period of adoption.
The Company, effective January 1, 2019 has adopted the provisions of the new standard. The Company decided to use the practical expedients available upon adoption of Topic 842 to aid the transition from current accounting to provisions of Topic 842. The package of expedients will effectively allow the Company to run off existing leases, as initially classified as operating and classify new leases after implementation under the new standard as the business evolves.
The Company has an operating lease principally for warehouse and office space. Management evaluates each lease independently to determine the purpose, necessity to its future operations in addition to other appropriate facts and circumstances.
The Company adopted Topic 842 using a modified retrospective approach for its existing lease at January 1, 2019. The adoption of Topic 842 impacted the Company’s balance sheet by the recognition of the operating lease right-of-use assets and the liability for operating leases. The lease liability is based on the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted using a market based incremental borrowing rate as the effective date of January 1, 2019 using current estimates as to lease term including estimated renewals for each operating lease. As of January 1, 2019, the Company recorded an adjustment of approximately $386,614 to operating lease right-to-use asset and the right to use lease liability.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which supersedes all existing revenue recognition requirements, including most industry specific guidance. This new standard requires a company to recognize revenues when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the company expects to receive for those goods or services. The FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASU No. 2014-09 that have the same effective date and transition date: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations; ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing; ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients; and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company adopted these amendments with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the new revenue standards).
The new revenue standards became effective for the Company on January 1, 2018, and were adopted using the modified retrospective method. The adoption of the new revenue standards as of January 1, 2018 did not change the Company’s revenue recognition as the majority of its revenues continue to be recognized when the customer takes control of its product. As the Company did not identify any accounting changes that impacted the amount of reported revenues with respect to its product revenues, no adjustment to retained earnings was required upon adoption.
The Company recognizes revenues when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which it expects to receive in exchange for those goods. The Company recognizes revenues following the five step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation.
Revenues from product sales are recognized when the customer obtains control of the Company’s product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon delivery to the customer. The Company expenses incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that it would have recognized is one year or less or the amount is immaterial.
Stock-Based Compensation
Share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options are recognized as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their fair values, in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718. That expense is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period). The Company had no common stock options or common stock equivalents granted or outstanding for all periods presented. The Company may issue shares as compensation in future periods for employee services.
The Company may issue restricted units to consultants for various services. Cost for these transactions will be measured at the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. The value of the common stock is to be measured at the earlier of: (i) the date at which a firm commitment for performance by the counterparty to earn the equity instruments is reached, or (ii) the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete. The Company may issue shares as compensation in future periods for services associated with the registration of the common shares.