ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes to those statements included later in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a dermatology therapeutics company committed to the development and commercialization of novel treatments that provide meaningful benefit for people living with skin diseases. Our lead product candidate, VP-102, is a proprietary drug-device combination of our topical solution of cantharidin, a widely recognized, naturally sourced agent to treat topical dermatological conditions, administered through our single-use precision applicator. We are initially developing VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum contagiosum, or molluscum, a highly contagious and primarily pediatric viral skin disease, external genital warts and common warts. There are currently no products approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, nor is there an established standard of care for either of these diseases, resulting in significant undertreated populations in two of the largest unmet needs in dermatology. VP-102 has the potential to be the first FDA-approved product for molluscum and for its active pharmaceutical ingredient, or API, to be characterized as a new chemical entity, or NCE, with the five years of non-patent regulatory exclusivity associated with that designation. We also believe VP-102 has the potential to qualify for pediatric exclusivity in common warts, which would provide for an additional six months of non-patent exclusivity. In addition, our granted patents and pending patent applications include claims drawn to our cantharidin formulations, applicator devices and related accessories, dosing regimens, methods of preparation including methods of synthesis, and methods of use.
In January 2019, we reported positive top-line results from our Phase 3 CAMP-1 and CAMP-2 pivotal trials with VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum. Both clinical trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of VP-102 compared to placebo. In each trial, we observed that a clinically and statistically significant proportion of subjects treated with VP-102 achieved complete clearance of all treatable molluscum lesions compared to subjects treated with placebo. VP-102 was well-tolerated in both trials, with no serious adverse events reported in VP-102 treated subjects. CAMP-1 was conducted under a special protocol assessment, or SPA, agreement with the FDA. Based on the results from these trials, we submitted a new drug application, or NDA, to the FDA for VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum in September 2019. In November 2019, we received notice that the FDA accepted the NDA for filing, with a Prescription Drug User Fee Act, or PDUFA, goal date of July 13, 2020. In July 2020, we received a Complete Response Letter, or CRL, from the FDA for our NDA. The CRL indicated the need for additional information regarding certain aspects of the chemistry, manufacturing and controls, or CMC, processes for the drug/device combination as well as human factors validation. The FDA did not identify any clinical deficiencies. A Type A meeting was held with the FDA in October 2020 to discuss the issues that were identified in the CRL and the resubmission of the NDA for VP-102. We resubmitted our NDA for VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum in December 2020. In February 2021, we received notice that the FDA accepted the resubmitted NDA for filing, with a PDUFA goal date of June 23, 2021. On May 28, 2021 the FDA extended the PDUFA date to September 23, 2021 to allow the Agency additional time to review information submitted by Verrica in response to comments from the agency regarding the Company's human factors study.
On September 17, 2021, the FDA issued a CRL regarding our NDA for VP-102. According to the CRL, the FDA identified deficiencies at a facility of a contract manufacturing organization, or CMO, which are not specifically related to the manufacturing of VP-102 but instead raise general quality issues at the facility. The FDA did not identify any clinical, safety or product specific CMC deficiencies related to VP-102. Following the CRL, on September 22, 2021 we received a General Advice Letter from the FDA with recommendations to improve VP-102’s user interface. On November 5, 2021, we were notified that the inspection of the CMO has been classified as “voluntary action indicated”, or VAI, is now closed and that the VAI classification will not directly negatively impact FDA’s assessment of our NDA regarding this CMO. With the satisfactory resolution of the facility
inspection, we resubmitted the NDA for the approval of VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum. The resubmission was limited to those sections and elements of the NDA that were identified as deficiencies in the CRL issued by the FDA in September 2021. In December 2021 the FDA acknowledged our resubmission of the NDA and assigned a PDUFA goal date of May 24, 2022.
In addition, we are also developing VP-102 for the treatment of external genital warts. We initiated a Phase 2 clinical trial evaluating the optimal dose regimen, efficacy, safety and tolerability of VP-102 in patients with external genital warts in June 2019. In November 2020, we announced positive topline results from our Phase 2 clinical trial of VP-102 for the treatment of external genital warts. Based on the results of the Phase 2 trial, an end of Phase 2 meeting was held with the FDA in May 2021. In addition, we are conducting necessary drug development activities for VP-103, our second cantharidin-based product candidate, and are evaluating when to initiate a Phase 2 clinical trial for the treatment of plantar warts. We also intend to develop our third product candidate, LTX-315, for the treatment of dermatological oncology indications. The FDA accepted our IND in November 2021. We expect to initiate the Phase 2 trial of LTX-315 in Basel Cell Carcinoma in the first quarter of 2022.
In June 2019, we announced positive topline results from our COVE-1 Phase 2 open label clinical trial of VP-102 for the treatment of verruca vulgaris, or common warts. Based on feedback from the FDA regarding a potential Phase 3 trial protocol, we are currently evaluating conducting an additional Phase 2 clinical trial of VP-102 for the treatment of common warts.
On March 17, 2021, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement, or the Torii Agreement, with Torii Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., or Torii, pursuant to which we granted Torii an exclusive license to develop and commercialize our product candidates that contain a topical formulation of cantharidin for the treatment of molluscum contagiosum and common warts in Japan, including VP-102. Additionally, we granted Torii a right of first negotiation with respect to additional indications for the licensed products and certain additional products for use in the licensed field, in each case in Japan. Pursuant to the Torii Agreement, we are entitled to receive an up-front payment from Torii of $11.5 million. Additionally, we are entitled to receive from Torii an additional $58.0 million in aggregate payments contingent on achievement of specified development, regulatory, and sales milestones, in addition to tiered transfer price payments for supply of product in the percentage range of the mid-30s to the mid-40s of net sales
In August 2020, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Lytix Biopharma AS, or Lytix, pursuant to which we obtained a worldwide, license for certain technology of Lytix to develop LTX-315 for use in all malignant and pre-malignant dermatological indications, other than metastatic melanoma and metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma.
Our strategy is to advance VP-102 through regulatory approval and self-commercialize in the United States for the treatment of several skin diseases. We intend to build a specialized sales organization in the United States focused on pediatric dermatologists, dermatologists, and select pediatricians. In the future, we also intend to develop VP-102 for commercialization in additional geographic regions, either alone or together with a strategic partner.
We have been actively monitoring the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic and its impact globally. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain it or treat COVID-19. As a direct result of COVID-19, we decided to delay the initiation of our previously planned Phase 3 clinical trials to evaluate VP-102 in subjects with common warts as well as our previously planned Phase 2 clinical trial to evaluate VP-103 in subjects with plantar warts.
Since our inception in 2013, our operations have focused on developing VP-102, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and conducting clinical trials. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity and equity-linked securities and through borrowing under our loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB.
On June 19, 2018, we completed an IPO of common stock, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 5,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $15.00 per share, generating net proceeds of $78.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs. We completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock in March 2021, generating net proceeds of $28.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs.
On March 10, 2020, we entered into (i) a mezzanine loan and security agreement, or the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, with Silicon Valley Bank, as administrative agent and collateral agent, or the Agent, and Silicon Valley Bank and West River Innovation Lending Fund VIII, L.P., as lenders, or the Mezzanine Lenders, pursuant to which the Mezzanine Lenders have agreed to lend us up to $50.0 million in a series of term loans, and (ii) a loan and security agreement, or the Senior Loan Agreement, and together with the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, the Loan Agreements, with Silicon Valley Bank, as lender, or the Senior Lender, and together with the Mezzanine Lenders, the Lenders, pursuant to which the Senior Lender has agreed to provide us a revolving line of credit of up to $5.0 million. Upon entering into the Loan Agreements, we borrowed $35.0 million in term loans, or the Term A Loan, from the Mezzanine Lenders. We entered into amendments to the Loan Agreements in October 2020 under which we borrowed an additional $5.0 million in term loans, or the Term B1 Loan and together with the Term A Loan, the Loans, on March 1, 2021.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to support our planned operations into the third quarter of 2022.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net loss was $35.1 million and $42.7 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $139.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•initiate clinical trials evaluating VP-102 for the treatment of external genital warts;
•continue our ongoing clinical programs evaluating VP-102 for the treatment of common warts as well as initiate and complete additional clinical trials, as needed;
•initiate clinical trials evaluating VP-103 for the treatment of plantar warts, and LTX-315 for the treatment of dermatological oncology indications;
•pursue regulatory approvals for VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum, and eventually for the treatment of external genital warts, common warts or any other indications we may pursue for VP-102, as well as for VP-103 or LTX-315;
•seek to discover and develop additional product candidates;
•ultimately establish a commercialization infrastructure and scale up external manufacturing and distribution capabilities to commercialize any product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval, including VP-102, VP-103 and LTX-315;
•seek to in-license or acquire additional product candidates for other dermatological conditions;
•adapt our regulatory compliance efforts to incorporate requirements applicable to marketed products;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional clinical, manufacturing and scientific personnel;
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and planned future commercialization efforts; and
•incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reported periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
A summary of our significant accounting policies appears in the notes to our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, we believe that the following accounting estimate is important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and we have accordingly included it in this discussion.
Research and Development Costs
We rely on third parties to conduct our preclinical studies and clinical trials, and to provide services, including manufacturing of product in connection with the clinical trials. At the end of each reporting period, we compare payments made to third-party service providers to the estimated progress toward completion of the applicable research or development objectives. Such estimates are subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to the service providers and the progress that we estimate has been made as a result of the service provided, we may record net prepaid or accrued expense relating to these costs. As of December 31, 2021, we did not make any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
JOBS Act
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
Subject to certain conditions, as an emerging growth company, we may rely on certain exemptions, including exemptions from (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of (1) (a) December 31, 2023, which is the end of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering, (b) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion or (c) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
Components of Operating Results
License Revenue
We have not received any revenue from product sales since our inception. License revenue represents revenue from the Torii Agreement pursuant to which we granted Torii an exclusive license to develop and commercialize our
product candidates that contain a topical formulation of cantharidin for the treatment of molluscum contagiosum and common warts in Japan including VP-102.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•manufacturing and supply scale-up expenses and the cost of acquiring and manufacturing preclinical and clinical trial supply and commercial supply, including manufacturing validation batches;
•outsourced professional scientific development services;
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•expenses relating to regulatory activities; and
•laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as we increase personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, initiate and conduct clinical trials of VP-102 in patients with external genital warts, VP-102 in patients with common warts, VP-103 in patients with plantar warts, LTX-315 for dermatological oncology indications, and conduct other clinical trials and prepare regulatory filings for our product candidates.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of, or when, if ever, material net cash inflows may commence from our product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the duration and cost of clinical trials, which vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of many factors, including:
•the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
•the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
•the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trials;
•the number of doses patients receive;
•the duration of patient follow-up; and
•the results of our clinical trials.
Our expenditures are subject to additional uncertainties, including the manufacturing process for our product candidates, the terms and timing of regulatory approvals, and the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims or other intellectual property rights. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify clinical trials of our product candidates. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive and administrative functions, including stock-based compensation, travel expenses and recruiting expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include market research costs, insurance costs, and professional fees for audit, tax and legal services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses, including payroll and related expenses, will increase in the future as we continue to increase our headcount to support the expected growth in our business, expand our operations and organizational capabilities, and prepare for potential commercialization of VP-102 for the treatment of molluscum, if successfully developed and approved. We also anticipate increased expenses associated with general operations, including costs related to audit, tax and legal services, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs
Income Taxes
Since our inception in 2013, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $109.0 million and $110.9 million, respectively. The federal net operating loss carryforwards included in the foregoing totals that were generated prior to 2018 (federal of approximately $6.9 million) will begin to expire, if not utilized, by 2033. Utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation according to Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and similar provisions.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
License Revenue
License revenue was $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to no license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Pursuant to the exercise of the license option in March 17, 2021 per the Torii Agreement we recognized revenue of $12.0 million comprised of an up-front payment of $0.5 million received in December 2020 and $11.5 million payment paid in April 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $0.3 million was primarily attributable to a one-time $2.3 million payment made to Lytix upon the achievement of a regulatory milestone for LTX-315 and increased compensation costs, and increased clinical costs related to our development of VP-102 for molluscum
partially offset by decreased Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls, or CMC, costs related to our development of VP-102 for molluscum.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $2.5 million was primarily driven by expenses related to increased headcount, an increase in insurance, professional fees, and other operating costs, and an increase in expenses related to pre-commercial activities for VP-102. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation costs, which includes $4.8 million of stock-based compensation expense recorded in December 2020 related to the modification of a stock award to a former executive.
Interest Income
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. The decrease of $0.4 million was primarily a result of lower interest income due to lower interest rates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of interest expense on the Mezzanine Loan Agreement as noted in Note 11 to our financial statements. The increase of $1.3 million was primarily a result of the Mezzanine Loan Agreement which commenced on March 10, 2020.
Results of Operations for Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a discussion and analysis of changes in financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 17, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Since our inception, we have not generated any product revenue and have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have financed our operations since inception through sales of our convertible preferred stock and the sale of our common stock in our IPO, receiving aggregate gross proceeds of $123.2 million and most recently, $40.0 million of gross proceeds from the Mezzanine Loan Agreement noted below, $28.1 million in net proceeds from issuance of common stock in a follow-on offering in March 2021 and $12.0 million from the Torii Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $70.4 million. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation.
We have debt obligations through March 1, 2024 of $40.0 million principal, $3.8 million final payment fee and interest expense of $3.7 million. In addition, we have an operating lease for office space in West Chester with obligations through September 1, 2027 of $2.0 million including imputed interest.
Indebtedness
On March 10, 2020, or the Effective Date, we entered into (i) the Mezzanine Loan Agreement with the Agent, and the Mezzanine Lenders, pursuant to which the Mezzanine Lenders have agreed to lend us up to $50.0 million in a series of term loans, and (ii) the Senior Loan Agreement with the Senior Lender, pursuant to which the Senior Lender has agreed to provide us with a revolving line of credit of up to $5.0 million. Upon entering into the Loan Agreements, we borrowed the Term A Loan.
On October 26, 2020, we entered into (i) the first amendment to the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, or the Mezzanine Loan Amendment and (ii) the first amendment to the Senior Loan Agreement, or the Senior Loan Amendment with the Lenders, under which we borrowed the Term B1 Loan on March 1, 2021.
On March 1, 2022, we entered into a second amendment to the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, or the Second Mezzanine Loan Amendment. Pursuant to the Second Mezzanine Loan Amendment, we are no longer required to maintain a minimum liquidity ratio or achieve minimum levels of trailing six-month net product revenues but will be required to maintain a minimum cash balance equal to the outstanding amount of the Term Loans under the Mezzanine Loan Agreement prior to entry into the Second Mezzanine Loan Amendment in a separate money market account with SVB. Additionally, we entered into a second amendment to the Senior Loan Agreement, or the Second Senior Loan Amendment. Pursuant to the Second Senior Loan Amendment, we are no longer required to achieve minimum levels of trailing six-month net product revenues. See Notes 11 and 14 for a full discussion of our indebtedness.
Under the terms of the Senior Loan Agreement, as amended, we may, at our sole discretion, borrow from the Senior Lender one or more advances on the revolving credit line, or the Revolving Loans, and together with the Term Loans, the Loans in an aggregate amount not to exceed the lesser of (i) 85% of the aggregate amount then-contained in our eligible accounts receivable and (ii) $5.0 million.
Our obligations under the Senior Loan Agreement and the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, as amended, are secured by, respectively, a first priority perfected security interest and second priority perfected security interest in substantially all of our current and future assets, other than our intellectual property (except rights to payment from the sale, licensing or disposition of such intellectual property). We have also agreed not to encumber our intellectual property assets, except as permitted by the Loan Agreements.
All of the Loans mature on March 1, 2024, or the Maturity Date. Based on the terms of the Term Loans prior to the Second Loan Amendments, the Term Loans were interest-only through March 31,2022, followed by 24 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. Following the entry into the Second Loan Amendments on March 1, 2022, the Term Loans will be interest-only through February 28, 2023, followed by 12 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. The Term Loans will bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) 7.25% and (ii) the sum of (a) the prime rate reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue, plus (b) 2.50%. The Revolving Loans will bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) 6.00% and (ii) the sum of (a) the prime rate reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue, plus (b) 1.25%.
Under the terms of the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, as amended, we will be required to make a final payment fee of $3,750,000 payable on the earlier of (i) the Maturity Date, (ii) the acceleration of any Term Loans, or (iii) the prepayment of the Term Loans, or the Final Payment. We are recording the final payment fee using the effective interest rate method over the term of the Term Loan with an increase in debt. We may prepay all, or any portion of the Term Loans upon 5 business days advance written notice to the Agent, provided that we will be obligated to pay a prepayment fee equal to (i) $1.0 million if prepaid between October 27, 2021 and October 26, 2022, and (ii) $0.5 million if prepaid between October 27, 2022 and October 26, 2023 and (iii) no prepayment fee if prepaid after October 26, 2023, each, a Prepayment Fee.
We may terminate the revolving credit line under the Senior Loan Agreement at any time upon three business days advance written notice to the Senior Lender. If we terminate the revolving credit line prior to the Maturity Date, we must pay to the Senior Lender an early termination fee of $50,000, or the Termination Fee.
Under the Loan Agreements, as amended, we are subject to a number of affirmative and restrictive covenants, including covenants regarding delivery of financial statements, maintenance of inventory, payment of taxes, maintenance of insurance, protection of intellectual property rights, dispositions of property, business combinations or acquisitions, incurrence of additional indebtedness or liens and investments and transactions with affiliates, among other customary covenants. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants.
Upon the occurrence of certain events, including but not limited to our failure to satisfy our payment obligations under the Loan Agreements, the breach of certain of our other covenants under the Loan Agreements, or the occurrence of a material adverse change, cross defaults to other indebtedness or material agreements, judgment defaults and defaults related to failure to maintain governmental approvals failure of which to maintain could result in a material adverse effect, the Agent and the Lenders will have the right, among other remedies, to declare all principal and interest immediately due and payable, to exercise secured party remedies, to receive the Final Payment and Termination Fee and, if the payment of principal and interest is due prior to the Maturity Date, to receive the applicable Prepayment Fee. The Loan Agreements also include subjective acceleration clauses that permit the Lenders to accelerate the maturity date under certain circumstances, including a material adverse change in our business, operations, or financial condition or a material impairment of the prospect of repayment of our obligations to the Mezzanine Lenders.
Prior to the Second Loan Amendments of the Term Loans on March 1, 2022, we believed that without additional financing, it was probable that we would not be in compliance with the minimum liquidity ratio covenant at some point in the next twelve months. In accordance with FASB ASC 470, since the Mezzanine Loan Agreement contained subjective acceleration clauses and assessment that it was probable that the minimum liquidity ratio covenant would not be met, we classified all outstanding principal and final payment fees as a current liability in the accompanying balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $27.6 million of cash, primarily resulting from a net loss of $35.1 million and noncash stock-based compensation of $6.1 million and non-cash interest expense of $1.4 million. Net cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $0.5 million consisted primarily of a decrease in deferred revenue of $0.5 million, and a decrease in prepaid expenses and operating lease liability partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $30.2 million of cash, primarily resulting from a net loss of $42.7 million and noncash stock-based compensation of $9.8 million. Net cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.6 million consisted primarily of an increase in accrued expenses of $1.4 million. The increase in accrued expenses was primarily due to accruals for clinical development and product development activities.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was related to the purchase of marketable securities of $68.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.9 million, partially offset by the sales and maturities of marketable securities of $69.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was related to the purchase of marketable securities of $71.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.5 million, partially offset by the sales and maturities of marketable securities of $69.8 million.
Financing Activities
During the ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $33.6 million, which was primarily related to the proceeds from issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs of $28.1 million and proceeds from debt, net of issuance costs of $5.0 million.
During the ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $35.2 million, which was primarily related to the proceeds from issuance of debt net of issuance costs of $34.5 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, continue or initiate clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Accordingly, we may need to obtain additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to support our planned operations into the third quarter of 2022. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of our clinical trials;
•the scope, prioritization and number of our research and development programs;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our ability to maintain compliance with covenants under our loan agreements;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•the impact on the timing of our clinical trials and our business due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the costs to scale up and secure manufacturing arrangements for commercial production; and
•the costs of establishing or contracting for sales and marketing capabilities if we obtain regulatory approvals to market our product candidates.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes many years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of a product candidate that we do not expect to be commercially available in the near term, if at all. We may need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Our financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can obtain marketing approval to sell, and then generate significant sales of, VP-102. We will need substantial additional financing to fund our operations and to develop and commercialize our drug candidate. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. Our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, ownership interests of existing stockholders may be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Other Contractual Obligations and Commitments
On August 7, 2020, we entered into an exclusive license agreement, or the Lytix Agreement, with Lytix, pursuant to which we obtained a worldwide, exclusive, royalty-bearing license, with the right to sublicense, for certain technology of Lytix to research, develop, manufacture, have manufactured, use, sell, have sold, offer for sale, import and otherwise commercialize LTX-315 for use in all malignant and pre-malignant dermatological indications, other than metastatic melanoma and metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma. Our right to manufacture the active pharmaceutical ingredient is limited to certain instances, and Lytix is obligated to manufacture and supply our clinical and commercial needs for such active pharmaceutical ingredient. We are obligated to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and to commercialize the product, which development and commercialization will be overseen by a joint steering committee. Lytix has agreed not to pursue any products in the field of dermatology other than LTX-315 for use in metastatic melanoma and metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma. Lytix has granted us an exclusive option to negotiate for an exclusive license for use of LTX-315 in additional dermatological indications.
In connection with entering the Lytix Agreement, we made an initial payment of $250,000 and an additional payment of $2.3 million upon the achievement by Lytix of a regulatory milestone. Additionally, we are obligated to pay up to $111.0 million contingent on achievement of specified development, regulatory, and sales milestones, and tiered royalties based on worldwide annual net sales ranging in the low double digits to the mid-teens, subject to certain customary reductions. Our obligation to pay royalties expires on a country-by-country and product-by-product basis on the later of the expiration or abandonment of the last to expire licensed patent covering LTX-315 anywhere in the world and expiration of regulatory exclusivity for LTX-315 in such country. Additionally, all upfront fees and milestone-based payments received by us from a sublicensee will be treated as net sales and will be subject to the royalty payment obligations under the Lytix Agreement, and all royalties received by us from a sublicensee shall be shared with Lytix at a rate that is initially 50% but decreases based on the stage of development of LTX-315 at the time such sublicense is granted.