ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation and other parts of this Report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. All forward-looking statements included in this Report are based on information available to us on the date hereof, and except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. The following should be read in conjunction with our annual financial statements contained elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
VerifyMe, Inc. (“VerifyMe,” the “Company,” “we” “us” or “our”) is a technology solutions provider specializing in products to connect brands with consumers. VerifyMe technologies give brand owners the ability to gather business intelligence while engaging directly with their consumers. VerifyMe technologies also provide brand protection and supply chain functions such as counterfeit prevention, authentication, serialization, and track and trace features for labels, packaging and products. We are a Nevada corporation formed in 1999. We began to commercialize our covert luminescent pigment VerifyInkTM in 2018. Prior to 2021 we completed the initial development stage of our other current technologies and in 2021 we began to commercialize as a Brand Protection Solutions provider.
Our brand protection technologies include consumer engagement capabilities, the custom printing of tamper proof secure labels, and utilization of invisible and visible images printed with our proprietary special composition inks comprised of a rare earth mineral. These inks are compatible and printed with modern digital and standard printing systems such as digital, offset, flexographic, silkscreen, gravure, inkjet and toner-based laser printers. The inks can be used to print both static labels on standard printing systems and variable labels utilizing digital printing systems that include variable images, serialized codes, dynamic bar codes and dynamic QR codes that allow brand owners to engage directly with customers. We have developed and patented a dual-code technology that we believe can connect digital NFTs to physical products. We have developed and patented a device that attaches to a smartphone that brand inspectors or law enforcement can use to read our invisible ink codes into our cloud-based track and trace software that contains our patented verification technology along with algorithms that analyze the label, package or product’s authenticity and diversion activity. We also have a device that informs users that our proprietary invisible ink is present, which can be used for authentication without the need for internet connectivity.
VerifyMe has a custom suite of products that offer clients the brand protection security, anti-counterfeiting, protection from product diversion, consumer engagement and a robust serialization, track and trace system. These products are combined with “software as a service” or “SAAS” which is stored in the cloud and accessed through the internet.
· VerifyMe Engage™ for consumer engagement
· VerifyMe Authenticate™ for product authentication
· VerifyMe Track & Trace™ for product supply chain control
· VerifyMe Online™ for on-line (web) brand monitoring
VerifyMe Engage™ services provide the ability for the brand owner to gather business intelligence and engage with the consumer using our authentication test as the initial contact with the consumer. For example, consumers can simply use their smart phone camera to scan our visible unique codes and/or RFID/NFC chips included on products, labels and packages. Once the consumer scans the code, an instant authenticity check is made using algorithms stored in the cloud to determine the products authenticity on multiple factors. This allows brands to understand where their products are being scanned, whether they are legitimate, and form an immediate bridge for communication with the consumer. After a product is authenticated, the brand owner can then engage with the consumer by, for example offering a gift or future discounts providing marketing materials, videos, product information and specifications, contest entries or cross selling other products through the consumer engagement software. This service allows to the brand owner to gather real-time actionable information on their customer base. To date, we have derived limited revenue from VerifyMe Engage customers in the cannabis industry.
VerifyMe Authenticate™ services provide an assortment of tools through our patented products allowing brand owners to instantly authenticate a product, label or package as genuine and or determine if a product has been fraudulently diverted and where such diversion occurred in the supply chain. Brand owners can use our cloud-based web portal to easily order many types of serialization codes for their products, labels and packages. Once the codes are applied to their products, brand owners can then monitor, control and protect their products during the product’s complete life cycle through the supply chain. Our customers use our patented invisible ink, VerifyInkTM which is combined with a proprietary reader to easily identify counterfeit products. Product investigators may then use our patented VerifyAuthenticatorTM technology, a device used with a smartphone and the VerifyMe app, to authenticate and decode VerifyInkTM codes. The user attaches this device to their smartphone, which reveals the hidden VerifyInkTM images that are then sent to our web portal in the cloud for authentication and data submission. We also have another device that does not require use the of a smartphone, our VerifyChecker™ which is a handheld device that is tuned to authenticate the unique frequency of our VerifyInkTM invisible ink. The VerifyChecker™ is designed for use by customers who desire instant authentication on items without the need for an internet connection. It is perfect for field investigators, CBP officials, or as validation in practice such as scanning event tickets at an entry gate. The device functionality was upgraded in September 2021 by adding wireless connectivity to a mobile phone enabling authentication attempts to be recorded in the cloud with geo-location, inspector’s names, and time and date stamp. To date, we have derived limited recurring revenues from two global brand owners who use VerifyMe Authenticate.
VerifyMe Track & Trace™ supply chain serialization, track and trace technology utilize overt dynamic codes (QR codes or other barcode symbology), such as our VerifyCode™, which are tied to our cloud-based authentication and track and trace system. This technology provides brand owners business intelligence on counterfeiting and diversion using distribution channel scans throughout the supply chain coupled with consumer scan data. All this data is consolidated on a system that allows brands to customize rules and parameters and establish sophisticated alert systems allowing brands to be proactive, rather than reactive, in thwarting illicit activity. Invisible codes can be added using VerifyInkTM to increase brand protection security and provide inspectors a means to authenticate counterfeit or diverted product if the visible codes have been defaced or removed. Using information from a smartphone, our VerifyCodeTM technology, can provide authentication and data submission information. A customer or end-user can scan codes printed on labels and packaging and send it to the cloud where our software can verify authenticity of the product, as well as track and trace the product from production through delivery. To date, we have derived limited revenues from the use of this technology in the personal protective equipment industry and in the cannabis industry.
VerifyMe® Online™ includes, through our collaboration with a strategic partner, a brand clearance and protection leader, technologies and services that better enable customers to effectively tackle counterfeit websites, domains and e-commerce platforms, and social media sites offering or promoting counterfeit products. To date, we have not derived revenue from this technology.
To optimize our security for our customers, we are seeking to add a blockchain architecture version to our brand protection platform which currently uses a centralized cloud-based data architecture. Our plan is to develop the ability to connect physical products to NFTs in the blockchain. VerifyMe has a patented dual-code technology that we believe will facilitate this process for clients requesting this service. We are exploring opportunities to gain the skillsets needed either through mergers and acquisitions or through strategic partnerships with blockchain specialists that will help us create this product.
We believe that our brand protection security technologies, coupled with our contract with HP Indigo, can be used to enable brand owners to securely prevent counterfeiting, prevent product diversion and authenticate labels, packaging and products and alleviate the brand owner’s liability from counterfeit products that physically harm consumers. Our covert technologies give brand owners the ability to control, monitor and protect their products life cycle. In cases where the brand owner may be subject to liability brought forth by counterfeit products, our tools allow the brand owner to prove whether the product causing an issue is authentic or counterfeit. Combined with our customer engagement product lines, we offer a unique and comprehensive brand protection and promotion solution that can be tailored to any brand’s specifications.
At present, our strategic partner, HP Indigo has the ability, with their Indigo 6000 series, to print our technology on a variable basis. HP Indigo has produced flexible packaging pouch samples, shrink sleeves samples, and tax stamp samples with our covert VerifyInkTM. In May 2019, we entered into a strategic partnership with INX, the third largest producer of inks in North America allowing us to successfully print our covert VerifyInk™ on garments, metal and plastic objects, and INX is now co-marketing the new security ink to its global clients. We are continuing to work with our partners and INX international to develop inkjet ink for various print head, drop on demand and continuous inkjet, that can be used independently or mounted to printing presses and finishing equipment. We have successfully developed VerifyInk™ for drop on demand inkjet printing and are carrying on with the development of a continuous inkjet solution. The specially formulated inks will enable these printing presses to print our VerifyInkTM invisible ink technology, which includes our variable VerifyCode™ serialization, track and trace technology. We believe VerifyInkTM is particularly well-suited to closed and controlled environments that want to verify transactions within a specific area, as well as labels, packaging, textiles, plastics and metal products that need authentication.
In addition to packaging and labels, our brand protection security printing technologies can be applied to authenticate important credentials such as tax stamps, driver’s licenses, plastics, metal, apparel, election ballots, birth certificates, immigration documents, gaming, apparel, currency, event and transportation tickets, passports, computer software, and credit cards. We can track and trace from production to ultimate consumption when coupled with our proprietary brand protection software.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted businesses and affected production and sales across a range of industries, as well as caused volatility in the financial markets, which negatively impacted our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customer demand, sales and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including, among other things, the continued duration and spread of the outbreak, the effectiveness of vaccines against new variants, the availability of vaccines and vaccination rates, and the impact on our customers and employees, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Please see Item 1A, “Risk Factors- Risks Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic” in this Report for additional information regarding certain risks associated with the pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused an increase in demand for safety products such as masks and gloves, COVID-19 test kits, medications and vaccines to treat the virus, which we believe has further caused an increase in counterfeit products. Our suite of technology solutions for global manufacturers, distributors and sellers are designed to allow consumers to prove authenticity and we have proactively reached out to global manufacturers who are seeking to provide their customers authenticity in their products. We believe we have a dynamic management and sales team in place with the ability to seamlessly work remotely to minimize any operational disruption.
After an approximate one-year COVD-19 related hiatus we begun attending sales conferences and other in-person sales initiatives in September 2021. Although we have been attending in-person sales events, such events are not at full capacity due to the ongoing pandemic. Since we have recently begun face to face sales presentations and trade shows we are experiencing a small increase in travel related costs versus the 12 months preceding September 2021. We expect these travel related costs to grow which should be offset by increased sales activity. VerifyMe has continued to be aggressive in regard to sales and marketing efforts as we have completed a new website which is generating new leads and we have expanded our sales force. We have also started our first social media advertising campaign. New leads are being generated due to these actions. We continue to work with our sales representatives to look for alternative ways to communicate effectively and promote sales both with our customers and potential customers.
Further, we anticipate that as a result of the continued COVID-19 pandemic, our customers may still require that their programs be cancelled, delayed or reduced. We will continue to work in partnership with our customers to continually assess any potential impacts and opportunities to mitigate risk.
SPAC Investment
On July 6, 2021, we co-sponsored the initial public offering of G3 VRM Acquisition Corp, a special purpose acquisition company, or “SPAC,” through a contribution into G3 VRM Holdings LLC, or the “Sponsor Entity.” The closing of the IPO of 10,626,000 Units, including 626,000 Units pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment, generated gross proceeds of $106,260,000. G3 VRM commenced trading on NASDAQ under the symbol “GGGVU” and is targeting businesses with enterprise values of approximately $250 million to $500 million within the technology and business services industry. VerifyMe, indirectly through the Sponsor Entity beneficially owns approximately 9.42% of the common stock of the SPAC.
If the SPAC is unable to complete its initial business combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or 15 or 18 months from the closing of the IPO, should we and the co-sponsor extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by depositing additional funds into the trust account as described in more detail in IPO prospectus), our founder shares and private placement securities will be worthless. Even if the SPAC is able to complete a business combination within the allotted time, if the combined company is unable to maintain adequate results from operations, then our investment in the SPAC could lose value and may ultimately become worthless. There can be no assurance that the SPAC will complete a business combination within the allotted time or that any such business combination will be successful.
As of December 31, 2021, we have accounted for the Sponsor Entity as an equity investment and have elected the fair value option resulting in a fair value gain of $8,371 thousand included in Other Income (Expense), Net in the accompanying Statement of Operations.
We believe our sponsorship of the SPAC will allow us to pursue an equity interest in larger companies and add value without diluting the equity interests of our shareholders.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021, and 2020
The following discussion analyzes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. The following information should be considered together with our financial statements for such periods and the accompanying notes thereto.
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $867 thousand, a 153% increase compared to $343 thousand, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue primarily related to increased security printing with our authentication serialization technology for two large global brand owners, as well as a new application of our technology, in the personal protective equipment space and new orders with two cannabis companies using our unique smart phone readable codes which will allow them to connect directly with their customer base.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, was $599 thousand and $281 thousand, respectively. The resulting gross margin was 69.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 81.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in our gross profit margin relates to a shift in product mix, with an increase in the use of our secure track and trace serialization technology and customer engagement products. We believe our high gross profit margins demonstrate our business model’s ability to generate profitable growth.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $2,995 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,072 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $923 thousand. The increase primarily related to increases in non-cash stock-based compensation of $550 thousand and an increase of costs associated with exploratory costs related to our search of strategic partnerships, mergers and acquisitions of $180 thousand.
Legal and Accounting
Legal and accounting fees decreased to $362 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $403 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease relates to savings in legal fees that were higher in 2020 related to our securities offerings.
Corporate Payroll Expenses
Payroll expenses increased to $859 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $704 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $155 thousand. The increase related to an increase in the executive compensation and an increase in the number of our employees.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $32 thousand to $51 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $19 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to continued development costs associated with commercializing our product lines. We plan to increase research and development in future periods, particularly in the switch from a cloud-based centralized network to an Ethereum decentralized block-chain platform for our supply chain monitoring, and authentication platform. In 2021, we also developed the ability to read VerifyInkTM covert codes at a distance in ambient light on any product.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $1,163 thousand compared to $651 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $512 thousand. The increase primarily related to an expansion of our sales team and marketing outreach in 2021. We expanded our sales team to address growing domestic and international opportunities resulting in increased compensation expense of approximately $350 thousand and $130 thousand for marketing programs.
Operating Loss
Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $4,831 thousand, an increase of $1,263 thousand, compared to $3,568 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in loss primarily related to an increase in non-cash stock-based compensation of approximately $370 thousand, an increase in employee headcount, increase in executive salaries, an increase relating to our sales and marketing outreach to meet our growing number of opportunities, and increased costs associated with being a Nasdaq listed company.
Net Income (Loss)
Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $3,612, an increase of $9,514 thousand compared to $5,902 thousand net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the fair value gain of $8,371 thousand on our equity investment in the SPAC during 2021 and the amortization of debt discount related to our 2020 senior secured convertible debentures (the “2020 Debentures”) included in interest expense, and loss on extinguishment of debt related to our 2019 senior secured convertible debentures (the “2019 Debentures”) in 2020. The resulting net income per diluted share for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, was $0.49 per diluted share, compared to $1.48 loss per diluted share for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operations used $3,254 thousand of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,281 thousand during the year end December 31, 2020, relating primarily to an increase in employee headcount, an expansion of our sales team and marketing outreach efforts.
Net cash used in investing activities was $2,851 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $125 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase relates primarily to our investment in the SPAC of $2,593 thousand.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $2,504 thousand to $7,588 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $10,092 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. On February 12, 2021, as part of our public offering of an aggregate 1,750,000 shares of common stock, we generated aggregate gross proceeds of $9.3 million and net proceeds of $8.4 million, less underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, including the partial exercise of the over-allotment option resulting in gross proceeds of $530 thousand. In the first quarter of 2020, we raised $1,992 thousand in gross proceeds from the 2020 Debentures for net proceeds of $1,747 thousand. In the second quarter of 2020, as part of our public offering, we raised approximately $10,000 thousand in gross proceeds and received net proceeds of $9,023 thousand, including the exercise of the over-allotment option resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $232 thousand.
Absent any acquisitions, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will fund our operations through 2025.
In November 2020, we announced a share repurchase program to spend up to $1.5 million to repurchase shares of our common stock until August 16, 2021. On August 12, 2021, this program was extended to expire on August 16, 2022. All other terms and conditions remained the same. To date, 216,945 shares have been purchased for a total of $725 thousand and a remaining $775 may be purchased under the program.
While we expect revenues to increase, we expect continued negative cash flows as we incur increased costs associated with expanding our business. We expect to grow our business organically and through key acquisitions that will help accelerate the growth of our business. We expect to continue to fund our operations primarily through utilization of our current financial resources, future revenue, and through the issuance of debt or equity.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by management during their preparation. We have identified below the accounting policies that are of particular importance in the presentation of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows and which require the application of significant judgment by management. We believe estimates and assumptions related to these critical accounting policies are appropriate under the circumstances; however, should future events or occurrences result in unanticipated consequences, there could be a material impact on our future financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Variable Interest Entity
We determined that we have a variable interest in a VIE through our indirect ownership of the SPAC. As such, we used judgment to determine whether we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE and would need to consolidate as a result. To make this determination, we evaluated our power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the SPAC. We concluded that we are not the primary beneficiary, and as such account for it as an equity investment. The facts and circumstances surrounding our determination of whether the SPAC is a VIE and the entity that is the primary beneficiary are analyzed on an ongoing basis based on the current facts and circumstances surrounding the entity, including at every reporting period.
Equity Investments
We have accounted for our beneficial ownership in the SPAC as an equity investment as we have determined that we exert a significant influence in the entity’s operations and accounting policies. Furthermore, we have elected the fair value option under applicable US GAAP as we believe the fair value best reflects the economic performance of the equity investment. We perform a qualitative assessment at each reporting date to determine if there was a change in fair value. The assessment considers factors such as, but not limited to, discussions with management, data showing other companies in the industry, plus adjustment to reflect company circumstances.
Derivative Liability
We have accounted for our two directors restricted stock units in the SPAC (“SPAC RSUs”) as a long-term derivative liability as the underlying awards are not the Company’s stock but an unrelated, publicly traded entity’s shares. We perform an assessment at each reporting date to determine if there was a change in fair value using a Monte Carlo Simulation. The assessment considers factors such as, but not limited to, discussions with management, data showing other companies in the industry, plus adjustment to reflect company circumstances.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue transactions include sales of our ink canisters, software, licensing, pre-printed labels, integrated solutions and leasing of our equipment. We recognize revenue based on the principals established in ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” Revenue recognition is made when our performance obligation is satisfied. Our terms vary based on the solutions we offer and are examined on a case-by-case basis. For licensing of our VerifyInkTM technology we depend on the integrity of our clients’ reporting.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation”, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees and directors based on estimated fair values on the grant date. We estimate the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes model. The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model include risk-free interest rates, expected volatility and expected life of the stock options. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect estimates of fair value stock-based compensation, and the compensation expense recorded in future periods. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line method.
We account for stock-based compensation awards to non-employees in accordance with ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Based Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”), which aligns accounting for share-based payments issued to nonemployees to that of employees under the existing guidance of Topic 718, with certain exceptions. This update supersedes previous guidance for equity-based payments to nonemployees under Subtopic 505-50, Equity - Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees.
All issuances of stock options or other equity instruments to non-employees as consideration for goods or services received by the Company are accounted for based on the fair value of the equity instruments issued. Non-employee equity-based payments are recorded as an expense over the service period, as if we had paid cash for the services. At the end of each financial reporting period, prior to vesting or prior to the completion of the services, the fair value of the equity-based payments will be re-measured, and the non-cash expense recognized during the period will be adjusted accordingly. Since the fair value of equity-based payments granted to non-employees is subject to change in the future, the amount of the future expense will include fair value re-measurements until the equity-based payments are fully vested or the service completed.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes accompanying the financial statements.