Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Business” in Item 1, and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this report. This discussion contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and all of which could be affected by uncertainties and risks. Our actual results may differ materially from the results contemplated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors including, but not limited to, those described in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Overview
Recent Developments
Spin-Off of Cognyte Software Ltd.
On February 1, 2021, we completed the previously announced spin-off (the “Spin-Off”) of Cognyte Software Ltd. (“Cognyte”), a company limited by shares incorporated under the laws of the State of Israel whose business and operations consist of our former Cyber Intelligence Solutions business (the “Cognyte Business”). The Spin-Off was completed by way of a pro rata distribution on February 1, 2021 of all of the then-issued and outstanding ordinary shares, no par value, of Cognyte to holders of record of our common stock as of the close of business on January 25, 2021. After the distribution, we do not beneficially own any ordinary shares of Cognyte and beginning February 1, 2021, we no longer consolidate Cognyte within our financial results or reflect the financial results of Cognyte within our continuing results of operations.
We incurred cumulative transaction costs of $53.0 million prior to the completion of the Spin-Off, of which $47.7 million and $5.3 million is reflected in our consolidated statement of operations within discontinued operations for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Transaction costs primarily consisted of costs incurred for the establishment of separate information systems for each company, along with related information technology costs, third-party advisory, consulting, legal and professional services, as well as other items that were incremental and one-time in nature that related to the Spin-Off.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into several agreements with Cognyte that provide a framework for the relationship between the parties going forward, including a limited duration Transition Services Agreement under which we and Cognyte agreed to provide and/or make available various administrative services and assets to each other for a given period based on each individual service. In no case will services be provided for more than 24 months after the Spin-Off. Services provided included certain services related to finance, accounting, business technology, human resources, information systems, facilities, document management and record retention and technical support. In consideration for such services, we and Cognyte paid fees to each other for the services provided, and those fees were generally in amounts intended to allow the party providing services to recover all of its direct and indirect costs incurred in providing those services, plus a standard markup. As of January 31, 2022, the performance of services under the Transition Services Agreement was substantially concluded.
The historical results of operations and financial positions of Cognyte are reported as discontinued operations in our consolidated financial statements. For further information on discontinued operations, see Note 2, “Discontinued Operations”, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report. Pursuant to the Spin-Off of the Cognyte Business, we now operate in a single reportable segment, which is described in the “Our Business” section below.
Apax Investment
On December 4, 2019, we announced that an affiliate (the “Apax Investor”) of Apax Partners would make an investment in us in an amount of up to $400.0 million. Under the terms of the Investment Agreement, on May 7, 2020 the Apax Investor purchased $200.0 million of our Series A convertible preferred stock (“Series A Preferred Stock”). In connection with the completion of the Spin-Off, on April 6, 2021 the Apax Investor purchased $200.0 million of our Series B convertible preferred stock (“Series B Preferred Stock” and, together with the Series A Preferred Stock, the “Preferred Stock”). Further discussion regarding the Apax investments and details of the closing of both tranches appears in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Overview” section below.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. The pandemic has caused significant economic disruption and uncertainty and governmental authorities around the world have implemented
numerous measures attempting to contain and mitigate the effects of the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, border closings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, shutdowns, limitations or closures of non-essential businesses, and social distancing requirements and many such restrictions remain in place. Our customers, partners, and vendors, have also implemented actions in response to the pandemic, including among others, office closings, site restrictions, and employee travel restrictions. In response to these challenges, we established remote working arrangements for our employees, limited non-essential business travel, and canceled or shifted our customer, employee, and industry events to a virtual-only format. During the first half of the year ended January 31, 2021, we also implemented certain cost-reduction actions of varying durations. Such actions included, but were not limited to, reducing our discretionary spending, decreasing capital expenditures, reconsidering the optimal uses of our cash and other capital resources, including with respect to our stock repurchases, and reducing workforce-related costs. During the first half of the year ended January 31, 2021, our revenue was adversely impacted by delays and reduced spending attributed to the impact of the pandemic on our customers’ operational priorities and as a result of cost containment measures they had implemented. We saw a reduction or delay in certain large customer contracts, particularly on-premises arrangements, and limitations on access to the facilities of our customers also impacted our ability to deliver some of our products and complete certain implementations, negatively impacting our ability to recognize revenue.
We saw an improvement in the business environment during the second half of the year ended January 31, 2021, which continued through the year ended January 31, 2022 as our customers accelerated the digitization of their customer interactions and internal operations due to the pandemic. This ongoing shift to a digital-first world has increased the importance and relevance of our solutions. Based on the improved business environment and our financial performance, we have in many cases resumed investments and other spending; however, these actions may need to be reassessed depending on how the facts and circumstances surrounding the pandemic evolve. Any such renewed cost controls may have an adverse impact on us, particularly if they remain in place for an extended period. As the pandemic has evolved, we have also adapted our pandemic response on a localized basis based on the prevailing conditions in the locations in which we and our customers, partners, or vendors operate. Currently, the majority of our employees are working remotely. We expect to incur additional costs to the extent we further resume business-related travel and as we prepare our facilities for a safe return to work environment as we anticipate implementing a hybrid work model during the year ending January 31, 2023. During the year ended January 31, 2022, we decided to exit twenty-one leased offices, which resulted in the recognition of accelerated lease expense and other asset impairments of $13.3 million, which is reflected in our consolidated statement of operations within selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended January 31, 2022. We will continue to evaluate our real estate footprint to determine where we can exit, consolidate, or modify our office space leases, and we anticipate exiting or reducing additional office leases in the future as we continue to assess how and to what extent our employees will return to work in our offices.
We are monitoring developments related to the U.S. federal, state, and local vaccination mandates and testing requirements and are evaluating the impact such mandates and requirements may have on our business and results of operations, including any potential impact on our employees, customers, partners, and vendors. Notwithstanding the strong demand for our cloud-based solutions and the recovery in the business environment, given the uncertainty associated with the pandemic, our ability to predict how it will impact our business, financial condition, liquidity, and financial results in future periods is limited, particularly if the pandemic fails to abate for an extended period of time or worsens. See Part I, Item IA “Risk Factors” of this report for additional discussion of the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our business and results of operations in the future.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was enacted and signed into U.S. law to provide economic relief to individuals and businesses facing economic hardship as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations as of and for the year ended January 31, 2022. However, we have deferred the timing of employer payroll taxes and accelerated the refund of AMT credits as permitted by the CARES Act. Where taxes payable to government entities have been deferred to a later date, no reduction of expenses has been recorded.
Our Business
Verint helps brands provide Boundless Customer Engagement™. For more than two decades, the world’s most iconic brands - including more than 85 of the Fortune 100 companies - have trusted Verint to provide the technology and domain expertise they require to effectively build enduring customer relationships.
Verint is uniquely positioned to help organizations close the Engagement Capacity Gap™ with our differentiated Verint Customer Engagement Cloud Platform. Brands today are challenged by new workforce dynamics, ever-expanding customer engagement channels and exponentially more consumer interactions - often while facing limited budgets and resources. As a result, brands are finding it more challenging to deliver the desired customer experience. This creates a capacity gap, which is widening as the digital transformation continues. Organizations are increasingly seeking technology to close this gap, solutions
that are based on artificial intelligence (AI) and are developed specifically for customer engagement. These solutions automate workflows across enterprise silos to optimize the workforce expense and at the same time drive an elevated consumer experience.
Verint is headquartered in Melville, New York, and has more than 30 offices worldwide. We have approximately 4,400 passionate professionals around the globe exclusively focused on helping brands provide Boundless Customer Engagement™.
Key Trends and Factors That May Impact our Performance
We believe there are three market trends that are benefiting Verint today: the acceleration of digital transformation, changes in the workforce shaping the future of work, and elevated customer expectations.
•Acceleration of Digital Transformation: Digital transformation is accelerating, and it is driving significant change in customer engagement for the contact center and across the enterprise. Long gone are the days when customer journeys were limited to phone calls into a contact center. Today, customer journeys take place across many touchpoints in the enterprise and across many communication and collaboration platforms, with digital leading the way. Customer touchpoints take place in contact centers, in back-office and branch operations, in ecommerce, in digital marketing, in self-service, and in customer experience departments. We believe that the breadth of customer touchpoints across the enterprise and the rapid growth in digital interactions, benefit Verint as these trends create demand for new solutions that increase automation and connect organizational silos to increase efficiency and elevate the customer experience.
•A Changing Workforce Shapes the Future of Work: Brands are facing unprecedented challenges when it comes to how they manage their changing workforce. Increasingly, brands are managing employees that may work from anywhere. Providing flexibility for where their employees work creates challenges in managing and coaching their teams. And because of the limited resources that are available, brands must find ways to use technology like AI-powered bots to augment their workforce. “The Great Resignation” has put a spotlight on the importance of employee experience and brands must quickly evolve how they recruit, onboard, and retain employees. We believe that these trends benefit Verint as they create demand for new solutions that can shape the future of work, with a workforce of people and bots working together, increased automation, greater employee flexibility and a greater focus on the voice of the employees.
•Elevated Customer Expectations: Customer expectations for faster, more consistent, and contextual responses continue to rise and meeting those expectations is becoming more difficult with legacy technology. The increase in the number of channels and customer desire to seamlessly shift between channels creates a more complex customer journey for brands to support and manage. Customers also expect that each brand will have a deep understanding of the customer’s relationship with the brand - one that is unified across the enterprise regardless of whether the customer touchpoint is in the contact center, on a website, through a mobile app, or in the back office or branch. We believe that this trend benefits Verint as it creates demand for new solutions that help brands support complex customer journeys and increase automation to meet elevated customer expectations.
As discussed above, the COVID-19 pandemic is also a material factor that may negatively impact us and demand for our solutions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
An appreciation of our critical accounting policies is necessary to understand our financial results. The accounting policies outlined below are considered to be critical because they can materially affect our operating results and financial condition, as these policies may require us to make difficult and subjective judgments regarding uncertainties. The accuracy of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a range of possible outcomes and a number of underlying variables, many of which are beyond our control, and there can be no assurance that our estimates are accurate.
Revenue Recognition
We derive and report our revenue in two categories: (a) recurring revenue, which includes bundled SaaS, unbundled SaaS, hosting services, optional managed services, initial and renewal support revenue, and product warranties, and (b) nonrecurring revenue, which primarily consists of our perpetual licenses, hardware, installation services, and business advisory consulting and training services. We account for a contract with a customer when it has written approval, the contract is committed, the
rights of the parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Products sold by us are delivered electronically, shipped from our facilities, or drop-shipped directly from the vendor. We generate all of our revenue from contracts with customers. We generally invoice a customer upon delivery, or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. Payments are due as per contract terms and do not contain a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our goods and services, and not to provide financing to or from customers.
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Our revenue recognition policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates. In applying our revenue recognition policy, we must determine which portions of our revenue are recognized at a point in time (generally perpetual and term license revenue) and which portions must be deferred and recognized over time (generally cloud, professional services, and support revenue). We analyze various factors including, but not limited to, the selling price of undelivered services when sold on a stand-alone basis, our pricing policies, the creditworthiness of our customers, and contractual terms and conditions in helping us to make such judgments about revenue recognition. Changes in judgment on any of these factors could materially impact the timing and amount of revenue recognized in a given period.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. In contracts with multiple performance obligations, we identify each performance obligation and evaluate whether the performance obligations are distinct within the context of the contract at contract inception. Performance obligations that are not distinct at contract inception are combined. For bundled SaaS arrangements, we determine whether the services performed during the initial phases of an arrangement, such as setup activities, are distinct. In most cases, we consider our bundled SaaS deliverable to represent a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). We record deferred revenue attributable to certain process transition, setup activities where such activities do not represent separate performance obligations. Implementation, support, and other services are typically considered distinct performance obligations when sold with a software license unless these services are determined to significantly modify the software. The transaction price is generally in the form of a fixed fee at contract inception, and excludes taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction, that are collected by us from a customer.
We allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on the estimated standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each performance obligation. Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the product or service separately, we estimate the SSP of each performance obligation based on either a cost-plus-margin approach or an adjusted market assessment approach. We may have more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by customers and circumstances. In these instances, we may use information such as the size of the customer and geographic region in determining the SSP.
We then look to how control transfers to the customer in order to determine the timing of revenue recognition. Revenue related to bundled SaaS, professional services and customer education services is typically recognized over time as the services are performed. We recognize support revenue, which includes software updates on a when-and-if-available basis, telephone support, and bug fixes or patches, over the term of the customer support agreement, which is typically one year for perpetual licenses support and one to three years for unbundled SaaS support. Unbundled SaaS and perpetual license revenue is typically recognized when the software is delivered and/or made available for download as this is the point the user of the software can direct the use of and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the functional intellectual property. We do not recognize software revenue related to the renewal of software licenses earlier than the beginning of the renewal period. In situations where arrangements include customer acceptance provisions, revenue is recognized when we can objectively verify the software complies with the specifications underlying acceptance and the customer has control of the software.
Our products are generally not sold with a right of return and credits and incentives granted have been minimal in both amount and frequency. Shipping and handling activities that are billed to customers and occur after control over a product has transferred to a customer are accounted for as fulfillment costs and are included in cost of revenue. Historically, these expenses have not been material.
Accounting for Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development assets, and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition dates, with
the remaining unallocated purchase prices recorded as goodwill. These fair values are typically estimated with assistance from independent valuation specialists. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, contractual support obligations assumed, contingent consideration arrangements, and pre-acquisition contingencies.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•future expected cash flows from software license sales, SaaS and support agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts, and acquired developed technologies;
•expected costs to develop in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed;
•the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio;
•cost of capital and discount rates; and
•estimating the useful lives of acquired assets as well as the pattern or manner in which the assets will amortize.
In connection with the purchase price allocations for applicable acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the contractual SaaS and support obligations we are assuming from the acquired business. The estimated fair value of the SaaS and support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach, which determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a reasonable profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the SaaS and support obligations are based on the historical direct costs related to providing the services. The sum of these costs and operating profit represents an approximation of the amount that we would be required to pay a third party to assume these obligations.
Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which can be an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, on an annual basis as of November 1, or more frequently if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that impairment in the value of goodwill may exist. Subsequent to the Spin-Off of Cognyte on February 1, 2021, we became a pure-play customer engagement company that operates as a single reporting unit.
In testing for goodwill impairment, we may elect to utilize a qualitative assessment to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to bypass a qualitative assessment, or if our qualitative assessment indicates that goodwill impairment is more likely than not, we perform quantitative impairment testing. If our quantitative testing determines that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill impairment is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
When we decide to perform a qualitative assessment, we assess and make judgments regarding a variety of factors which potentially impact the fair value of the reporting unit, including general economic conditions, industry and market-specific conditions, customer behavior, cost factors, our financial performance and trends, our strategies and business plans, capital requirements, management and personnel issues, and our stock price, among others. We then consider the totality of these and other factors, placing more weight on the events and circumstances that are judged to most affect the reporting unit’s fair value or the carrying amount of its net assets, to reach a qualitative conclusion regarding whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount.
When we perform quantitative impairment testing, we utilize one or more of three primary approaches to assess fair value: (a) an income-based approach, using projected discounted cash flows, (b) a market-based approach, using valuation multiples of comparable companies, and (c) a transaction-based approach, using valuation multiples for recent acquisitions of similar businesses made in the marketplace.
Our estimate of fair value of our reporting unit is based on a number of subjective factors, including: (a) appropriate consideration of valuation approaches (income approach, comparable public company approach, and comparable transaction approach), (b) estimates of future growth rates, (c) estimates of our future cost structure, (d) discount rates for our estimated cash flows, (e) selection of peer group companies for the comparable public company and the comparable transaction approaches, (f) required levels of working capital, (g) assumed terminal value, and (h) time horizon of cash flow forecasts.
The determination of reporting units also requires judgment. We assess whether a reporting unit exists within a reportable segment by identifying the unit, determining whether the unit qualifies as a business under GAAP, and assessing the availability and regular review by segment management of discrete financial information for the unit.
We review intangible assets that have finite useful lives and other long-lived assets when an event occurs indicating the potential for impairment. If any indicators are present, we perform a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the assets in question to their carrying amounts. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the test for recoverability are less than the long-lived assets carrying amount, we determine the fair value of the long-lived asset and recognize an impairment loss if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. The impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value.
For all our goodwill and other intangible asset impairment reviews, the assumptions and estimates used in the process are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the assumptions, judgments, and estimates we have used in our assessments are reasonable and appropriate, a material change in any of our assumptions or external factors could lead to future goodwill or other intangible asset impairment charges.
Based upon our November 1, 2021 quantitative goodwill impairment review of our reporting unit, we concluded that the estimated fair value of our reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value. Our reporting unit carried goodwill of $1,353.4 million at January 31, 2022.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which includes the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this approach, deferred taxes are recorded for the future tax consequences expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and liabilities are recovered or paid. The provision for income taxes represents income taxes paid or payable for the current year plus deferred taxes. Deferred taxes result from differences between the financial statement and tax bases of our assets and liabilities, and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when changes are enacted. The effects of future changes in income tax laws or rates are not anticipated.
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. The calculation of our income tax provision involves the application of complex tax laws and requires significant judgment and estimates.
We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets for each jurisdiction in which we operate at each reporting date, and we establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income of the same character and in the same jurisdiction. We consider all available positive and negative evidence in making this assessment, including, but not limited to, the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. In circumstances where there is sufficient negative evidence indicating that our deferred tax assets are not more likely than not realizable, we establish a valuation allowance.
We use a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by assessing whether they are more likely than not sustainable, based solely on their technical merits, upon examination, and including resolution of any related appeals or litigation process. The second step is to measure the associated tax benefit of each position as the largest amount that we believe is more likely than not realizable. Differences between the amount of tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our income tax returns and the amount of tax benefits recognized in our financial statements represent our unrecognized income tax benefits, which we either record as a liability or as a reduction of deferred tax assets. Our policy is to include interest (expense and/or income) and penalties related to unrecognized income tax benefits as a component of the provision for income taxes.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
During the three-year period ended January 31, 2022, restricted stock units were our predominant stock-based payment award. The fair value of these awards is equivalent to the market value of our common stock on the grant date.
We periodically award restricted stock units to executive officers and certain employees that vest upon the achievement of specified performance goals or market conditions. The recognition of the compensation costs of the performance-based awards with performance goals requires an assessment of the probability that the specified performance criteria will be achieved. At each reporting date, we update our assessment of the probability that the specified performance criteria will be achieved and adjust our estimate of the fair value of the award, if necessary. For the performance-based awards with market conditions, the condition is incorporated into the grant date fair value valuation of the award and compensation costs are recognized even if the market condition is not satisfied.
Awards are generally subject to multi-year vesting periods. We recognize compensation expense for awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which are generally the vesting periods, reduced by estimated forfeitures.
Changes in assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of stock-based compensation and, consequently, the related expense recognized. The assumptions we use in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Results of Operations
Seasonality and Cyclicality
As is typical for many software and technology companies, our business is subject to seasonal and cyclical factors. In most years, our revenue and operating income are typically highest in the fourth quarter and lowest in the first quarter (prior to the impact of unusual or nonrecurring items). Moreover, revenue and operating income in the first quarter of a new year may be lower than in the fourth quarter of the preceding year, in some years, by a significant margin. In addition, we generally receive a higher volume of orders in the last month of a quarter, with orders concentrated in the later part of that month. We believe that these seasonal and cyclical factors primarily reflect customer spending patterns and budget cycles, as well as the impact of incentive compensation plans for our sales personnel. While seasonal and cyclical factors such as these are common in the software and technology industry, this pattern should not be considered a reliable indicator of our future revenue or financial performance. Many other factors, including general economic conditions, may also have an impact on our business and financial results.
Overview of Operating Results
The following table sets forth a summary of certain key financial information for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Our revenue increased approximately $44.3 million, or 5%, from $830.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $874.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. The increase consisted of a $57.5 million increase in recurring revenue, partially offset by a $13.2 million decrease in nonrecurring revenue. For additional details on our revenue by category, see “-Revenue”. Revenue in the Americas, EMEA, and APAC represented approximately 69%, 20%, and 11% of our total revenue, respectively, in the year ended January 31, 2022,
compared to approximately 69%, 21%, and 10%, respectively, in the year ended January 31, 2021. Further details of changes in revenue are provided below.
Operating income was $46.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $57.4 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease in operating income was primarily due to a $43.8 million increase in operating expenses, partially offset by a $33.2 million increase in gross profit. The increase in operating expenses consisted of a $49.5 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $4.9 million decrease in net research and development expenses and a $0.8 million decrease in amortization of other acquired intangible assets. Further details of changes in operating income are provided below.
Net loss from continuing operations attributable to Verint Systems Inc. common shares was $4.5 million and diluted net loss per common share was $0.07 in the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to net loss from continuing operations attributable to Verint Systems Inc. common shares of $57.3 million and diluted net loss per common share of $0.88 in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease in net loss from continuing operations attributable to Verint Systems Inc. per common share and diluted net loss per common share in the year ended January 31, 2022 was primarily due to a $91.8 million decrease in total other expense, net primarily due to the elimination of a non-cash revaluation loss related to the Future Tranche Right as a result of the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, partially offset by a $16.9 million increase in our provision for income taxes, an $11.3 million increase in Preferred Stock dividends due to the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, a $10.6 million decrease in operating income, as described above, and a $0.2 million increase in net income from continuing operations attributable to our noncontrolling interests. Further details of these changes are provided below.
A portion of our business is conducted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, and therefore, our revenue and operating expenses are affected by fluctuations in applicable foreign currency exchange rates. When comparing average exchange rates for the year ended January 31, 2022 to average exchange rates for the year ended January 31, 2021, the U.S. dollar weakened relative to the British pound sterling, the Australian dollar, the euro, and the Israeli shekel rate (hedged and unhedged), resulting in an overall increase in our revenue, cost of revenue and operating expenses on a U.S. dollar-denominated basis. For the year ended January 31, 2022, had foreign exchange rates remained unchanged from rates in effect for the year ended January 31, 2021, our revenue would have been approximately $9.2 million lower and our cost of revenue and operating expenses on a combined basis would have been approximately $11.9 million lower, which would have resulted in a $2.7 million increase in operating income.
As of January 31, 2022, we employed approximately 4,400 professionals, including part-time employees and certain contractors, compared to approximately 4,300 at January 31, 2021.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Our revenue decreased approximately $16.3 million, or 2%, from $846.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $830.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $57.5 million decrease in nonrecurring revenue, partially offset by a $41.2 million increase in recurring revenue. For additional details on our revenue by category, see “-Revenue”. Revenue in the Americas, EMEA, and APAC represented approximately 69%, 21%, and 10% of our total revenue, respectively, in the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to approximately 70%, 20%, and 10%, respectively, in the year ended January 31, 2020. Further details of changes in revenue are provided below.
Operating income was $57.4 million in the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to an operating loss of $2.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2020. This increase in operating income was primarily due to a $59.1 million decrease in operating expenses and a $0.3 million increase in gross profit. The decrease in operating expenses consisted of a $51.9 million decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses primarily due to cost reduction initiatives we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a $6.1 million decrease in net research and development expenses, and a $1.1 million decrease in amortization of other acquired intangible assets. Further details of changes in operating income are provided below.
Net loss from continuing operations attributable to Verint Systems Inc. common shares was $57.3 million and diluted net loss per common share was $0.88 in the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to net loss from continuing operations attributable to Verint Systems Inc. common shares of $47.1 million and diluted net loss per common share of $0.71 in the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase in net loss from continuing operations attributable to Verint Systems Inc. per common share and diluted net loss per common share in the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $61.5 million increase in total other expense, net primarily due to the change in fair value of the Future Tranche Right issued in connection with our Preferred Stock, a $7.7 million increase in dividends on Preferred Stock, and a $0.5 million increase in net income from continuing operations attributable to our noncontrolling interests, partially offset by a $59.4 million increase in operating income, as described above. Further details of these changes are provided below.
As noted above, a portion of our business is conducted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, and therefore our revenue and operating expenses are affected by fluctuations in applicable foreign currency exchange rates. When comparing average exchange rates for the year ended January 31, 2021 to average exchange rates for the year ended January 31, 2020, the U.S. dollar strengthened relative to the Brazilian real, and Indian rupee and weakened against the euro, British pound sterling, and our Israeli shekel rate (hedged and unhedged), resulting in an overall increase in our revenue and expenses, on a U.S. dollar-denominated basis. For the year ended January 31, 2021, had foreign exchange rates remained unchanged from rates in effect for the year ended January 31, 2020, our revenue would have been approximately $1.3 million lower and our cost of revenue and operating expenses on a combined basis would have been approximately $0.5 million lower, which would have resulted in a $0.8 million decrease in operating income.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, we employed approximately 4,300 professionals, including part-time employees and certain contractors.
Revenue
We derive and report our revenue in two categories: (a) recurring revenue, which includes bundled SaaS, unbundled SaaS, hosting services, optional managed services, initial and renewal support revenue, and product warranties, and (b) nonrecurring revenue, which primarily consists of our perpetual licenses, hardware, installation services, and business advisory consulting and training services.
The following table sets forth revenue by category for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Recurring Revenue
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Recurring revenue increased approximately $57.5 million, or 10%, from $575.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $633.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. The increase consisted of a $111.0 million increase in cloud revenue, partially offset by a $53.5 million decrease in support revenue. The increase in cloud revenue was primarily due to an increase in unbundled SaaS revenue resulting from support conversion transactions and new cloud deployments, and an increase in bundled SaaS and optional managed services as we continue to see positive demand from customers across our portfolio of cloud-based solutions and services. The decrease in support revenue was primarily due to customers migrating to our cloud-based solutions. We expect our revenue mix to continue to shift to recurring sources, which is consistent with our cloud-first strategy and a general market shift from on-premises to cloud-based solutions.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Recurring revenue increased approximately $41.2 million, or 8%, from $534.4 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $575.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase consisted of a $56.9 million increase in cloud revenue, partially offset by a $15.7 million decrease in support revenue. The increase in cloud revenue was primarily due to an increase in bundled SaaS driven by positive demand from customers across our portfolio for cloud-based solutions and services, and an increase in unbundled SaaS revenue resulting from new cloud deployments and support conversion transactions. The decrease in support revenue was primarily due to customers migrating to our cloud-based solutions.
Nonrecurring Revenue
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Nonrecurring revenue decreased approximately $13.2 million, or 5%, from $254.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $241.4 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. The decrease consisted of a $9.5 million decrease in professional services revenue and a $3.7 million decrease in perpetual revenue. The decrease in professional services revenue was primarily driven by a decrease in implementation services as a result of the overall shift in our business to a cloud-based model. The decrease in perpetual revenue was primarily due to a continued shift in spending by our customers towards our cloud-based solutions. Our nonrecurring revenue can fluctuate from period to period, as some large contracts can represent a significant share of our nonrecurring revenue for a given period.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Nonrecurring revenue decreased approximately $57.5 million, or 18%, from $312.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $254.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $38.0 million decrease in perpetual revenue and a $19.5 million decrease in professional services revenue. The decrease in perpetual revenue was primarily driven by delayed purchasing decisions on large contracts, particularly on-premises arrangements, and reduced product spending by customers, both due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a shift in spending by our customers towards our cloud-based solutions. The decrease in professional services revenue was due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related containment measures, including customer facility closures and travel restrictions, and an overall shift in our business to a cloud-based model.
Cost of Revenue
The following table sets forth cost of revenue by recurring and nonrecurring, as well as amortization of acquired technology for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Cost of Recurring Revenue
Cost of recurring revenue primarily consists of employee compensation and related expenses for our cloud operations and support teams, contractor costs, cloud infrastructure and data center costs, travel expenses relating to optional managed services and support, and royalties due to third parties for software components that are embedded in our cloud-based solutions. Cost of recurring revenue also includes stock-based compensation expenses, facility costs, and other allocated overhead expenses.
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Cost of recurring revenue increased approximately $17.6 million, or 13%, from $139.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 to $156.6 million for the year ended January 31, 2022. The increase was primarily due to an increase in employee compensation, contractor expenses, and general overhead costs compared to the prior year during which we had implemented certain cost reduction measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as an increase in headcount, the write-off of prepaid license royalties that are not core to our growth strategy, and an increase in data center and cloud costs associated with the increase in cloud revenue. Our recurring revenue gross margins decreased slightly from 76% in the year ended January 31, 2021 to 75% in the year ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to the one-time write-off of prepaid license royalties during the year ended January 31, 2022.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Cost of recurring revenue increased approximately $6.2 million, or 5%, from $132.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2020 to $139.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in data center and cloud costs associated with the corresponding increase in cloud revenue and an increase in employee compensation and related expenses, partially offset by a decrease in travel and general overhead costs as a result of cost reduction initiatives related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our recurring revenue gross margins increased from 75% in the year ended January 31, 2020 to 76% in the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to temporary COVID-19 pandemic cost containment measures that we implemented.
We expect our cost of recurring revenue to continue to increase as we continue to invest in our cloud operations to support our growing cloud customer base and improve the security of our solutions.
Cost of Nonrecurring Revenue
Cost of nonrecurring revenue primarily consists of employee compensation and related expenses, contractor costs, travel expenses relating to installation, training and consulting services, hardware material costs, and royalties due to third parties for software components that are embedded in our on-premises software solutions. Cost of nonrecurring revenue also includes amortization of capitalized software development costs, employee compensation and related expenses associated with our global operations, facility costs, and other allocated overhead expenses.
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Cost of nonrecurring revenue decreased approximately $6.3 million, or 5%, from $130.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $124.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in general overhead expenses as a result of the Spin-Off, a decrease in employee compensation and related expenses due to a decrease in headcount supporting nonrecurring revenue offerings, and lower contractor costs. These decreases were offset by an increase in third-party hardware delivered and related shipping and handling costs during the current year. Our overall nonrecurring gross margins were 49% in each of the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Cost of nonrecurring revenue decreased approximately $19.3 million, or 13%, from $149.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $130.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in travel costs, employee compensation, and contractor costs as a result of cost reduction initiatives related to the COVID-19 pandemic and our overall shift towards cloud-based solutions. Our overall nonrecurring gross margin decreased from 52% in the year ended January 31, 2020 to 49% in the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to lower sales volume due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in revenue decreasing at a faster rate than nonrecurring costs.
Amortization of Acquired Technology
Amortization of acquired technology consists of amortization of technology assets acquired in connection with business combinations.
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Amortization of acquired technology decreased approximately $0.2 million, or 1%, from $18.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $17.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. The decrease was attributable to acquired technology intangible assets from historical business combinations becoming fully amortized during the year ended January 31, 2022, partially offset by amortization expense of acquired technology intangible assets associated with recent business combinations.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Amortization of acquired technology decreased approximately $3.6 million, or 17%, from $21.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $18.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was attributable to acquired technology intangible assets from historical business combinations becoming fully amortized during the year ended January 31, 2021, partially offset by amortization expense of acquired technology intangible assets associated with business combinations that closed during the prior year, for which a full year of amortization expense was reflected in the year ended January 31, 2021.
Further discussion regarding our business combinations appears in Note 6, “Business Combinations and Divestitures” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Research and Development, Net
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and subcontracting expenses, facility costs, and other allocated overhead, net of certain software development costs that are capitalized. Software development costs are capitalized upon the establishment of technological feasibility and continue to be capitalized through the general release of the related software product.
The following table sets forth research and development, net for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Research and development, net decreased approximately $4.9 million, or 4%, from $128.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $123.3 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $16.9 million decrease in indirect R&D shared support services and facility expenses due to a reduction in our shared support services workforce as a result of the completion of the Spin-Off, a $3.6 million increase in benefits from participation in certain government-sponsored programs for the support of R&D activities, and a $2.5 million decrease in general overhead costs. These decreases were partially offset by a $7.8 million increase in employee compensation and related expenses compared to the prior year period during which we had implemented certain cost reduction measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and increased investment in R&D headcount, a $5.7 million increase in contractor costs, a $3.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses due to a shorter vesting schedule for prior year grants which resulted in a greater charge in the current year, additional performance based awards in connection with completion of the Spin-Off, and a change in our R&D employee bonus payment structure, and a $1.1 million increase in third party software components in support of our cloud business.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Research and development, net decreased approximately $6.0 million, or 5%, from $134.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $128.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to a $3.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation as a result of a change in our R&D employee bonus payment structure and cost reduction initiatives we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a $1.8 million decrease in travel related expenses, and a $1.3 million decrease in employee compensation and related expenses, excluding stock-based compensation, partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in capitalized software development costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and related expenses, professional fees, changes in the fair values of our obligations under contingent consideration arrangements, sales and marketing expenses, including travel costs, sales commissions and sales referral fees, facility costs, communication expenses, and other administrative expenses.
The following table sets forth selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased approximately $49.5 million, or 15%, from $327.3 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $376.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $14.9 million in employee compensation and related expenses, a $7.0 million increase in contractor costs, and a $3.8 million increase in marketing related expenses compared to the prior year during which we had implemented certain cost reduction measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a $17.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses due to a shorter vesting schedule for prior year grants which resulted in a greater charge in the current year period, additional performance-based awards in connection with completion of the Spin-Off, and a change in the employee bonus payment structure, $13.3 million of accelerated facility costs and asset impairment charges due to the early termination or abandonment of certain office leases, a $5.0 million increase in professional service fees primarily related to recent business combinations, and $2.6 million of one-time nonrecurring operational costs incurred during the current period related to the Spin-Off, in that they are only necessary because of the Spin-Off, but they are not transactional type costs. These increases in SG&A expenses were partially offset by a $13.4 million decrease in indirect SG&A shared support services and facilities expenses due to a reduction in our shared support services workforce as a result of the completion of the Spin-Off. SG&A expenses were also impacted by a $1.7 million increase due to a change in the fair value of our obligations under contingent consideration arrangements, from a net benefit of $0.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 to a net charge of $0.9 million during the year ended January 31, 2022, as a result of revised outlooks for achieving the performance targets under several unrelated contingent consideration arrangements.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased approximately $51.9 million, or 14%, from $379.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $327.3 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily attributable to cost reduction initiatives we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a $13.7 million decrease in travel related costs, a $7.8 million decrease in contractors used for corporate support activities, and a $5.6 million decrease in marketing related expenses due to the cancellation of certain sales and marketing events and trade shows. Additionally, stock-based compensation decreased by $14.2 million primarily due to a change in employee bonus payment structure and professional fees decreased by $7.9 million due to a shareholder proxy contest that impacted the year ended January 31, 2020. Selling, general, and administrative expenses were also impacted by a $5.7 million decrease due to the change in the fair value of our obligations under contingent consideration arrangements, from a net expense of $4.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to a net benefit of $0.8 million during the year ended January 31, 2021, as a result of revised outlooks for achieving the performance targets under several unrelated contingent consideration arrangements. These decreases were partially offset by a $4.6 million increase in depreciation expense on fixed assets used for general administration purposes.
The impact of contingent consideration arrangements on our operating results can vary over time as we revise our outlook for achieving the performance targets underlying the arrangements. This impact on our operating results may be more significant in some periods than in others, depending on a number of factors, including the magnitude of the change in the outlook for each arrangement separately as well as the number of contingent consideration arrangements in place, the liabilities requiring adjustment in that period, and the net effect of those adjustments.
Amortization of Other Acquired Intangible Assets
Amortization of other acquired intangible assets consists of amortization of certain intangible assets acquired in connection with business combinations, including customer relationships, distribution networks, trade names and non-compete agreements.
The following table sets forth amortization of other acquired intangible assets for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Amortization of other acquired intangible assets decreased approximately $0.8 million, or 3%, from $29.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $29.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2022. The decrease was attributable to acquired customer-related intangible assets from historical business combinations becoming fully amortized during the year ended January 31, 2022, partially offset by amortization expense associated with acquired intangible assets from recent business combinations.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Amortization of other acquired intangible assets decreased approximately $1.1 million, or 4%, from $30.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $29.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was attributable to acquired customer-related intangible assets from historical business combinations becoming fully amortized during the year ended January 31, 2021, partially offset by amortization expense associated with acquired intangible assets from business combinations that closed during the prior year, for which a full year of amortization expense was reflected in the year ended January 31, 2021.
Further discussion regarding our business combinations appears in Note 6, “Business Combinations and Divestitures” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Other Expense, Net
The following table sets forth total other expense, net for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
* Percentage is not meaningful.
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Total other expense, net, decreased by $91.7 million from $99.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $7.3 million in the year ended January 31, 2022.
Interest expense decreased to $10.3 million in the year ended January 31, 2022 from $39.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 due to lower interest expense related to our 2014 Notes, as a result of the 2014 Notes maturing on June 1, 2021 and our early adoption of ASU No. 2020-06 on February 1, 2021. As a result of this adoption, the 2014 Notes were accounted for as a single liability until maturity as the new accounting guidance eliminated the amortization of the debt discount. Prior to February 1, 2021, the carrying amount of the equity component of the 2014 Notes was recorded as a debt discount and amortized to interest expense. Interest expense related to the amortization of debt discount costs associated with the 2014 Notes was $12.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. See Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for more information regarding the adoption of ASU No. 2020-06. Interest expense also decreased due to lower interest rates on outstanding borrowings as well as lower outstanding borrowings as a result of the partial prepayment of our 2017 Term Loan in conjunction with the issuance of the 2021 Notes and no outstanding balances under our 2017 Revolving Credit Facility during the year ended January 31, 2022.
During the year ended January 31, 2022, we recorded $2.5 million of losses on early retirements of debt, $2.0 million of which was a result of repaying $309.0 million of our 2017 Term Loan. In April 2021, we also amended the 2017 Credit Agreement and refinanced our 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, which otherwise would have matured on June 29, 2022, resulting in the write off of $0.5 million of unamortized deferred debt issuance costs related to certain lenders who will no longer provide commitments under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility. Further discussion regarding our 2017 Credit Agreement, 2017 Term Loan and 2021 Revolving Credit Facility appears in Note 8, “Long-term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
We recorded $1.6 million of net foreign currency losses in each of the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021. Our foreign currency losses in the current year period resulted primarily from fluctuations associated with the exchange rate movement of the U.S. dollar against the British pound sterling, the Australian dollar, and the Brazilian real.
During the year ended January 31, 2022, we recorded a $14.4 million loss on our interest rate swap as a result of the partial early retirement of our 2017 Term Loan, with no comparable transaction in the prior year period.
During the year ended January 31, 2022, we recorded a non-cash Future Tranche Right revaluation gain of $15.8 million compared to a revaluation loss of $56.1 million during year ended January 31, 2021. The non-cash gain for the current period relates to the final mark-to-market adjustment of the Future Tranche Right, issued in connection with the closing of the Series A Preferred Stock on May 7, 2020 relative to the potential future issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock. The change in fair value was primarily due to a decrease in our stock price from January 31, 2021 to immediately prior to the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, which decreased the estimated fair value of the Future Tranche Right. Upon the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock on April 6, 2021, the Future Tranche Right was settled and no further charges (or benefits) will be recorded. The non-cash charge for the prior year period relates to the change in fair value of the Future Tranche Right primarily due to a significant increase in our stock price during the period, which increased the estimated fair value of the Future Tranche Right. Please refer to Note 10, “Convertible Preferred Stock” and Note 14, “Fair Value Measurements” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding the Future Tranche Right.
We recorded $5.4 million of income within other, net in the year ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to the recognition of a $3.1 million unrealized gain from a fair value adjustment to a noncontrolling equity investment related to an observable price change in the period. During the year ended January 31, 2021, we recorded $1.6 million of expenses within other, net primarily due to fees in connection with our second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Total other expense, net, increased by $61.5 million from $37.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $99.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2021.
Interest income decreased from $2.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $1.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 due to a decrease in average interest rates, partially offset by interest earned on higher cash balances.
Interest expense decreased to $39.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 from $40.3 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates on outstanding borrowings.
We recorded $1.6 million of net foreign currency losses in the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to $0.7 million of net foreign currency gains in the year ended January 31, 2020. Our foreign currency gains and losses are primarily the result of fluctuations associated with the exchange rate movement of the U.S. dollar against the euro, the Israeli shekel, the Brazilian real, and the British pound sterling.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, there were net losses on derivative financial instruments (not designated as hedging
instruments) of $1.3 million, compared to $0.2 million of net gains on such instruments for the year ended January 31, 2020. The net losses during the year ended January 31, 2021 were primarily the result of an unrealized loss associated with our interest rate swap contract.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, we recorded a non-cash Future Tranche Right charge of $56.1 million. This non-cash charge for the period relates to the change in fair value of the Future Tranche Right (the right of the Apax Investor to purchase the Series B Preferred Stock at a future date), issued in connection with the closing of the Series A Preferred Stock on May 7, 2020. The change in fair value was primarily due to a significant increase in our stock price during the period, which increased the estimated fair value of the Future Tranche Right.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, we recorded $1.6 million of expenses within other, net compared to $0.3 million of net expenses for the year ended January 31, 2020. The net expenses during the year ended January 31, 2021 were primarily due to fees in connection with our second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement. Further discussion of the second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement appears in Note 8, “Long-Term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table sets forth our provision for income taxes from continuing operations for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Intra-period allocation rules require us to allocate our provision for income taxes between continuing operations and other categories such as discontinued operations or comprehensive income (loss). As described in Item 8, Note 2, “Discontinued Operations”, the results of Cognyte have been reported as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Year Ended January 31, 2022 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2021. Our effective income tax rate was 60.4% for the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to a negative effective income tax rate of 16.6% for the year ended January 31, 2021. For the year ended January 31, 2022, our effective income tax rate was higher than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the U.S. taxation of certain foreign income and impact of a tax rate change in a foreign jurisdiction, offset by the change in the fair value of the Future Tranche Right associated with the Preferred Stock issuance. The effective tax rate is further impacted by the mix and levels of income and losses among taxing jurisdictions, changes in valuation allowances, and changes in unrecognized income tax benefits.
For the year ended January 31, 2021, our effective income tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of U.S. taxation of certain foreign activities, and the change in the fair value of the Future Tranche Right associated with the Preferred Stock issuance. The effective rate is further impacted by the mix and levels of income and losses among taxing jurisdictions, changes in valuation allowances, and changes in unrecognized income tax benefits.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Our effective income tax rate was negative 16.6% for the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to a negative effective income tax rate of 17.5% for the year ended January 31, 2020. For the year ended January 31, 2021, our effective income tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of U.S. taxation of certain foreign activities and the change in the fair value of the Future Tranche Right associated with the Preferred Stock. The effective tax rate is further impacted by the mix and levels of income and losses among taxing jurisdictions, changes in valuation allowances, and changes in unrecognized income tax benefits.
For the year ended January 31, 2020, our effective income tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of U.S. taxation of certain foreign activities, the mix and levels of income and losses among taxing jurisdictions, and changes in valuation allowances and in unrecognized income tax benefits.
Net Income from Discontinued Operations
As more fully described in Note 2, “Discontinued Operations” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report, on February 1, 2021, we completed the Spin-Off of our Cognyte Business into an independent public company, Cognyte. As a result, the historical results of operations for Cognyte have been included within discontinued operations in our consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary recurring source of cash is the collection of proceeds from the sale of products and services to our customers, including cash periodically collected in advance of delivery or performance.
On December 4, 2019, we announced that the Apax Investor would make an investment in us in an amount of up to $400.0 million. Under the terms of the Investment Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2019, the Apax Investor purchased $200.0 million of our Series A Preferred Stock in an issuance that closed on May 7, 2020, with an initial conversion price of $53.50 per share. In accordance with the Investment Agreement, the Series A Preferred Stock did not participate in the Spin-Off distribution of the Cognyte shares described above and the Series A conversion price was instead adjusted to $36.38 per share based on the ratio of the relative trading prices of Verint and Cognyte following the Spin-Off. In connection with the completion of the Spin-Off, the Apax Investor purchased $200.0 million of our Series B Preferred Stock in an issuance that closed on April 6, 2021. The Series B Preferred Stock is convertible at a conversion price of $50.25, based in part on our trading price over the 20 trading day period following the Spin-Off. As of January 31, 2022, Apax’s ownership in us on an as-converted basis was approximately 12.9%.
Each series of Preferred Stock pays dividends at an annual rate of 5.2% until the 48-month anniversary of the closing of the Series A Preferred Stock investment, and thereafter at a rate of 4.0%, subject to adjustment under certain circumstances. Dividends will be cumulative and payable semiannually in arrears in cash. All dividends that are not paid in cash will remain accumulated dividends with respect to each share of Preferred Stock. We used the proceeds from the Apax investment to repay outstanding indebtedness, to fund a portion of our stock repurchase programs (as described below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements”), and/or for general corporate purposes. Please refer to Note 10, “Convertible Preferred Stock”, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for more information regarding the Apax convertible preferred stock investment.
Our primary recurring use of cash is payment of our operating costs, which consist primarily of employee-related expenses, such as compensation and benefits, as well as general operating expenses for cloud operations, marketing, facilities and overhead costs, and capital expenditures. We also utilize cash for debt service, stock repurchases, dividends on the Preferred Stock, and business acquisitions. Cash generated from operations, along with our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, are our primary sources of operating liquidity, and we believe that our operating liquidity is currently
sufficient to support our business operations, including debt service, capital expenditure requirements, and the payment of dividends on the convertible preferred stock.
On June 29, 2017, we entered into the 2017 Credit Agreement with certain lenders, and terminated a prior credit agreement. The 2017 Credit Agreement was amended on January 31, 2018 (the “2018 Amendment”), again on June 8, 2020 (the “2020 Amendment”), and again on April 9, 2021 (the “2021 Amendment”). Pursuant to the 2020 Amendment, we were permitted to effect the Spin-Off within the parameters set forth in the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, and our 2014 Notes would not be deemed to be outstanding if such 2014 Notes were cash collateralized in accordance with the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, for purposes of the determination of the maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility. On February 26, 2021, we deposited approximately $390.0 million of cash, representing the full principal amount of the 2014 Notes then outstanding, as well as the final interest payment on the 2014 Notes due at maturity, into an escrow account in satisfaction of the cash collateralization provisions of the 2020 Amendment. On May 28, 2021, prior to the June 1, 2021 maturity date of the 2014 Notes, we used the escrowed cash to settle the principal amount, including the final interest payment, and the incremental conversion value of $57.7 million was settled with approximately 1,250,000 shares of common stock. Further discussion of our 2017 Credit Agreement as amended, appears below, under “Financing Arrangements”.
We have historically expanded our business in part by investing in strategic growth initiatives, including acquisitions of products, technologies, and businesses. We may finance such acquisitions using cash, debt, stock, or a combination of the foregoing, however, we have used cash as consideration for substantially all of our historical business acquisitions, including approximately $57.0 million of net cash expended for business acquisitions during the year ended January 31, 2022. There were no business acquisitions during the year ended January 31, 2021. Please refer to Note 6, “Business Combinations”, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for more information regarding our recent business combinations.
We continually examine our options with respect to terms and sources of existing and future short-term and long-term capital resources to enhance our operating results and to ensure that we retain financial flexibility, and may from time to time elect to raise capital through the issuance of additional equity or the incurrence of additional debt. In connection with the completion of the Spin-Off, the Apax Investor purchased $200.0 million of our Series B Preferred Stock in an issuance that closed on April 6, 2021. Additionally, we issued $315.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.25% convertible senior notes due April 15, 2026, unless earlier converted by the holders pursuant to their terms, on April 9, 2021 (the “2021 Notes”). We used a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Notes to pay the costs of the capped call transactions. We also used a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Notes, together with the net proceeds from the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, to repay a portion of the outstanding indebtedness under our 2017 Credit Agreement, to terminate an interest rate swap agreement, and to repurchase shares of our common stock. The remainder is being used for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
A portion of our operating income is earned outside the United States. Cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, and restricted cash and cash equivalents, and restricted bank time deposits (excluding any long-term portions) held by our subsidiaries outside of the United States were $140.2 million and $241.1 million as of January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and are generally used to fund the subsidiaries’ operating requirements and to invest in growth initiatives, including business acquisitions. These subsidiaries also held long-term restricted cash and cash equivalents, and restricted bank time deposits of $0.4 million and $0.6 million, at January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
We currently intend to continue to indefinitely reinvest a portion of the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, which, as a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, may now be repatriated without incurring additional U.S. federal income taxes.
Should other circumstances arise whereby we require more capital in the United States than is generated by our domestic operations, or should we otherwise consider it in our best interests, we could repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions, which could result in higher effective tax rates. As noted above, we currently intend to indefinitely reinvest a portion of the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to finance foreign activities. Except to the extent that earnings of our foreign subsidiaries have been subject to U.S. taxation as of January 31, 2022, and withholding taxes of $1.0 million accrued as of January 31, 2022 with respect to certain identified cash that may be repatriated to the United States, we have not provided tax on the outside basis difference of foreign subsidiaries nor have we provided for any additional withholding or other tax that may be applicable should a future distribution be made from any unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries. Due to complexities in the laws of the foreign jurisdictions and the assumptions that would have to be made, it is not practicable to estimate the total amount of income and withholding taxes that would have to be provided on such earnings.
The following table summarizes our total cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, cash equivalents, and bank time deposits, and short-term investments, as well as our total debt, as of January 31, 2022 and 2021:
Capital Allocation Framework
As noted above, after cash utilization required for working capital, capital expenditures, required debt service, and dividends on the Preferred Stock, we expect that our primary usage of cash will be for business combinations, repayment of outstanding indebtedness, and/or stock repurchases under repurchase programs that may be in place from time to time (subject to the terms of our 2017 Credit Agreement). Please see the “Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements” section below for further information about our recent stock repurchase programs.
Consolidated Cash Flow Activity
The following table summarizes selected items from our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
Our financing activities from continuing operations used $430.1 million of net cash and our investing activities from continuing operations used $35.9 million of net cash during the year ended January 31, 2022, which was partially offset by $134.7 million of cash generated from operating activities from continuing operations. Further discussion of these items appears below.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities from Continuing Operations
Net cash provided by operating activities is driven primarily by our net income or loss, as adjusted for non-cash items, and working capital changes. Operating activities from continuing operations generated $134.7 million of net cash during the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $159.7 million generated during the year ended January 31, 2021. Our operating cash flow in the current year decreased despite a year-over-year increase in collections due to lower cash operating costs in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, one-time separation costs and higher income tax payments related to the Spin-Off in the current year period, and a greater portion of bonuses being paid in cash compared to the prior year.
Operating activities from continuing operations generated $159.7 million of net cash during the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to $127.0 million generated during the year ended January 31, 2020. Our improved operating cash flow in the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to cost reduction initiatives we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first half of the year, partially offset by $8.0 million of higher combined interest and net income tax payments during the year ended January 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
Our cash flow from operating activities can fluctuate from period to period due to several factors, including the timing of our billings and collections, the timing and amounts of interest, income tax and other payments, and our operating results.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities from Continuing Operations
During the year ended January 31, 2022, our investing activities from continuing operations used $35.9 million of net cash, consisting primarily of $57.0 million of net cash utilized for business combinations and $24.5 million of payments for property, equipment, and capitalized software development, partially offset by a $45.5 million of net sales and maturities of short-term investments and a $0.1 million decrease in restricted bank time deposits.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, our investing activities from continuing operations used $54.0 million of net cash, consisting primarily of $32.8 million of net purchases of short-term investments and $21.3 million of payments for property, equipment, and capitalized software development costs, partially offset by a $0.1 million decrease in restricted bank time deposits.
During the year ended January 31, 2020, our investing activities from continuing operations used $96.3 million of net cash, consisting primarily of $55.4 million of net cash utilized for business combinations, $30.9 million of payments for property, equipment, and capitalized software development costs, and $12.5 million of net purchases of short-term investments, partially offset by $2.9 million of proceeds from settlements of our derivative financial instruments not designated as hedges.
We had no significant commitments for capital expenditures at January 31, 2022.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Financing Activities from Continuing Operations
For the year ended January 31, 2022, our financing activities from continuing operations used $430.1 million of net cash primarily due to $386.9 million of payments to settle our 2014 Notes, $310.1 million of repayments of borrowings under our 2017 Term Loan, $114.7 million of net cash transferred to Cognyte upon the completion of the Spin-Off, $76.0 million of payments to repurchase common stock, $41.1 million of payments to purchase the capped calls in connection with the issuance of our 2021 Notes, $16.5 million paid to terminate our interest rate swap, $12.9 million of payments of Preferred Stock dividends, $10.7 million paid for debt-related issuance fees, $4.5 million for the financing portion of payments under contingent consideration arrangements related to prior business combinations, $4.5 million paid to exercise an option to acquire the noncontrolling interests of two majority owned subsidiaries, $3.1 million of finance lease payments, and a $1.1 million distribution to a noncontrolling shareholder of one of our subsidiaries, partially offset by $315.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of our 2021 Notes, $198.7 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, and $38.3 million from a dividend and other settlements received from Cognyte during the period in connection with the Spin-Off.
For the year ended January 31, 2021, our financing activities from continuing operations generated $76.8 million of net cash, primarily due to $197.3 million of net proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and $155.0 million of proceeds from borrowings under our revolving credit facility used to fund share repurchases, partially offset by $207.2 million for repayments of borrowings and other financing obligations, $36.8 million of payments to repurchase common stock, $13.0 million of payments to repurchase $13.1 million principal amount of our 2014 Notes, $9.3 million for the financing portion of payments under contingent consideration arrangements related to prior business combinations, a $5.4 million distribution to a noncontrolling shareholder of one of our subsidiaries, $2.3 million of payments for debt-related costs, and $1.6 million of payments of preferred stock dividends.
For the year ended January 31, 2020, our financing activities from continuing operations used $107.9 million of net cash, the most significant portions of which were $113.7 million of payments to repurchase common stock, $21.0 million for the financing portion of payments under contingent consideration arrangements related to prior business combinations, $6.5 million for repayments of borrowings and other financing obligations, payments of $6.0 million related to deferred purchase price of a prior period business combination, and a $5.5 million distribution to a noncontrolling shareholder of one of our subsidiaries. The cash used by these financing activities was partially offset by $45.0 million of proceeds from borrowings under our revolving credit facility used to fund share repurchases.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements
Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet anticipated operating costs, required payments of principal and interest, dividends on Preferred Stock, working capital needs, ordinary course capital expenditures, research and development spending, and other commitments for at least the next 12 months. Currently, we have no plans to pay any cash dividends on our common stock, which are subject to certain restrictions under our 2017 Credit Agreement.
Our liquidity could be negatively impacted by a decrease in demand for our products and services, including the impact of changes in customer buying behavior due to circumstances over which we have no control, including, but not limited to, the
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. If we determine to make additional business acquisitions or otherwise require additional funds, we may need to raise additional capital, which could involve the issuance of additional equity or debt securities or an increase in our borrowings under our credit facility.
On December 4, 2019, we announced that our board of directors had authorized a stock repurchase program whereby we were authorized to repurchase up to $300.0 million of common stock over the period ending on February 1, 2021. During the year ended January 31, 2021, we acquired approximately 613,000 shares of our common stock at a cost of $34.0 million under this program. During the year ended January 31, 2020, we acquired approximately 2,119,000 shares of our common stock at a cost of $116.1 million under this program, of which $2.8 million was settled in cash in February 2020. Total repurchases under the program, which expired on February 1, 2021, were $150.1 million.
On March 31, 2021, we announced that our board of directors had authorized a stock repurchase program whereby we were authorized to repurchase up to a number of shares of common stock approximately equal to the number of shares to be issued as equity compensation during the fiscal year ending January 31, 2022. During the year ended January 31, 2022, we acquired approximately 1,600,000 shares of our common stock at a cost of $75.4 million under this program.
On December 2, 2021, we announced that our board of directors had authorized a new stock repurchase program for the fiscal
year ending January 31, 2023 whereby we may repurchase up to 1.5 million shares of common stock to offset dilution from our
equity compensation program for such fiscal year. Subsequent to January 31, 2022, we repurchased 1.5 million shares under this stock repurchase program with available cash in the United States. On March 22, 2022, our board of directors authorized an additional 500,000 shares of common stock to be repurchased under this program. Please refer to Note 21, “Subsequent Event”, for more information regarding this stock repurchase program.
Financing Arrangements
2021 Notes
On April 9, 2021, we issued $315.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.25% convertible senior notes due April 15, 2026, unless earlier converted by the holders pursuant to their terms. The 2021 Notes are unsecured and pay interest in cash semiannually in arrears at a rate of 0.25% per annum.
We used a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Notes to pay the costs of the capped call transactions described below. We also used a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Notes, together with the net proceeds from the April 6, 2021 issuance of $200.0 million of Series B Preferred Stock, to repay a portion of the outstanding indebtedness under our 2017 Credit Agreement described below, to terminate an interest rate swap agreement, and to repurchase shares of our common stock. The remainder is being used for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
The 2021 Notes are convertible into shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of 16.1092 shares per $1,000 principal amount of 2021 Notes, which represents an initial conversion price of approximately $62.08 per share, subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of certain events, and subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. Prior to January 15, 2026, the 2021 Notes will be convertible only upon the occurrence of certain events and during certain periods, and will be convertible thereafter at any time until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date of the 2021 Notes. Upon conversion of the 2021 Notes, holders will receive cash up to the aggregate principal amount, with any remainder to be settled with cash or common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election. As of January 31, 2022, the 2021 Notes were not convertible.
Based on the closing market price of our common stock on January 31, 2022, the if-converted value of the 2021 Notes was less than their aggregate principal amount.
Capped Calls
In connection with the issuance of the 2021 Notes, on April 6, 2021 and April 8, 2021, we entered into capped call transactions (the “Capped Calls”) with certain counterparties. The Capped Calls are intended generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the 2021 Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted 2021 Notes, in the event that at the time of conversion our common stock price exceeds the conversion price, with such reduction and/or offset subject to a cap.
The Capped Calls exercise price is equal to the $62.08 initial conversion price of each of the 2021 Notes, and the cap price is $100.00, each subject to certain adjustments under the terms of the Capped Calls. The Capped Calls have the economic effect of
increasing the conversion price of the 2021 Notes from $62.08 per share to $100.00 per share. Our exercise rights under the Capped Calls generally trigger upon conversion of the 2021 Notes, and the Capped Calls terminate upon maturity of the 2021 Notes, or the first day the 2021 Notes are no longer outstanding. As of January 31, 2022, no Capped Calls have been exercised.
Pursuant to their terms, the Capped Calls qualify for classification within stockholders’ equity, and their fair value is not remeasured and adjusted, as long as they continue to qualify for stockholders’ equity classification. We paid approximately $41.1 million for the Capped Calls, including applicable transaction costs, which was recorded as a reduction to additional paid in capital.
2014 Notes
On June 18, 2014, we issued $400.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.50% convertible senior notes with a maturity date of June 1, 2021 (the “2014 Notes”). Net proceeds from the 2014 Notes after underwriting discounts were $391.9 million. The 2014 Notes paid interest in cash semiannually in arrears at a rate of 1.50% per annum.
The 2014 Notes were issued concurrently with our public issuance of 5,750,000 shares of common stock, the majority of the combined net proceeds of which were used to partially repay certain indebtedness under a prior credit agreement.
On February 26, 2021, we deposited approximately $390.0 million of cash, representing the full principal amount of the 2014 Notes then outstanding as well as the final interest payment on the 2014 Notes due at maturity, into an escrow account to cash collateralize the 2014 Notes. On May 28, 2021, prior to the maturity of the 2014 Notes on June 1, 2021, we paid an aggregate of $389.8 million in cash for the settlement of the 2014 Notes, which included $386.9 million in satisfaction of the outstanding principal of the 2014 Notes and $2.9 million related to the final interest payment on the 2014 Notes. We funded the repayment of the outstanding principal amount of the 2014 Notes and accrued interest thereon using the cash we had placed in escrow. Additionally, the 2014 Notes had an incremental conversion value of $57.7 million, as the market value per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the 2014 Notes, was greater than the conversion price of the 2014 Notes. We issued approximately 1,250,000 shares of common stock to the holders of the 2014 Notes as payment of the conversion premium, which we issued from treasury stock.
As of January 31, 2021, the 2014 Notes had a conversion rate of 15.5129 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2014 Notes, which represented an effective conversion price of approximately $64.46 per share of common stock and would have resulted in the issuance of approximately 6,002,000 shares of common stock if all of the 2014 Notes were converted and the conversions were settled entirely in common stock. As a result of the Spin-Off, the conversion rate was adjusted to 24.6622 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2014 Notes, which represented an effective conversion price of $40.55 per share of common stock and would have resulted in the issuance of approximately 9,541,000 shares of common stock if all of the 2014 Notes had been converted prior to maturity and the conversions were settled entirely in common stock.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, we repurchased $13.1 million principal amount of our 2014 Notes (the “Repurchased 2014 Notes”) in open market transactions for an aggregate of $13.0 million in cash.
Note Hedges and Warrants
Concurrently with the issuance of the 2014 Notes, we entered into convertible note hedge transactions (the “Note Hedges”) and sold warrants (the “Warrants”). Prior to the Spin-Off, the combination of the Note Hedges and the Warrants served to increase the effective initial conversion price for the 2014 Notes to $75.00 per share. Subsequent to the Spin-Off, as a result of the conversion rate adjustments, the Note Hedges and the Warrants served to increase the effective conversion price for the 2014 Notes to $47.18 per share. The Note Hedges and Warrants were each separate instruments from the 2014 Notes.
Note Hedges
Pursuant to the Note Hedges, we purchased call options on our common stock, under which we had the right to acquire from the counterparties up to approximately 6,205,000 shares of our common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, at a price of $64.46, which equaled the initial conversion price of the 2014 Notes. As a result of the Spin-Off, on February 1, 2021, the call options on our stock were adjusted to allow us to purchase up to 9,865,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $40.55, which was equal to the adjusted conversion price of the 2014 Notes. We were permitted to settle the Note Hedges in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, at our option, and they were intended to reduce our exposure to potential dilution upon conversion of the 2014 Notes. We paid $60.8 million for the Note Hedges, which was recorded as a charge to additional paid-in capital. Our exercise rights under the Note Hedges were automatically triggered upon conversion of any 2014 Notes and the Note Hedges otherwise terminated upon maturity of the 2014 Notes, on June 1, 2021. In connection
with the maturity of the 2014 Notes on June 1, 2021, we received approximately 1,250,000 shares of our common stock from the counterparties under the Note Hedges, which offset the dilution resulting from the settlement of the conversion premium on the 2014 Notes as the market value per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the Note Hedges, was greater than the strike price of the Note Hedges.
The Repurchased 2014 Notes acquired during the year ended January 31, 2021 as described above did not change the number of common shares subject to the Note Hedges as the counterparties agreed that the options under the Note Hedges remained outstanding notwithstanding such repurchase. Upon maturity of the 2014 Notes, we received approximately 42,000 shares of our common stock from the counterparties to the Note Hedges as reimbursement for the in-the-money portion of the Repurchased 2014 Notes.
Warrants
We sold the Warrants to several counterparties. The Warrants initially provided the counterparties rights to acquire from us up to approximately 6,205,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $75.00 per share. As a result of the Spin-Off, the terms of the Warrants provided the counterparties rights to acquire from us up to approximately 9,865,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $47.18 per share. Proceeds from the sale of the Warrants were $45.2 million and were recorded as additional paid-in capital. The Warrants expired incrementally on a series of expiration dates between August 30, 2021 and January 21, 2022. At each expiration date the Warrants were exercised where the market price per share of our common stock exceeded the strike price of the Warrants, and we issued an aggregate of 293,143 shares of our common stock as part of the cashless exercise of approximately 5,031,000 Warrants. The Warrants had a dilutive effect on net income per share to the extent that the average market value of our common stock, exceeded the strike price of the Warrants. There are no Warrants outstanding as of January 31, 2022.
Credit Agreements
On June 29, 2017, we entered into a credit agreement with certain lenders, and terminated a prior credit agreement. The credit agreement was amended in 2018, 2020, and 2021, as further described below (as amended, the “2017 Credit Agreement”).
The 2017 Credit Agreement currently provides for $725.0 million of senior secured credit facilities, comprised of a $425.0 million term loan maturing on June 29, 2024 (the “2017 Term Loan”), of which $100.0 million and $410.1 million was outstanding at January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and a $300.0 million revolving credit facility maturing on April 9, 2026 (the “2021 Revolving Credit Facility”), which refinanced our prior $300.0 million revolving credit facility (the “2017 Revolving Credit Facility”), subject to increase and reduction from time to time according to the terms of the 2017 Credit Agreement.
Interest rates on loans under the 2017 Credit Agreement are periodically reset, at our option, at either a Eurodollar Rate or an ABR rate (each as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement), plus in each case a margin.
During the three months ended April 30, 2021, in addition to our regular quarterly $1.1 million principal payment, we repaid $309.0 million of our 2017 Term Loan, reducing the outstanding balance to $100.0 million. As a result, $1.8 million of deferred debt issuance costs and $0.2 million of unamortized discount associated with the 2017 Term Loan were written off, and are included within losses on early retirements of debt on our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended January 31, 2022.
The maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and 2017 Revolving Credit Facility would have been accelerated to March 1, 2021 if on such date any 2014 Notes remained outstanding, unless such outstanding 2014 Notes were cash collateralized pursuant to a second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement (the “2020 Amendment”), entered into on June 8, 2020. Pursuant to the 2020 Amendment, we were permitted to effect the Spin-Off of our Cyber Intelligence Solutions business within the parameters set forth in the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, and our 2014 Notes would not be deemed to be outstanding for purposes of the determination of the maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility discussed above if such 2014 Notes were cash collateralized in accordance with the 2017 Credit Agreement. On February 26, 2021, as noted above, we cash collateralized the 2014 Notes in satisfaction of the cash collateralization provisions of the 2020 Amendment. Accordingly, the maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and 2017 Revolving Credit Facility were not accelerated to March 1, 2021. In connection with, the maturity of the 2014 Notes, we used the escrowed cash to settle the principal amount, including the final interest payment, and the incremental conversion value of $57.7 million was settled with approximately 1,250,000 shares of our common stock.
On April 9, 2021, we amended the 2017 Credit Agreement (the “2021 Amendment”), pursuant to which we refinanced the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, which would otherwise have matured on June 29, 2022, with the $300.0 million 2021 Revolving Credit Facility maturing on April 9, 2026.
As of January 31, 2022, the interest rate on the 2017 Term Loan was 2.10%. Taking into account the impact of the original issuance discount and related deferred debt issuance costs, the effective interest rate on the 2017 Term Loan was approximately 2.30% at January 31, 2022. As of January 31, 2021, the interest rate on the 2017 Term Loan was 2.14%.
For borrowings under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, and previously under the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, the margin is determined by reference to our Consolidated Total Debt to Consolidated EBITDA (each as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement) leverage ratio (the “Leverage Ratio”). In addition, under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, and previously under the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, we are required to pay a commitment fee with respect to unused availability at rates per annum determined by reference to our Leverage Ratio. The 2017 Credit Agreement contains certain customary affirmative and negative covenants for credit facilities of this type. The 2017 Credit Agreement also contains a financial covenant that, solely with respect to the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, requires us to maintain a Leverage Ratio of no greater than 4.50 to 1. At January 31, 2022, our Leverage Ratio was approximately 1.1 to 1. The limitations imposed by the covenants are subject to certain exceptions as detailed in the 2017 Credit Agreement.
Optional prepayments of loans under the 2017 Credit Agreement are generally permitted without premium or penalty.
Our obligations under the 2017 Credit Agreement are guaranteed by each of our direct and indirect existing and future material domestic wholly owned restricted subsidiaries, and are secured by a security interest in substantially all of our assets and the assets of the guarantor subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions.
The 2017 Credit Agreement provides for events of default with corresponding grace periods that we believe are customary for credit facilities of this type. Upon an event of default, all of our obligations owed under the 2017 Credit Agreement may be declared immediately due and payable, and the lenders’ commitments to make loans under the 2017 Credit Agreement may be terminated.
Interest Rate Swap
In April 2018, we executed a pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swap agreement with a multinational financial institution to partially mitigate risks associated with the variable interest rate on our 2017 Term Loan, under which we paid interest at a fixed rate of 2.949% and received variable interest of three-month LIBOR (subject to a minimum of 0.00%), on a notional amount of 200.0 million (the “2018 Swap”). The effective date of the 2018 Swap was September 6, 2019, and settlements with the counterparty began on November 1, 2019 and occurred on a quarterly basis. The 2018 Swap had a termination date of June 29, 2024.
On May 1, 2020, which was an interest rate reset date on our 2017 Term Loan, we selected an interest rate other than three-month LIBOR. As a result, the 2018 Swap, which was designated specifically to hedge three-month LIBOR interest payments, no longer qualified as a cash flow hedge. Subsequent to May 1, 2020, changes in fair value of the 2018 Swap were accounted for as a component of other income (expense), net. Accumulated deferred losses on the 2018 Swap of $20.4 million, or $16.0 million after tax, at May 1, 2020 that were previously recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss, were being amortized to interest expense in the consolidated statement of operations over the remaining term of the 2018 Swap, as the hedged interest payments occurred.
On April 13, 2021, we paid $16.5 million to the counterparty to settle the 2018 Swap prior to its June 2024 maturity. Upon settlement, we recorded an unrealized gain of $1.3 million in other income (expense), net to adjust the 2018 Swap to its fair value at settlement date and reclassified the remaining $15.7 million of pretax accumulated deferred losses from accumulated other comprehensive loss within stockholders’ equity to other income (expense), net on our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended January 31, 2022. The associated $3.7 million deferred tax asset was reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss and netted against income taxes receivable, which are included within prepaid expenses and other current assets on our consolidated balance sheet as of January 31, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments primarily consist of long-term debt, dividends on Preferred Stock, leases for office space and open non-cancellable purchase orders. As of January 31, 2022, our total operating lease liabilities were $53.0 million, of which $24.5 million is included within accrued expenses and other current liabilities (current portions), and $28.5 million is included as
operating lease liabilities (long-term portions), on our consolidated balance sheets. We have no current plans to lease significant additional office space. During the year ended January 31, 2022, we decided to exit certain leased offices, and we anticipate exiting or reducing additional office leases in the future as we continue to assess how and to what extent our employees will return to work in our offices.
As of January 31, 2022, our unconditional purchase obligations totaled approximately $240.3 million, the majority of which is due over the next 12 to 36 months. Our purchase obligations are primarily commitments to vendors for the procurement of goods and services in the ordinary course of business, commitments with contract manufacturers, and data center hosting services. Agreements to purchase goods or services that have cancellation provisions with no penalties are excluded from these purchase obligations.
It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance sheet arrangements. However, in the normal course of business, we enter into contracts in which we make representations and warranties that guarantee the performance of our products and services. Historically, there have been no significant losses related to such guarantees.
Our consolidated balance sheet at January 31, 2022 included $16.3 million of non-current tax reserves, net of related benefits (including interest and penalties of $3.4 million) for uncertain tax positions. We do not expect to make any significant payments for these uncertain tax positions within the next 12 months.
For additional information regarding our long-term debt, Preferred Stock, and our commitments and contingencies, see Note 8, “Long-Term Debt”, Note 10, “Convertible Preferred Stock”, Note 17, “Leases”, and Note 18, “Commitments and Contingencies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Contingent Payments Associated with Business Combinations
In connection with certain of our business combinations, we have agreed to make contingent cash payments to the former owners of the acquired companies based upon the achievement of performance targets following the acquisition dates.
For the year ended January 31, 2022, we made $9.6 million of payments under contingent consideration arrangements. As of January 31, 2022, consideration expected to be paid subsequent to January 31, 2022 under contingent consideration arrangements totaled $7.8 million and was reported in accrued expenses and other current liabilities. The performance periods associated with these potential payments expired during the year ended January 31, 2022.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See also Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about recent accounting pronouncements recently adopted and those not yet effective.