ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Company Overview
We are a preclinical-stage pharmaceutical company focused on developing novel and proprietary drug delivery systems across various pain indications in order to enhance compliance and optimize the ability of each product candidate in our pipeline. Our drug-delivery systems, and drug-releasing technologies being developed are focused on advancing non-opioid and non-addictive pain management treatments and treatments for CNS disorders to enhance patients’ quality of life.
We have exclusive global rights to the following proprietary patented technologies: i) Topical Spray Film Delivery Technology for osteoarthritis pain (“Epoladerm”), ii) Injectable “local anesthetic” Liposomal Gel Technology for postoperative pain management (“Probudur”), and iii) Molecular Envelope Technology (“MET”) that uses an intranasal device to deliver enkephalin for the management of acute and chronic pain, including pain associated with cancer (“Envelta”). Envelta would support the current effort among prescribers, regulators, and patients to seek non-opioid and non-addictive treatment options to combat the opioid epidemic. We will utilize these delivery technologies to selectively develop a portfolio of patented 505(b)(2) and new chemical entity (“NCE”) candidates for commercialization. We also have exclusive worldwide rights to develop and commercialize an investigational formulation delivered via the nasal route to enhance pharmaceutical-grade cannabidiol (“CBD”) transport to the brain to potentially treat seizures associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome in patients one year of age and older. While we are currently focused advancing non-opioid and non-addictive pain management treatments and treatments for CNS disorders, we also plan on using our proprietary delivery technologies to develop its anti-viral therapy (“AnQlar”) as an anti-viral barrier to potentially prevent or reduce the risk or the intensity of viral infections in humans, including, but not limited to, influenza and SARS-CoV-2 (COVID 19) which we currently have exclusive global rights.
Envelta
We believe Envelta and PES200 could support the current effort among prescribers, regulators, and patients to seek non-addictive treatment options. We plan to utilize these delivery technologies to selectively develop a portfolio of patented 505(b)(2) and NCE candidates for commercialization. The IND enabling studies for Envelta are being performed under a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (“CRADA”) entered into by us and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (“NCATS”). We intend to use these studies as a source for INDs for two additional potential indications, cancer pain and post-traumatic stress disorder. To date, two of the four planned initial in vitro studies have been successfully completed. These pre-clinical studies under the CRADA will be conducted into 2022.
In early 2022, we completed a 14-day intranasal dose range finding toxicity study of Envelta in rats with a 14-day recovery period which showed no adverse related findings in hematology, coagulation and serum chemistry data, with no treatment related toxicology findings or mortality noted. A 14-day intranasal dose range finding toxicity study of Envelta in dogs with a 14-day recovery period was also conducted and showed no adverse toxicologic findings.
AnQlar
While we are currently focused on the development of our non-opioid and non-addictive pain management pipeline of product candidates, we also plan on using our proprietary delivery technologies to develop anti-viral therapies (“AnQlar”) as an anti-viral barrier to potentially prevent or reduce the risk or the intensity of viral infections in humans, including, but not limited to, influenza and SARS-CoV-2 (COVID 19). AnQlar is our patented high-density intranasal molecular masking spray being developed as an anti-viral barrier that will be used as an adjuvant to barrier-based personal protective equipment. Our results from an animal study of AnQlar demonstrated inhibited viral replication and decreased levels of virus in animal brain tissue.
We submitted and received a written pre-investigational new drug (“pre-IND”) response from the FDA for AnQlar, in its pre-IND response, the FDA provided guidance on our pathway to pursue prophylactic treatment against SARS-CoV-2 and influenza for daily use as an over the counter (“OTC”) product. We believe the results of the pre-IND response support further research on AnQlar as an intranasal protective that may limit transmission of the viruses to others. If we are able to successfully complete the required clinical trials for this product candidate, we intend to move forward and pursue an NDA for AnQlar as a once daily intranasal treatment. The FDA has indicated that, upon successful completion, we may pursue an NDA drug approval with the Office of Non-Prescription Drugs.
In August 2021, we engaged Syneos Health to assist with the optimal clinical trial design based on an efficient timeline.
On August 25, 2021, we entered into a commercial manufacturing and supply agreement with Seqens, an integrated global leader in pharmaceutical solutions with 24 manufacturing sites worldwide and seven research and development facilities throughout the U.S. and Europe. The agreement with Seqens provides for both the supply material for our clinical studies as well as the long-term commercial supply of AnQlar. Seqens will conduct process development and validation of additional large scale commercial quantities of AnQlar at its facilities in Devens and Newburyport, Massachusetts.
On September 29, 2021, we engaged a research and development firm to conduct a series of IND enabling toxicity studies for AnQlar which are expected to be completed by mid-2022. Upon successful completion of these studies, we intend to submit an IND application to the FDA, including a trial design for a Phase I study as an anti-viral therapy.
On October 19, 2021, we engaged Nanomerics to supply AnQlar for our planned IND enabling toxicology studies.
Epoladerm
We believe the Topical Spray Film Delivery Technology, which we refer to as Epoladerm, could provide a pathway for additional proprietary spray formulations with strong adhesion and accessibility properties upon application, especially around joints and curved body surfaces. Our belief is based on, in part, an American College of Physicians and American Academy of Family Practice national guideline for the treatment of non-Low Back Musculoskeletal Pain which recommends topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (“NSAIDs”) as the first-line therapy in patients with acute pain from non-low back, musculoskeletal injuries. According to the new guideline, evidence shows that topical NSAIDs were among the most effective for pain reduction, physical function, treatment satisfaction, and symptom relief and were not associated with any significant side effects. The guideline was based on a systematic evidence review of the comparative efficacy and safety of non-pharmacological and pharmacological management of acute pain from non-low back, musculoskeletal injuries in adults in the outpatient setting and a systematic review of the predictors of prolonged opioid use.
Pursuant to a Research and Option Agreement we have entered into with MedPharm Limited (the “MedPharm Research and Option Agreement”), MedPharm will conduct certain research and development activities of proprietary formulations incorporating certain MedPharm technologies and certain of our proprietary molecules. These proprietary molecules relate to indications which include, but are not limited to, treatment of estrogen levels, Alzheimer’s disease, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, neuropathic issues, and acute and chronic pain. Under the agreement, we were granted an option to obtain an exclusive, world-wide, sub-licensable, royalty bearing, irrevocable license to research, develop, market, use, commercialize, and sell any product utilizing MedPharm’s spray formulation technology.
Based on results from our recent non-clinical studies and further research of Epoladerm, we have determined that it is reasonable to focus our Epoladerm indication on chronic osteoarthritis of the knee, representing what we believe to be a better global market opportunity for us.
In December 2021, we completed a single dose pharmacokinetic study of dermal administration of Epoladerm in minipigs as part of the required IND enabling trials. Single-dose transdermal delivery of Epoladerm was well-tolerated in all minipigs and no treatment-related clinical observations, changes in body weight, or dermal irritation were observed. All Epoladerm treated animals had plasma levels of Epoladerm confirming transdermal absorption. The maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) was reached at 4 hours post-dose, and plasma Epoladerm remained at 24-hour post-dose for all animals.
On December 17, 2021, we executed a clinical trial agreement with Altasciences Company, Inc., a leading clinical trial services company, for a First-in-Human study investigating Epoladerm™ for pain associated with chronic osteoarthritis of the knee. The study is planned to take place in Canada with a Clinical Trial Application (“CTA”) filing. Original enrollment of the first patient was anticipated to start in the second quarter of 2022; however, due to a delay in procuring the active pharmaceutical ingredient necessary for the drug product candidate, enrollment is now anticipated to start in the second half of 2022.
In January 2022, we reported positive results of four preclinical dermal safety studies for Epoladerm™. Researchers concluded that once daily dermal administration of Epoladerm for 28 days was well-tolerated with no serious adverse findings. The studies were performed by Charles River Laboratories, a well-known clinical research organization. The studies included a skin irritation study in rabbits; a dermal sensitization assessment in guinea pigs; and a phototoxicity assay in mouse fibroblasts. Epoladerm was well tolerated in each of the studies and no reportable dermal irritation, dermal sensitization or phototoxicity was observed.
The successful completion of the above studies has allowed us to initiate the drafting of the IND submission documents that would accompany the IND application to the FDA, including a trial design for a Phase I study for chronic osteoarthritis of the knee. In addition, we have scheduled a series of pre-clinical studies for this chronic use indication to run in parallel with our anticipated Phase I study for Epoladerm. The filing of the IND application would follow the anticipated First-in-Human study in Canada noted above and we plan to submit the results of this study to facilitate a more robust submission.
Probudur
Probudur is our injectable bupivacaine liposomal hydrogel for postoperative pain management, which we believe to have improved onset and extended duration of action compared to existing treatment options. Charles River Laboratories was engaged to perform seven preclinical animal studies during the second half of 2021, including method, dosage, and toxicity as part of the required FDA enabling trials for an IND for Probudur. However, we elected to strategically delay these trials in order to enhance the formulation of Probudur to increase stability for manufacturing purposes and to possibly extend the lifetime of a relevant patent.
On June 30, 2021, we entered into an Agreement for Rendering of Research Services with Yissum (the “June 2021 Yissum Research Agreement”) on substantially similar terms and conditions as detailed above (see Note 10 - “Research and Development and License Agreements” to our audited financial statements filed herewith) under the October 2020 Yissum Research Agreement. Under the June 2021 Yissum Research Agreement, we shall provide funding for research and development studies to be performed by researchers at Hebrew University related to the optimization of the Liposomal Bupivacaine formulation and to increase stability for manufacturing purposes. We may terminate the agreement at any time and shall be only responsible to pay Yissum for work performed through the date of termination. In consideration for the research services, we agreed to pay research service fees of $337,500 in six equal quarterly installments. All services to be provided under the June 2021 Yissum Research Agreement initiated on July 1, 2021 and are anticipated to be completed towards the end 2022.
On June 29, 2021, we entered into an Agreement for Rendering of Research Services with Lipocure RX, Ltd. (the “June 2021 Lipocure Research Agreement”). Under the June 2021 Lipocure Research Agreement, we shall provide funding for research and development related to the optimization of the Liposomal Bupivacaine formulation and eventual manufacture of pre-clinical batches including batches for stability testing, animal studies and toxicology work. This will also include work associated with the potential filing of additional provisional patent applications. We may terminate the agreement at any time upon 30 days written notice and shall be only responsible to pay Lipocure for work performed through the date of such notice. In consideration for the research services, the Company agreed to pay research service fees of $200,000 upon execution, as well as $400,000 in July 2021, $270,000 in both September 2021 and January 2022, and three additional payments of $270,000 during 2022. We also agreed to pay $250,000 to Lipocure upon successful completion of Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (“CMC”) filing with the FDA. All services to be provided under the June 2021 Lipocure Research Agreement initiated on July 1, 2021 and are anticipated to be completed towards the end 2022. We recorded $870,000 in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 associated with this agreement.
VRP324
VRP324 is an investigational formulation being developed by Nanomerics delivered via the nasal route to enhance CBD transport to the brain. VRP324 uses a preassembled device and cartridge to propel the CBD powder formulation into the nose to the brain via the olfactory nerve/bulb. This product candidate will be formulated to potentially treat seizures associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome in patients one year of age and older. Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome are rare central nervous system diseases considered serious epileptic encephalopathies that cause different types of epileptic seizures as well as cognitive and behavioral changes and are generally resistant to treatment.
On September 17, 2021, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with Nanomerics (the “Nanomerics License Agreement - VRP324”) for the exclusive worldwide license to develop and commercialize an investigational formulation delivered via the nasal route to enhance pharmaceutical-grade cannabidiol (“CBD”) transport to the brain to potentially treat seizures associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome in patients one year of age and older. Under the Nanomerics License Agreement - VRP324, we are required to make royalty payments within a range of 5% to 15% of annual net sales of royalty qualifying products. Our obligation to pay royalties, on a country-by-country basis, shall commence on the date of first commercial sale of licensed products (as defined in the Nanomerics License Agreement - VRP324) and shall expire with respect to each separate licensed product, on the latest to occur of (a) the fifteen (15th) anniversary of the first commercial sale of the first licensed product; (b) the expiration date of the last to expire of any valid claim; and, (c) the date upon which a generic product has been on the market for a period of no fewer than ninety (90) days. We paid an upfront milestone payment upon signing of $200,000 and are required to make future milestone and royalty payments of up to $41 million upon the achievement of specified development and commercial milestones, and sublicense fees for any sublicense relationships we enter into subsequent to the Nanomerics License Agreement - VRP324 (any patent that issues from the currently filed provisional patent application would expire on August 24, 2041). We have the right to terminate the Nanomerics License Agreement - VRP324 upon one hundred and eighty (180) days’ prior written notice to Nanomerics. Upon termination, we shall assign to Nanomerics all its rights, title and interest in all of its results. Nanomerics has the right to terminate the agreement upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice if we conclude in writing to Nanomerics that the study aim has not been achieved or we notify Nanomerics that we have decided against proceeding with a Phase III Clinical trial.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
We have based our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to clinical development expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully discussed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements contained within this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
We rely on third parties to conduct our preclinical studies and to provide services, including data management, statistical analysis and electronic compilation. Once our clinical trials begin, at the end of each reporting period, we will compare the payments made to each service provider to the estimated progress towards completion of the related project. Factors that we will consider in preparing these estimates include the number of patients enrolled in studies, milestones achieved and other criteria related to the efforts of our vendors. These estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, we will record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. Our policy permits the valuation of stock-based awards granted to non-employees to be measured at fair value at the grant date rather than on an accelerated attribution basis over the vesting period.
Determining the appropriate fair value of share-based awards requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of our common shares prior to becoming a public company, and for options, the excepted life of the option and expected share price volatility. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value its option awards. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represents management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and management uses different assumptions, share-based compensation expense could be materially different for future awards. See Note 8 to notes to financial statements.
The expected life of options was estimated using the simplified method, as we do not have historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating expenses:
General and administrative expenses increased by $4,282,281, or 147%, to $7,186,385 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2,904,104 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary reasons for the increase in general and administrative costs were (i) an increase in legal costs associated with litigation efforts and legal costs associated with general corporate purposes of $2,850,683, (ii) an increase in insurance costs related to directors’ and officers’ insurance of $952,368, (iii) an increase in exchange listing and filing fees of $90,709, (iv) an increase in salaries and wages of $648,471, and (v) an increase in franchise tax of $135,600. This was offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation of $558,220 as compared to the prior period.
Research and development expenses increased by $3,547,500, or 275%, to $4,839,115 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1,291,615 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to (i) a $1,000,000 milestone payment made to Nanomerics and preclinical activity of $788,996 associated with AnQlar, (ii) increases in pre-clinical activity related to Epoladerm of $1,216,291, (iii) an increase in preclinical work in Probudur of $1,011,144, and (iv) a milestone payment of $200,000 due to VRP324. This was offset by a decrease of $723,690 in pre-clinical regulatory activities associated with Envelta as preclinical studies for Envelta are mainly covered under the CRADA.
Other expenses:
Interest expense decreased by $55,112, or 37%, to $92,822 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $147,934 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily the result of the repayment of a convertible promissory note in February 2021 and related party notes payable in September 2021.
Other income increased by $58,259 for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the forgiveness of our PPP Loan (as defined below).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was our cash, which totaled approximately $36.8 million. To continue to grow our business over the longer term, we plan to commit substantial resources to research and development, pre-clinical and clinical trials of our product candidates, other operations and potential product acquisitions and in-licensing. We have evaluated and expect to continue to evaluate a wide array of strategic transactions as part of our plan to acquire or in-license and develop additional products and product candidates to augment our internal development pipeline. Strategic transaction opportunities that we may pursue could materially affect our liquidity and capital resources and may require us to incur additional indebtedness, seek equity capital or both. In addition, we may pursue development, acquisition or in-licensing of approved or development products in new or existing therapeutic areas or continue the expansion of our existing operations. Accordingly, we expect to continue to opportunistically seek access to additional capital to license or acquire additional products, product candidates or companies to expand our operations, or for general corporate purposes. Strategic transactions may require us to raise additional capital through one or more public or private debt or equity financings or could be structured as a collaboration or partnering arrangement. Any equity financing would be dilutive to our stockholders. We have no arrangements, agreements, or understandings in place at the present time to enter into any acquisition, in-licensing or similar strategic business transaction.
Equity Financings
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 139,220 shares of common stock for gross proceeds totaling $1.4 million.
On February 16, 2021, we closed an initial public offering of 1,800,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share, for net proceeds of $15.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds from the offering to fund research and development of our Epoladerm, Probudur, Envelta and AnQlar indications and other development programs, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
On September 16, 2021, we issued 6,670,000 shares of common stock related to our underwritten offering, for net proceeds totaling $37.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds from the underwritten offering to fund research and development of all our product candidates and other development programs, the repayment of our promissory notes and deferred compensation, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
We issued 45,448 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of 87,751 options in a cashless exercise during the year ended December 31, 2021. We also issued 40,221 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of 76,620 warrants in a cashless exercise during the year ended December 31, 2021. There were warrants to purchase 18,436 shares of the Company’s common stock outstanding at December 31, 2021.
Debt
Promissory Notes
On October 1, 2018, we issued a promissory note, as amended (the “2018 Promissory Note”), pursuant to which we were obligated to pay Anthony Mack, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, the principal amount of $500,000 that bore interest at a rate of 11.19% per annum. The 2018 Promissory Note had a maturity date of January 15, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we had fully repaid the balance due of $500,000 on this promissory note with proceeds from the underwritten offering with accrued interest of $166,296.
On January 15, 2019, we issued a promissory note, as amended (the “2019 Promissory Note”), pursuant to which we were obligated to pay Mr. Mack the principal amount of $500,000 that bore interest at a rate of 11.19% per annum. The 2019 Promissory Note had a maturity date of January 15, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we had fully repaid the balance due of $500,000 on this promissory note with proceeds from the underwritten offering with accrued interest of $149,977.
In January 2021, we issued notes with an aggregate principal amount of $75,000 and $25,000, respectively. These notes were issued to Anthony Mack for $75,000 and Christopher Chipman, our Chief Financial Officer, for $25,000. These notes were subsequently repaid with proceeds from the initial public offering in February 2021.
RRD Note
On August 29, 2019, we entered into a service provider convertible note purchase agreement (the “RRD Note”) with RRD International, LLC (“RRD”). The RRD Note had a maximum principal balance of $400,000 and bore interest at a rate of 10.00% per annum and was due on March 31, 2020. During 2020, the RRD Note was amended to increase the maximum principal to $600,000 and to extend the maturity and conversion dates through to January 31, 2021. At December 31, 2020, the principal balance on the RRD Note was $493,480, with accrued interest of $34,544. In February 2021, we repaid in full the RRD Note, including accrued interest, utilizing net proceeds received from our initial public offering.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan (“PPP Loan”)
On May 4, 2020, we entered into a promissory note (the “PPP Note”) with PNC Bank as the lender (the “Lender”), pursuant to which the Lender agreed to make a loan to us under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) in a principal amount of $72,100 pursuant to Title 1 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”).
The PPP Loan proceeds were available to be used to pay for payroll costs, including salaries, commissions, and similar compensation, group health care benefits, and paid leaves; rent; utilities; and interest on certain other outstanding debt. The amount that was forgiven was calculated in part with reference to our full-time headcount during the period ending October 31, 2020. On July 2, 2021, we were notified by the Small Business Administration that the forgiveness amount totaled $61,816 and was recorded as other income within the 2021 statement of operations. The remaining balance of $10,284 was repaid in 2021.
Cash Flows
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating and financing activities:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operations was $14,542,592 compared to $1,384,860 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operations was primarily the result of the increase in net loss, decrease in accounts payable balances, and an increase in prepaid insurance premiums and prepaid research and development activities.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $51,278,908 during the year ended December 31, 2021, attributable primarily to net proceeds received from our initial public offering in February 2021 of $15,783,207 and the underwritten offering in September 2021 of $36,999,465, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. These proceeds were offset by the repayment in full of our RRD Note of $493,480 in February 2021 and repayments of our promissory notes and the unforgiven portion of the PPP Loan of an aggregate of $1,503,764. Cash provided by financing activities was $1,398,120 during the year ended December 31, 2020, attributable to $1,376,900 received from the sale of 139,220 shares of our common stock and proceeds received from our PPP loan of $72,100 slightly offset by $50,880 paid in deferred financing costs.
Future Capital Requirements
It is difficult to predict our spending for our product candidates prior to obtaining FDA approval. Moreover, changing circumstances may cause us to expend cash significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more cash than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control.
Our expectations regarding future cash requirements do not reflect the potential impact of any future acquisitions, mergers, dispositions, joint ventures or investments that we make in the future. We have no current understandings, agreements or commitments for any material acquisitions or licenses of any products, businesses or technologies. We may need to raise substantial additional capital in order to engage in any of these types of transactions.
We expect to continue to incur substantial additional operating losses for at least the next several years as we continue to develop our product candidates and seek marketing approval and, subject to obtaining such approval, the eventual commercialization of our product candidates. If we obtain marketing approval for our product candidates, we will incur significant sales, marketing and outsourced manufacturing expenses. In addition, we expect to incur additional expenses to add operational, financial and information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our planned product commercialization efforts. We also expect to continue to incur significant costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls and similar requirements applicable to us as a public company.
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
● the clinical development plans we establish for each product candidate;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates that we develop or may in-license;
● the terms of any collaboration agreements we may choose to execute;
● the outcome, timing and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, the FDA, the European Medicines Agency or other comparable foreign regulatory authorities;
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us;
● costs and timing of the implementation of commercial scale manufacturing activities;
● the cost of establishing, or outsourcing, sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own; and
● the costs to defend litigation;
To the extent that our capital resources are insufficient to meet our future operating and capital requirements, we must finance our cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements or other financing alternatives. We have no committed external sources of funds. Additional equity or debt financing or collaboration and licensing arrangements may not be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholder will experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms, such as liquidation and other preferences that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Liquidity
Since inception, we have been engaged in organizational activities, including raising capital and research and development activities. We have not generated revenues and has not yet achieved profitable operations, nor have we ever generated positive cash flow from operations. There is no assurance that profitable operations, if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. We are subject to those risks associated with any preclinical stage pharmaceutical company that has substantial expenditures for research and development. There can be no assurance that our research and development projects will be successful, that products developed will obtain necessary regulatory approval, or that any approved product will be commercially viable. In addition, we operate in an environment of rapid technological change and is largely dependent on the services of its employees and consultants. Further, our future operations are dependent on the success of our efforts to raise additional capital.
We incurred a net loss of $12,056,063 and $4,339,653 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $22,703,907 as of December 31, 2021. We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant revenue from our product candidates currently in development. Our primary source of capital has been the issuance of debt and equity securities. We closed our initial public offering in February 2021 and an underwritten public offering in September 2021, raising net proceeds of $15,783,207 and $36,999,465, respectively. Our cash on hand as of December 31, 2021 was $36,841,992.
Management believes that current cash is sufficient to fund operations and capital requirements for at least 12 months from the filing of this annual report. Additional financings will be needed by us to fund our operations, to complete clinical development of and to commercially develop our product candidates. There is no assurance that such financing will be available when needed or on acceptable terms. We also have the ability to curtail spending in research and development activities in order to conserve cash.
Significant Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We lease our office facilities under a month-to-month operating lease.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
No relevant recent accounting pronouncements noted.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company”. As an “emerging growth company,” we are electing to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that our decision not to take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.