Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes that are included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section entitled “Risk Factors.” Please also refer to the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Business Overview
We believe we are a leading provider of smart mobility technology solutions and services throughout the United States, Australia, Europe and Canada. These solutions and services include toll and violations management, title and registration, automated safety solutions, parking enforcement and citation, and other data-driven solutions, to our customers, which include RACs, FMCs, other large fleet owners, municipalities, school districts, universities, parking operators, healthcare facilities and transportation hubs and other violation-issuing authorities. Our solutions simplify the smart mobility ecosystem by utilizing what we believe are industry-leading capabilities, information and technology expertise, and integrated hardware and software to efficiently facilitate the automated processing of tolls and violations, automated safety and parking solutions for hundreds of agencies and millions of end users annually, while also making cities and roadways safer for everyone.
Executive Summary
We operate with long-term contracts and a highly reoccurring service revenue model. We continue to execute on our strategy of growing revenues with existing customers, expanding offerings into adjacent markets through innovation or acquisition and reducing operating costs. During the periods presented, we:
•Executed on our growth strategy by completing strategic acquisitions:
Redflex - During the second quarter of 2021, we acquired Redflex Holdings Limited (“Redflex”), which provides intelligent traffic management products and services to its customers. Through our acquisition of Redflex, we expanded our current footprint in the United States and gained access to international markets.
T2 Systems - During the fourth quarter of 2021, we acquired T2 Systems Parent Corporation (“T2 Systems”), which provides an integrated suite of parking software and hardware solutions and supports our strategy to diversify into new markets and increase opportunities to cross sell to customers within our overall portfolio.
•Increased total revenue by $157.0 million, or 40%, from $393.6 million in fiscal year 2020 to $550.6 million in fiscal year 2021. Our acquisitions contributed $45.0 million to revenue growth, and the remaining increase was mainly from Commercial Services service revenue resulting from improved travel demand that positively impacted our RAC customers. During fiscal year 2020, total revenue declined by $55.1 million, from $448.7 million in fiscal year 2019 to $393.6 million in fiscal year 2020 due to the significant negative impact from COVID-19.
•Generated cash flows from operating activities of $193.2 million, $46.9 million, and $133.8 million for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cash on hand was $101.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
Significant Events Impacting Our Business
Impact from COVID-19
COVID-19 emerged in December 2019 and was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020 as it significantly disrupted the global economy. In the United States and abroad, many federal, state and local governments have instituted travel restrictions, stay-at-home orders, social distancing orders, and border closures in order to minimize the spread of the virus. Revenues from RACs in our Commercial Services segment decreased significantly in 2020 as a result of reduced airline travel and other restrictions that impacted our customers’ volume and revenue. In our Government Solutions segment, school closures resulting from the
COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted revenues from our school bus stop arm camera and school zone speed camera products. Reductions in vehicle traffic in jurisdictions where we operate photo enforcement programs and payment rates for photo enforcement tickets have all negatively impacted service revenue in our Government Solutions segment.
In 2021, our business results were positively impacted from an increase in travel activity and the availability of COVID-19 vaccines, especially in the United States. Many of the widespread restrictions have been lifted, and the travel industry experienced a strong recovery, especially leisure travel, which increased our revenue from our RAC customers. In addition, reopening of schools throughout the United States and increase in vehicle traffic has contributed to revenue growth from our Government Solutions products and services. However, there remains continued uncertainty about the pandemic and its ongoing impact on our operational and financial performance due to the potential spread of new variants and other developments outside our control, and any future restrictions in travel and the related impact on demand for our products and services. For instance, the Omicron variant of COVID-19 has caused a surge in COVID-19 cases globally resulting in the reintroduction of travel restrictions in some countries.
T2 Systems Acquisition
On December 7, 2021, we acquired T2 Systems which offers an integrated suite of parking software and hardware solutions to its customers. This acquisition supports our strategy to expand and diversify into new markets within the mobility sector. We included the financial results of T2 Systems in the consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition and reported within the newly created Parking Solutions segment.
Pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “T2 Merger Agreement”) entered into on November 1, 2021 by VM Consolidated Inc., our indirect wholly owned subsidiary, Project Titan Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of VM Consolidated Inc. (“T2 Merger Sub”), T2 Systems, and Thoma Bravo Discover Fund, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, solely in its capacity as representative, T2 Merger Sub merged with and into T2 Systems (the “T2 Merger”), with T2 Systems surviving as an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. The Company paid a purchase price of $353.2 million. Transaction costs for T2 Systems were $2.7 million which primarily related to professional fees and other expenses related to the acquisition, and were included within the selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. See Note 3, Acquisitions, in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional details.
Share Repurchase and Retirement
On August 9, 2021, we announced that our Board authorized a share repurchase program for up to an aggregate amount of $100 million of our outstanding shares of Class A Common Stock. On August 20, 2021, we repurchased and retired 6,849,315 shares of our Class A Common Stock from the Platinum Stockholder at a price per share of $14.60, which was equal to the price at which the underwriter purchased shares of Class A Common Stock from the Platinum Stockholder in a concurrent underwritten secondary offering. We paid $100 million to fund the share repurchase using cash on hand. See Note 16, Related Party Transactions, in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional details on the secondary offering by the Platinum Stockholder.
Redflex Acquisition
On June 17, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Redflex, a public company limited by shares, incorporated in Australia and formerly listed on the Australian Securities Exchange. Redflex is a provider of intelligent traffic management products and services that are sold and managed in the Asia Pacific, North America, Europe, and Middle East regions. Redflex designs, manufactures, and operates a wide range of platform-based solutions, utilizing advanced sensor and image capture technologies that enable active management of state and local motorways. We included the financial results of Redflex in the consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition and reported within the Government Solutions segment.
Pursuant to the Scheme Implementation Agreement (the “Agreement”) entered into by us and Redflex on January 21, 2021, as amended by the Deed of Amendment and Consent, dated April 30, 2021, VM Consolidated, Inc., purchased one hundred percent of the outstanding equity of Redflex at A$0.96 per share resulting in consideration of A$152.5 million, or approximately US$117.9 million. Transaction costs for Redflex were $9.7 million which
primarily related to professional fees and other expenses related to the acquisition, and were included within the selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. See Note 3. Acquisitions, in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional details on the Redflex acquisition.
Segments
We have three operating and reportable segments, Commercial Services, Government Solutions and Parking Solutions:
•Our Commercial Services segment offers toll and violation management solutions and title and registration services for RACs and FMCs in North America. In Europe, we provide tolling and violations processing services.
•Our Government Solutions segment offers photo enforcement solutions and services to its customers. We provide complete, end-to-end speed, red-light, school bus stop arm and bus lane enforcement solutions within the United States and Canada. The international operations through Redflex primarily involve the sale of traffic enforcement products and related maintenance services.
•Our newly created Parking Solutions segment provides an integrated suite of parking software and hardware solutions to universities, municipalities, parking operators, healthcare facilities and transportation hubs in the United States and Canada.
Segment performance is based on revenues and income from operations before depreciation, amortization, gain (loss) on disposal of assets, net, impairment of property and equipment, and stock-based compensation. The measure also excludes interest expense, net, income taxes and certain other transactions and is inclusive of other income, net.
Primary Components of Our Operating Results
Revenues
Service Revenue. Our Commercial Services segment generates service revenue primarily through the operation and management of tolling programs and processing violations for RACs, FMCs and other large fleet customers. These solutions are full-service offerings by which we enroll the license plates of our customers’ vehicles and transponders with tolling authority accounts, pay tolls and violations on the customers’ behalf and, through proprietary technology, integrate with customer data to match the toll or violation to the driver and then bill the driver (or our customer, as applicable) for use of the service. The cost of certain tolls, violations and our customers’ share of administration fees are netted against revenue. We also generate service revenue in our Commercial Services segment through processing titles and registrations for our customers.
Our Government Solutions segment generates service revenue through the operation and maintenance of photo enforcement systems. Revenue drivers in this segment include the number of systems installed and the monthly revenue per system. Ancillary service revenue is generated in our Government Solutions segment from payment processing, pass-through fees for collection expense, and other fees.
Our Parking Solutions segment generates service revenue mainly from offering software as a service, subscription fees, professional services and citation processing services related to parking management solutions to its customers.
Product Sales. Product sales are generated by the sale of photo enforcement equipment in the Government Solutions segment and specialized hardware in the Parking Solutions segment. Customer buying patterns vary greatly from period to period related to product sales.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Service Revenue. Cost of service revenue consists of collection and other professional services provided by third parties associated with the delivery of certain ancillary services performed by our segments.
Cost of Product Sales. Cost of product sales consists of the cost to acquire and install photo enforcement equipment purchased by Government Solutions customers and costs to develop and install hardware sold to Parking Solutions customers.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses include payroll and payroll-related costs (including stock-based compensation), costs related to the operation of our call centers and other operational costs, including transaction processing, print, postage and communication costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include payroll and payroll-related costs (including stock-based compensation), real estate lease expense, insurance costs, professional services fees, acquisition costs and general corporate expenses.
Depreciation, Amortization and (Gain) Loss on Disposal of Assets, Net. Depreciation, amortization and (gain) loss on disposal of assets, net includes depreciation on property, plant and equipment, and amortization of definite-lived intangible assets. This line item also includes any one-time gains or losses incurred in connection with the disposal of certain assets.
Impairment of Property and Equipment. Impairment of property and equipment includes impairment charges for fixed assets which were held and used in our operations.
Interest Expense, Net. This includes interest expense and amortization of deferred financing costs and discounts and is net of interest income.
Change in Fair Value of Private Placement Warrants. Change in fair value of private placement warrants consists of liability adjustments related to the 6,666,666 Private Placement Warrants originally issued to Gores Sponsor II, LLC re-measured to fair value at the end of each reporting period.
Tax Receivable Agreement Liability Adjustment. Tax receivable agreement liability adjustment consists of adjustments made to our Tax Receivable Agreement due to changes in estimates.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt generally consists of early payment penalties, the write-off of original issue discounts and deferred financing costs associated with debt extinguishment.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net primarily consists of volume rebates earned from total spend on purchasing cards and gain or loss on foreign currency transactions.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
The following table sets forth our statements of operations data and expresses each item as a percentage of total revenue for the periods presented as well as the changes between periods. The tables and information provided in this section were derived from exact numbers and may have immaterial rounding differences.
Service Revenue. Service revenue increased by $156.6 million, or 46.6%, to $492.8 million for fiscal year 2021 from $336.3 million in fiscal year 2020, representing 89.5% and 85.4% of total revenue, respectively. The following table depicts service revenue by segment:
Commercial Services service revenue includes toll and violation management revenues from RACs and FMCs. Commercial Services service revenue increased by $80.0 million, or 44.3%, from $180.9 million in fiscal year 2020 to $260.9 million in fiscal year 2021. This increase was primarily due to the wide distribution of COVID-19 vaccines and the lifting of travel restrictions that positively impacted the travel industry in 2021. Our RAC customers experienced a rebound in leisure travel that impacted our volume in 2021 compared to the prior year which was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Government Solutions service revenue includes revenue from speed, red-light, school bus stop arm and bus lane photo enforcement systems. Service revenue was $228.0 million and $155.4 million for the years ended
December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and it increased by $72.6 million. The acquisition of Redflex on June 17, 2021 contributed $33.0 million to our year-over-year growth. Organic growth excluding Redflex was $39.6 million which was primarily driven by the expansion of school zone speed programs. Speed is our largest product in this segment and grew $33.5 million in the current year excluding Redflex. We added 805 speed cameras in 2020 which provided year-over-year growth in 2021 and 752 speed cameras in 2021 which provided growth in the current year and will continue to provide growth into 2022. The remaining growth can be attributable to improvement in variable rate programs that returned to more normalized volume as COVID-19 restrictions lifted throughout 2021.
Parking Solutions service revenue of $4.0 million resulted from the December 7, 2021 acquisition of T2 systems with no revenue in the comparable period.
Product Sales. Product sales increased slightly year over year and were $57.7 million and $57.3 million for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, which relate to revenue generated from Government Solutions and Parking Solutions customers who purchase their equipment. We generated product revenue of $8.1 million from the Redflex and T2 Systems acquisitions for which there was no revenue in the comparable period. Prior to these acquisitions, product revenue was limited to a few large customers whose buying patterns vary greatly from period to period. Product sales for these customers decreased by $7.7 million due to a decline of 60 units sold and to a lesser extent from product mix.
Cost of Service Revenue. Cost of service revenue increased from $4.0 million for fiscal year 2020 to $5.3 million for fiscal year 2021. The $1.3 million increase resulted from increased costs from third-party professional services associated with the delivery of certain ancillary services, a portion of which related to the Parking Solutions segment with no comparable costs in the prior year.
Cost of Product Sales. Cost of product sales increased slightly year over year and was $29.8 million and $29.6 million for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. This was mainly due to a decrease from the timing of installations at a single customer that is expanding its school zone speed program, offset by an increase from the inclusion of Redflex and T2 Systems product sales in the 2021 period with no comparable amounts in the prior year.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses increased by $47.6 million, or 41.2%, from $115.7 million for fiscal year 2020 to $163.4 million in fiscal year 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $20.4 million in wages expense, $13.4 million for subcontractor expenses and $9.4 million of recurring services resulting from increased operations in 2021, which were lower in the 2020 year due to the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenue increased from 29.4% to 29.7% in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, respectively. This slight increase represents improved operating leverage corresponding to the revenue improvement in the Commercial Services segment and decreased operating leverage for the Government Solutions business with the addition of Redflex which historically had lower margins than the Verra Mobility business. The following table presents operating expenses by segment:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $33.7 million to $123.4 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $89.7 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily due to $12.4 million in transaction costs incurred related to the Redflex and T2 systems acquisitions, increased wages expense due to the reinstatement of employee bonus accrual in 2021, and increased wages, rent, information technology and other professional expenses from the inclusion of Redflex operations for approximately 200 days in 2021 with no comparable amounts in prior year. These increases were partially offset by a $4.9 million reduction to the credit loss expense resulting from changes in loss rate estimates based on improved economic conditions. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenue decreased from 22.8% to
22.4% in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, respectively. The following table presents selling, general and administrative expenses by segment:
Depreciation, Amortization and (Gain) Loss on Disposal of Assets, Net. Depreciation, amortization and (gain) loss on disposal of assets, net, remained consistent at $116.8 million for both fiscal years 2021 and 2020. This was mainly due to a decrease from certain trademark intangibles being fully amortized for ten months in fiscal year 2021, offset by increased depreciation and amortization expense resulting from the Redflex and T2 Systems acquisitions in 2021 with no comparable amounts in the prior year.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net increased by $4.0 million from $40.9 million in fiscal year 2020 to $44.9 million in fiscal year 2021. This increase was primarily a result of the additional borrowing of $350 million in unsecured notes at a higher fixed rate, offset by the reduction in the variable rate on our first lien term loan facility. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Change in Fair Value of Private Placement Warrants. We recorded losses of $7.6 million and $1.1 million in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the changes in fair value of our Private Placement Warrants which are accounted for as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. The change in fair value is the result of re-measurement of the liability at the end of each reporting period.
Tax Receivable Agreement Liability Adjustment. We recorded a $1.0 million tax benefit in fiscal year 2021 and a $6.8 million tax expense in fiscal year 2020. The liability adjustment in 2021 is a result of lower estimated state tax rates due to changes in apportionment, whereas in 2020 it is a result of higher state tax rates due to changes in apportionment.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $5.3 million for fiscal year 2021 consisting of a $4.0 million write-off of pre-existing deferred financing costs and discounts and $1.3 million of lender and third-party costs associated with the issuance of the new 2021 Term Loan, as discussed and defined below.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net was $12.9 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to $11.9 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase of $1.0 million was primarily due to increased tolling activity as a result of COVID-19 recovery in the travel industry, offset by a total of $2.8 million in gains recorded in fiscal year 2020 from a settlement agreement and related insurance proceeds.
Income Tax Provision. Income tax provision was $26.5 million representing an effective tax rate of 39.0% for fiscal year 2021 compared to $5.4 million, representing an effective tax rate of 636.7% for fiscal year 2020. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2021 was lower compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in pretax income in 2021, resulting in the Company’s permanent book and tax differences having a proportionately lesser impact on the effective tax rate for 2021.
Net Income (Loss). We had net income of $41.4 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to a net loss of $4.6 million for 2020. The $46.0 million increase in net income was primarily due to the significant recovery in the travel industry positively impacting our RAC customers and from the other statement of operations activity discussed above.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
The following table sets forth our statements of operations data and expresses each item as a percentage of total revenue for the periods presented as well as the changes between periods. The tables and information provided in this section were derived from exact numbers and may have immaterial rounding differences.
Service Revenue. Service revenue decreased by $80.4 million, or 19.3%, to $336.3 million for fiscal year 2020 from $416.7 million in fiscal year 2019, representing 85.4% and 92.9% of total revenue, respectively. The following table depicts service revenue by segment:
Commercial Services service revenue includes toll and violation management revenues from commercial fleet and rental car companies. Commercial Services service revenue decreased by $95.6 million, or 34.6%, from $276.5 million in fiscal year 2019 to $180.9 million in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related containment measures, which had a significant negative impact on the RAC industry beginning in March 2020. As a result, our revenue declined 55% from the first quarter of 2020 to $27.3 million in the second quarter of 2020 which was the bulk of the decline. We had seen sequential improvement in service revenue to $44.2 million and $48.2 million in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively which could be attributed to typical seasonality or to signs of recovery.
Government Solutions service revenue includes revenue from red-light, speed, school bus stop arm and bus lane photo enforcement systems. Service revenue increased by $15.2 million to $155.4 million for fiscal year 2020 from 140.2 million in fiscal year 2019. Our red-light photo enforcement service revenue declined $6.7 million during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. This was primarily due to a $3.5 million decline from the loss of certain Texas programs on June 1, 2019, due to a legislative change that banned most red-light photo enforcement programs in the state. The remainder of the decline was primarily attributed to the impact from COVID-19 on variable rate clients. We also had a $4.3 million decrease in service revenue from the suspension of school bus stop arm cameras as most school buses were not operating for much of this period. These declines were mainly offset by speed program revenue, which grew approximately $25.7 million in fiscal year 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, due to an increase in the total number of camera systems installed.
There was an average of 4,027 active camera systems during fiscal year 2020 compared to an average of 4,738 for fiscal year 2019. The decline in active camera systems was primarily due to 1,347 cameras that were temporarily inactive due to COVID-19, and the loss of Texas programs noted above. These declines were partially offset by the expansion of speed enforcement systems with existing customers.
Service revenue for the 2020 period was negatively impacted by COVID-19 beginning in March 2020 which led to reduction in vehicle traffic as a result of stay-at-home orders and early school closures and delayed re-openings in certain jurisdictions in which we operate.
Product Sales. Product sales were $57.3 million and $32.0 million for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, which relate to revenue generated from Government Solutions customers who purchase their equipment. Product sales increased by $25.3 million which was primarily driven by sales to a single customer that is currently expanding its existing school zone speed program. A small number of customers purchase this equipment, and their buying patterns vary greatly from period to period.
Cost of Service Revenue. Cost of service revenue decreased year over year, from $5.6 million for fiscal year 2019 to $4.0 million for fiscal year 2020. The decrease resulted from decreased costs of collection and other third-party professional services associated with the delivery of certain ancillary services performed by us.
Cost of Product Sales. Cost of product sales increased by $15.7 million from $13.9 million in fiscal year 2019 to $29.6 million in fiscal year 2020 and was driven by the increase in product sales volume.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses decreased by $9.9 million, or 7.9%, from $125.6 million for fiscal year 2019 to $115.7 million in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of $4.6 million in employee wages due to furloughs, reduced headcount and bonus expense, and $9.1 million in transaction processing and other volume related costs, which were partially offset by increases in subcontractor expenses and operational equipment costs. Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenue increased from 28.0% to 29.4% in fiscal years 2019 and 2020, respectively. The following table presents operating expenses by segment:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $4.2 million to $89.7 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $85.5 million for fiscal year 2019. We recorded a $14.4 million credit loss expense during the year as a result of the new credit loss accounting standard, which contributed to a $6.3 million year over year increase. We also had increases to stock-based compensation and consulting fees of $2.6 million and $1.5 million, respectively. These increases were partially offset by an aggregate $7.6 million of cost-cutting measures including the elimination of the bonus payout and the related expense along with reductions to marketing and non-essential travel. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenue increased from 19.1% to 22.8% in fiscal years 2019 and 2020, respectively. The following table presents selling, general and administrative expenses by segment:
Depreciation, Amortization and (Gain) Loss on Disposal of Assets, Net. Depreciation, amortization and (gain) loss on disposal of assets, net, increased from $115.8 million in fiscal year 2019 to $116.8 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily due to the increased depreciation and amortization expense resulting from the Pagatelia acquisition included in the entire fiscal year 2020 compared to only two months in 2019.
Impairment of Property and Equipment. Impairment of property and equipment for the fiscal year 2019 included a $5.9 million impairment charge as a result of legislation that banned most red-light photo enforcement programs in Texas on June 1, 2019, which was in the Government Solutions segment.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net decreased by $19.9 million from $60.7 million in fiscal year 2019 to $40.9 million in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was primarily as a result of lower interest rates coupled with the refinancing of our 2018 Term Loan (as defined below) in February 2020, which reduced the applicable margin on the interest rate by 50 basis points.
Change in Fair Value of Private Placement Warrants. We recorded losses of $1.1 million and $16.3 million in fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the changes in fair value of our Private Placement Warrants
which are accounted for as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. The change in fair value is the result of re-measurement of the liability at the end of each reporting period.
Tax Receivable Agreement Liability Adjustment. We recorded a $6.8 million charge in fiscal year 2020 and income of $0.1 million in fiscal year 2019. The adjustment in 2020 reflects the impact of an increase to the Company’s deferred tax rate arising from higher state tax rates due to a change in apportionment.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net was $11.9 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $11.1 million in fiscal year 2019. The increase of $0.8 million was primarily due to a total of $2.8 million in gains recorded in fiscal year 2020 from a settlement agreement and related insurance proceeds, partially offset by the decreased volume in purchasing card rebates resulting from COVID-19’s impact on toll usage.
Income Tax Provision. Income tax provision was $5.4 million representing an effective tax rate of 636.7% for fiscal year 2020 compared to $13.6 million, representing an effective tax rate of 44.3% for fiscal year 2019. The effective tax rate change was primarily due to lower pre-tax income in 2020, resulting in the Company’s permanent book and tax differences having a proportionately greater impact on the effective tax rate in the 2020 year.
Net (Loss) Income. We had a net loss of $4.6 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to net income of $17.1 million for 2019. The $21.7 million decrease in net income was primarily due to the decline in revenue from the impact of COVID-19 on our RAC customers, and the other statement of operations activity discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flow from operations and available borrowings under our Revolver (defined below).
We have incurred significant long-term debt as a result of acquisitions completed in prior years as well as the Redflex and T2 Systems acquisitions in the current year.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flows provided by operating activities and our availability to borrow under our Revolver (as defined below) will be sufficient to meet operating cash requirements and service debt obligations for at least the next 12 months. Our ability to generate sufficient cash from our operating activities depends on our future performance, which is subject to general economic, political, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. In addition, our future capital expenditures and other cash requirements could be higher than currently expected due to various factors, including any expansion of our business or strategic acquisitions. Should we pursue strategic acquisitions, we may need to raise additional capital, which may be in the form of additional long-term debt, borrowings on our Revolver, or equity financings, all of which may not be available to us on favorable terms or at all.
At December 31, 2021, we had $25.0 million in outstanding borrowings on the Revolver, which was repaid in full in January 2022. The borrowings on the Revolver were used in the normal course of business to ensure sufficient cash balances globally.
Concentration of Credit Risk
The City of New York Department of Transportation (“NYCDOT”) represented 39% and 59% of total accounts receivable, net as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The total outstanding receivables balance decreased $35.7 million at December 31, 2021 compared to the outstanding balance at December 31, 2020 as the Company collected $182 million during 2021 from the customer. There is no material reserve related to NYCDOT open receivables as amounts are deemed collectible based on current conditions and expectations.
The following table sets forth certain captions on our statements of cash flows for the respective periods:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased by $146.3 million, from $46.9 million in 2020 to $193.2 million in 2021. Net income increased $46.0 million from a $4.6 million loss in 2020 compared to $41.4 million income in 2021. The adjustments to net income (loss) included increases of $6.5 million for the changes in the fair value of private placement warrants year over year and $5.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt, partially offset by decreases from lower credit loss expense, changes in deferred income taxes and the tax receivable agreement liability adjustments year over year. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were mainly driven by a significant reduction in the accounts receivable balance from $182 million in payments received from NYCDOT in 2021, and increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities resulting from increases in accrued interest at the end of 2021, reinstatement of the bonus accrual in 2021 and increased liabilities related to Redflex which were not in the comparable prior period.
Cash provided by operating activities decreased by $86.9 million, from $133.8 million in 2019 to $46.9 million in 2020. Net income year over year decreased by $21.7 million, from $17.1 million income in 2019 to a $4.6 million loss in 2020. The adjustments to net income (loss) included a $6.3 million increase in credit loss expense from the adoption of the credit loss standard, the $7.0 million increase in the tax receivable agreement liability adjustment and a $6.1 million change in deferred income taxes. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $15.1 million from the change in fair value of our private placement warrants, and a $5.9 million impairment of property and equipment in fiscal year 2019 with no comparable amount in 2020. There was an aggregate $65.5 million decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 in the changes in operating assets and liabilities, which was driven primarily by a $77.9 million increase in accounts receivables primarily due to collection delays on the accounts receivable associated with our fixed speed camera product sales to NYCDOT, combined with a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to the payout of the 2019 bonus accrual with no accrual for fiscal year 2020 and a decrease in other accruals which was consistent with our decrease in certain revenue streams.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities in 2021 was mainly related to acquisitions of Redflex, T2 Systems and NuPark. We acquired one hundred percent of the outstanding equity of Redflex on June 17, 2021 at A$0.96 per share for total consideration of A$152.5 million, or approximately US$117.9 million. On December 7, 2021, we acquired all of the outstanding shares of T2 Systems for $353.2 million, net of $14.1 million of cash acquired. On December 13, 2021, we acquired NuPark for $7.0 million, which included approximately $5.0 million of cash paid.
Cash used in investing activities was $24.2 million in 2020 mainly related to purchases of installation and service parts and property and equipment. Cash used in investing activities was $55.0 million in 2019 which was mainly due to the acquisition of Pagatelia for $26.6 million, net of $1.1 million of cash acquired, and $29.7 million from purchases of installation and service parts and property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $268.7 million in 2021. We had aggregate borrowings of $1.3 billion during 2021 consisting of the 2021 Term Loan (which included $250 million incremental borrowing), Senior Notes and the Revolver (defined below) and repayments of $884.5 million on outstanding debt related to the 2018 and 2021 Term Loans, and debt assumed as part of the Redflex and T2 acquisitions that was subsequently paid. The 2018 Term Loan had been fully repaid in March 2021. The aggregate borrowings net of the repayments along with existing cash on hand were used to fund the close of the Redflex and T2 systems acquisitions in June 2021 and December 2021, respectively, and the share repurchase and retirement for $100 million in August 2021 (discussed above).
Cash used in financing activities was $34.0 million and $14.5 million for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. The cash used in 2020 increased primarily as a result of a $19.7 million mandatory prepayment of excess cash flows made pursuant to the terms of the 2018 Term Loan and costs associated with refinancing it.
Long-term Debt
2021 Term Loan and Senior Notes
In March 2021, VM Consolidated, Inc., the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, entered into an Amendment and Restatement Agreement No.1 to the First Lien Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “2021 Term Loan”) with a syndicate of lenders. The 2021 Term Loan has an aggregate borrowing of $650 million, maturing on March 26, 2028, and an accordion feature providing for an additional $250 million of term loans, subject to satisfaction of certain requirements. In connection with the 2021 Term Loan, the Company had an offering discount cost of $3.3 million and $0.7 million of deferred financing costs, both of which were capitalized and are amortized over the remaining life of the 2021 Term Loan.
In addition, in March 2021, VM Consolidated, Inc. issued Senior Unsecured Notes (the “Senior Notes”) in an aggregate principal amount of $350 million, due on April 15, 2029. In connection with the issuance of the Senior Notes, the Company incurred $5.7 million in lender and third-party costs, which were capitalized as deferred financing costs and are being amortized over the remaining life of the Senior Notes.
The net proceeds from both the 2021 Term Loan and the Senior Notes received in March 2021 were used to repay in full all outstanding debt which was represented by the First Lien Term Loan Credit Agreement (as amended, the “2018 Term Loan”) with a balance of $865.6 million.
On December 7, 2021, VM Consolidated Inc, entered into an agreement to exercise the accordion feature under the 2021 Term Loan, borrowing $250 million in incremental term loans (“Incremental Term Loan”). The proceeds from the Incremental Term Loan were used, along with cash on hand, to fund the acquisition of T2 Systems, including repaying in full all outstanding debt for T2 Systems. In connection with the Incremental Term Loan, the Company had an offering discount cost of $1.3 million and $3.8 million of deferred financing costs, both of which were capitalized and are amortized over the remaining life of the 2021 Term Loan. The Incremental Term Loan accrued interest from the date of borrowing until December 31, 2021, at which time, it was combined with the 2021 Term Loan to be a single tranche of term loan borrowings. The total principal outstanding under the 2021 Term Loan, which includes the Incremental Term Loan, was $895.1 million at December 31, 2021.
The 2021 Term Loan is repayable at 1.0% per annum of the amount initially borrowed, paid in quarterly installments. It bears interest based, at the Company’s option, on either (1) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.25% per annum, or (2) an alternate base rate plus an applicable margin of 2.25% per annum. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the 2021 Term Loan was 3.6%.
In addition, the 2021 Term Loan requires mandatory prepayments equal to the product of the excess cash flows of the Company (as defined in the 2021 Term Loan agreement) and the applicable prepayment percentages (calculated as of the last day of the fiscal year, beginning with the year ending December 31, 2022), as set forth in the following table:
Interest on the Senior Notes is fixed at 5.50% per annum and is payable on April 15 and October 15 of each year (beginning on October 15, 2021). On or after April 15, 2024, the Company may redeem all or a portion of the Senior Notes at the redemption prices set forth below in percentages by year, plus accrued and unpaid interest:
In addition, the Company may redeem up to 40% of the Senior Notes before April 15, 2024, with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings.
The Company evaluated the March 2021 refinancing transactions on a lender-by-lender basis and accounted for the portion of the transaction that did not meet the accounting criteria for debt extinguishment as a debt modification. Accordingly, the Company recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.3 million on the 2018 Term Loan during the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of a $4.0 million write-off of pre-existing deferred financing costs and discounts and $1.3 million of lender and third-party costs associated with the issuance of the new 2021 Term Loan.
PPP Loan
During fiscal year 2020, Redflex received a loan from the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) as part of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP Loan”) to offset certain employment and other allowable costs incurred as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. At December 31, 2021, the loan amount outstanding was $2.9 million and is payable within a year, and is included in the current portion of long-term debt. In early 2021, Redflex applied for forgiveness of this loan and, as of December 31, 2021, was still awaiting approval from the SBA.
The Revolver
The Company has a Revolving Credit Agreement (the “Revolver”) with a commitment of up to $75 million available for loans and letters of credit. The Revolver matures on December 20, 2026. Borrowing eligibility under the Revolver is subject to a monthly borrowing base calculation based on (i) certain percentages of eligible accounts receivable and inventory, less (ii) certain reserve items, including outstanding letters of credit and other reserves. The Revolver bears interest on either (1) LIBOR plus an applicable margin, or (2) an alternate base rate, plus an applicable margin. The margin percentage applied to (1) LIBOR is either 1.25%, 1.50%, or 1.75%, or (2) the base rate is either 0.25%, 0.50%, or 0.75%, depending on the Company’s average availability to borrow under the commitment. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $25.0 million in outstanding borrowings on the Revolver, which was repaid in full in January 2022.
Interest on the unused portion of the Revolver is payable quarterly at 0.375% and the Company is also required to pay participation and fronting fees at 1.38% on $6.2 million of outstanding letters of credit as of December 31, 2021.
All borrowings and other extensions of credits under the 2021 Term Loan, Senior Notes and the Revolver are subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions and restrictive covenants including absence of defaults and accuracy in material respects of representations and warranties. At December 31, 2021, the Company was compliant with all debt covenants. Substantially all of the Company’s assets are pledged as collateral to secure the Company’s indebtedness under the 2021 Term Loan and the Revolver.
Interest Expense
We recorded interest expense, including amortization of deferred financing costs and discounts, of $44.9 million, $40.9 million and $60.7 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Management believes
that its estimates and assumptions are reasonable in the circumstances; however, actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the critical accounting policies listed below involve our more significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates and, therefore, could have the greatest potential impact on the financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
Nature of Goods and Services
The following is a description of principal activities - separated by reportable segments - from which the Company generates revenue:
Commercial Services. The Commercial Services segment offers toll and violation management solutions for the commercial fleet and rental car industries. The Company determined its performance obligation is a distinct stand-ready obligation, as there is an unspecified quantity of services provided that does not diminish, and the customer is being charged only when it uses the Company’s services, such as toll payment, title and registration, etc. Payment terms for contracts with commercial fleet and rental car companies vary, but are usually billed as services are performed.
Government Solutions. The Government Solutions segment principally generates revenue by providing complete, end-to-end speed, red-light, school bus stop arm, and bus lane enforcement solutions. Products, when sold, are typically sold together with the services in a bundle for a majority of customers. The average initial term of a contract is 3 to 5 years. Payment terms for contracts with government agencies vary depending on whether the consideration is fixed or variable. Payment terms for contracts with fixed consideration are usually based on equal installments over the duration of the contract. Payment terms for contracts with variable consideration are usually billed and collected as citations are issued or paid. In instances when the consideration expected from the customer is subject to variation, any variable consideration affecting revenue recognition is allocated to the distinct period (the monthly period) that it relates to.
For bundled packages, the Company accounts for individual products and services separately if they are distinct - i.e., if a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundle and if a customer can benefit from it as a stand-alone item. The consideration is allocated between separate products and services in a bundle based on their stand-alone selling prices (“SSP”). The Company estimates the SSP for its services based upon observable evidence, market conditions and other relevant inputs. If products are sold without the related services, no allocation is required.
•Product sales (sale of camera systems and installation) - the Company recognizes revenue when the installation process is completed and the camera system is ready to perform the services as expected by the customer. Generally, this occurs at site acceptance or first citation. The Company recognizes revenue for the sale of the camera system and installation services at a point in time.
•Service revenue - the Company has determined its performance obligation is to provide a complete end-to-end safety and enforcement solution. Promises include providing a system to capture images, processing images taken by the camera, forwarding eligible images to the police department and processing payments on behalf of the municipality. The Company has determined that certain of the promises to its customers are capable of being distinct as they are capable of providing some measure of benefit to the customer either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer. However, the Company has determined the promises to its customers do not meet the criterion of being distinct within the context of its contracts. The Company would not be able to fulfill its promises individually as its customers could not obtain the intended benefit from the contract without the Company fulfilling all promises. Accordingly, the Company concluded that each contract represents one service offering and is a single performance obligation to the customer. Further, the Company accounts for all the services as a single continuous service. The Company applied the series guidance for those services as it stands ready to deliver those services over the contract period. The Company recognizes revenue from services over time, as they are performed.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2021, the Company had approximately $0.3 million and $8.9 million of deferred revenue in the Government Solutions segment. Deferred revenue represents amounts that have been invoiced in advance which are expected to be recognized as revenue in future periods. The majority of the remaining performance obligations as of December 31, 2021 are expected to be completed and recognized in 2022 and $3.2 million is expected to be recognized ratably between 2023 through 2027.
Parking Solutions. The newly acquired T2 Systems business offers an integrated suite of parking software and hardware solutions to its customers. Revenue since the date of acquisition was derived primarily from the sale of software as a service (“SaaS”) and specialized hardware. For bundled packages, the Company accounts for individual products and services separately if they are distinct and allocate the transaction price based on the relative SSP.
•Revenue derived from the Company’s SaaS products is recognized ratably over the contractual service period beginning on the date the service is made available to the customer.
•Revenue from hardware product sales is recognized at a point in time when ownership is transferred to the customer.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $20.9 million of deferred revenue which represents amounts that have been invoiced in advance to the Parking Solutions customers and are expected to be recognized as revenue in 2022.
Significant Judgments
Significant judgment is required in order to identify contracts with customers and estimate transaction prices. Additional judgments are required for identifying the performance obligations and determining whether the services provided are able to be distinct, determining the transaction price as it relates to the different variable consideration structures identified in our contracts, the estimation of the SSP and the allocation of the transaction price by relative SSPs. Assumptions regarding timing of when control transfers to the customer also requires significant judgment in order to recognize revenue.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We review historical credit losses and customer payment trends on receivables and develop loss rate estimates as of the balance sheet date, which includes adjustments for current and future expectations using probability-weighted assumptions about potential outcomes. Receivables are written off against the allowance for credit losses when it is probable that amounts will not be collected based on the terms of the customer contracts, and subsequent recoveries reverse the previous write-off and apply to the receivable in the period recovered. The Company periodically evaluates the adequacy of its allowance for expected credit losses by comparing its actual historical write-offs to its previously recorded estimates and adjusts appropriately. This includes evaluation by portfolio segment the changes in expectations based on the newest information available on customer payment trends and risk characteristics, and adjusting the probability-weighting either upward or downward that is most representative of the expected credit losses. We adjusted down our estimate for credit loss as of December 31, 2021 for the Commercial Services (All other) portfolio segment to reflect improved economic conditions based on customer payment trends in
the last 12 months, as compared to as of December 31, 2020 which was based on higher probabilities of loss given the uncertainty caused by COVID-19 on the travel industry.
Acquisitions
We have made a number of acquisitions to date and may continue to do so in the future. We apply the acquisition method to account for business combinations. We allocate the fair value of the purchase price consideration to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase consideration over the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
The determination and allocation of fair values to the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is based on various assumptions and valuation methodologies requiring considerable management judgment and includes the use of independent valuation specialists to assist us in estimating fair values of acquired tangible and intangible assets. Fair values of acquired assets and their respective useful lives are based on, among other factors, critical estimates of expected cash flows, customer turnover and anticipated growth from acquired customers, discount rates and royalty cost savings. Although we believe that the assumptions applied in the determination are reasonable based on information available at the date of acquisition, actual results may differ from estimates. Differences between estimates and actual results may result in adjustment to goodwill and acquisition date fair values of assets and liabilities during a measurement period or upon a final determination of asset and liability fair values, whichever occurs first. Adjustments to fair values of assets and liabilities made after the end of the measurement period are recognized within our consolidated statements of operations as a current period gain or loss.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we early adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers, which requires consistent recognition and measurement of contract assets and contract liabilities whether or not they are acquired in a business combination. As a result, we did not measure deferred revenue at fair value for business combinations completed in fiscal year 2021.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
We assess goodwill for impairment annually on October 1, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be fully recoverable. We first consider the option to assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, we then perform a one-step quantitative impairment test by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value with its carrying value. An impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the reporting units’ carrying value exceeds its fair value, up to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. No impairment is recognized if the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value.
The process of evaluating goodwill requires significant judgment including the identification of reporting units and the determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. If necessary, we determine fair values of our reporting units based on an income approach or more specifically, a discounted cash flow method (“DCF Method”). The DCF Method is based on projected future cash flows and terminal value estimates discounted to their present values. Terminal value represents the present value an investor would pay on the valuation date for the rights to the cash flows of the business for the years subsequent to the discrete cash flow projection period. We consider the DCF Method to be the most appropriate valuation technique since it is based on our long-term financial projections. In addition to determining the fair value of our reporting units based on the DCF method, we also compare the aggregate values of our net corporate assets and the reporting unit fair values to our overall market capitalization and use certain market-based valuation techniques to assess the reasonableness of the reporting unit fair values determined in accordance with the DCF Method. The key inputs used in the DCF Method include revenue growth rates, gross margin percentage, selling, general and administrative expense percentage and discount rates that are at or above our weighted-average cost of capital. We apply discount rates that are commensurate with the risks and uncertainties inherent in the respective reporting units and our internally developed projections of future cash flows.
Our qualitative analyses performed as of October 1 for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 did not have indicators of impairment.
We review our long-lived assets other than goodwill, for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be fully recoverable. We assess recoverability by comparing the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group with its carrying value. If the carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value. Our estimates of cash flows are subjective judgments based on past experiences adjusted for trends and future
expectation, and can be significantly impacted by changes in our business or economic conditions. The determination of asset group fair value is also subject to significant judgment and utilizes valuation techniques including discounting estimated future cash flows and market-based analyses. If our estimates or underlying assumptions change in the future, our operating results may be materially impacted.
The state of Texas passed legislation as of June 1, 2019, to ban red-light photo enforcement programs across the state, with certain carve-outs for some existing programs. We considered this a triggering event for potential impairment and evaluated the recoverability of property and equipment used in the operations of red-light photo enforcement programs in Texas. As a result, we recognized an impairment charge in the Government Solutions segment of $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is included in impairment of property and equipment in the consolidated statements of operations. We did not have any indicators of impairment related to long-lived assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2021.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. This approach requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of differences between the tax basis of assets or liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax return in future years, while deferred tax liabilities generally represent items that generate a future tax liability for items where deductions have been accelerated for tax purposes. We provide a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the tax assets will not be realized. We calculate the valuation allowance in accordance with the authoritative guidance relating to income taxes, which requires an assessment of both positive and negative evidence regarding the realizability of these deferred tax assets when measuring the need for a valuation allowance. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. The realization of deferred tax assets can be affected by, among other things, the nature, frequency, and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the length of statutory carryforward periods, our experience with utilizing operating losses and tax credit carryforwards by jurisdiction, the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences and tax planning alternatives and strategies that may be available.
Our effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates, differences in the deductibility of certain expenses and inclusion of certain income items between financial statement and tax return purposes, and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Under GAAP, if we determine that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, we recognize the benefit. Tax code and regulations require certain items to be included in the tax return at different times than when those items are required to be recorded in the consolidated financial statements. As a result, our effective tax rate reflected in our consolidated financial statements is different from that reported in our tax returns. Some of these differences are permanent, such as meals and entertainment expenses that are not fully deductible on our tax returns, and some are temporary differences, such as depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes as a component of income tax provision or benefit.
Tax Receivable Agreement
At the closing of the Business Combination, we entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with the Platinum Stockholder. The Tax Receivable Agreement generally provides for the payment to the Platinum Stockholder of 50% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax that we actually realize (or are deemed to realize in certain circumstances) in periods after the closing of the Business Combination as a result of the increase in the tax basis of certain acquired intangibles prior to the Business Combination. We generally retain the benefit of the remaining 50% of these cash savings. We estimated the potential maximum benefit to be paid will be approximately $70.0 million and recorded an initial liability and corresponding charge to equity at the closing of the Business Combination. Subsequently, the Company adjusted this amount.
At December 31, 2021, the Tax Receivable Agreement liability was approximately $61.7 million of which $5.1 million was the current portion and $56.6 million was the non-current portion, both of which are included in the respective payable to the related party pursuant to tax receivable agreement line items on the consolidated balance
sheets. The Company made a $4.8 million payment during the first quarter of 2021 and a $5.1 million payment during the fourth quarter of 2021 related to tax years 2019 and 2020, respectively.
We recorded a $1.0 million tax benefit in fiscal year 2021, a $6.8 million tax expense in fiscal year 2020 and a $0.1 million tax benefit in fiscal year 2019. The Tax Receivable Agreement liability adjustment in 2021 is a result of lower estimated state tax rates due to changes in apportionment, whereas in 2020 it is a result of higher state tax rates due to changes in apportionment.
The remaining tax life of these intangible assets is approximately 12 years. The ultimate timing of payments of the Tax Receivable Agreement liability is uncertain due to the realization of the benefits from the related intangibles involving uncertainties in the amount and timing of our future taxable income. We expect to fund future payments through cash flow from operations.
Private Placement Warrant Liabilities
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance under the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common shares, among other conditions for equity classification.
For warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. Our Public Warrants meet the criteria for equity classification and accordingly, are reported as a component of shareholders’ equity while our Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and are instead classified as a liability. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants is estimated at period-end using a Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is a Level 3 fair value measurement exposed to valuation risk. The risk of exposure is estimated using a sensitivity analysis of potential changes in the significant unobservable inputs, primarily the volatility input that is the most susceptible to valuation risk. A 5% increase to the volatility input at December 31, 2021 would increase the estimated fair value of $5.77 by $0.30 per unit. A 5% decrease to the volatility input at December 31, 2021 would decrease the estimated fair value by $0.30 per unit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.