ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the financial statements, related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To the extent that this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements regarding the financial condition, operating results, business prospects or any other aspect of our Company, please be advised that our actual financial condition, operating results and business performance may differ materially from that projected or estimated by us in forward-looking statements and thus you should not unduly rely on these statements.
Explanatory Note
All references to shares of our common stock contained herein have been adjusted to reflect a 1-for-500 reverse stock split which was completed and became effective on January 13, 2021.
Overview
For the period August 1, 2018 through October 31, 2021, we, through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Verus Foods, Inc. (“Verus Foods”), an international supplier of consumer food products, were focused on international consumer packaged goods, foodstuff distribution and wholesale trade. Our fine food products were sourced in the United States and exported internationally. We marketed consumer food products under our own brand primarily to supermarkets, hotels and other members of the wholesale trade. Initially, we focused on frozen foods, particularly meat, poultry, seafood, vegetables, and french fries with beverages as a second vertical, and in 2018, we added cold-storage facilities and began seeking international sources for fresh fruit, produce and similar perishables, as well as other consumer packaged foodstuff with the goal to create vertical farm-to-market operations.
Through October 31, 2021, we had a significant regional presence in the Middle East and North Africa (“MENA”) and sub-Saharan Africa (excluding The Office of Foreign Assets Control restricted nations), with deep roots in the Gulf Cooperation Council (“GCC”) countries, which included the United Arab Emirates (“UAE”), Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. During the three months ended October 31, 2021, we made a decision to cease operating as an international supplier of consumer food products, whereby we cancelled and settled all supplier and customer contracts to avoid any future significant liabilities. Accordingly, we have classified the operating results and associated assets and liabilities from Verus MENA as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020.
In addition to the foregoing, since our acquisition of Big League Foods, Inc. (“BLF”) during April 2019, pursuant to which we acquired a license with Major League Baseball Properties, Inc. (“MLB”) to sell MLB-branded frozen dessert products and confections, we sold pint size ice cream in grocery store-type packaging. In addition, under our confections product line, we sold gummi and chocolate candies. The MLB license covers all 30 MLB teams, and all of our products pursuant to such license featured “home team” packaging that matched the fan base in each region. On December 18, 2020, we and our wholly owned subsidiary, BLF, entered into a letter agreement with ACG Global Solutions, Inc. and Game on Foods, Inc. (“GOF”), whereby for certain consideration, BLF sold, transferred, and assigned all of BLF’s rights, title, and interest in and to all of BLF’s assets to GOF. The assignments of our interests in the MLB and NHL licenses were completed on March 15, 2021 and March 25, 2021, respectively. Accordingly, we have classified the operating results and associated assets and liabilities from BLF as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020.
Furthermore, during August 2019, we purchased all of the assets of a french fry business in the Middle East.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Recent Developments
Big League Foods
On December 18, 2020, we and our wholly owned subsidiary, Big League Foods, Inc. (“BLF”), entered into a letter agreement (the “Agreement”) with ACG Global Solutions, Inc. (“ACG”) and Game on Foods, Inc. (“GOF”), whereby for certain consideration, BLF sold, transferred, and assigned all of BLF’s rights, title, and interest in and to all of BLF’s assets to GOF. The assignments of our interests in the MLB and NHL licenses were completed on March 15, 2021 and March 25, 2021, respectively. Accordingly, we have classified the operating results and associated assets and liabilities from BLF as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (see Note 16).
Verus Middle East and North Africa (“MENA”)
Through October 31, 2021, we had a significant regional presence in the Middle East and North Africa (“MENA”) and sub-Saharan Africa (excluding The Office of Foreign Assets Control restricted nations), with deep roots in the Gulf Cooperation Council (“GCC”) countries, which includes the United Arab Emirates, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. During the three months ended October 31, 2021, we made a decision to cease operating as an international supplier of consumer food products, whereby we cancelled and settled all supplier and customer contracts to avoid any future significant liabilities. Accordingly, we have classified the operating results and associated assets and liabilities from Verus MENA as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (see Note 16).
Financings
On November 5, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with an accredited investor pursuant to which the Company issued and sold a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $78,750 (the “Note”). The Note matures on November 5, 2022, bears interest at a rate of 9% per annum (increasing to 22% per annum upon the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in the Note)) and is convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price as specified in the Note, subject to adjustment. The Note may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to the 180th day after the issuance date of the Note with certain prepayment penalties as set forth therein.
On December 10, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with an accredited investor pursuant to which the Company issued and sold a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $48,750 (the “Note”). The Note matures on December 10, 2022, bears interest at a rate of 9% per annum (increasing to 22% per annum upon the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in the Note)) and is convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price as specified in the Note, subject to adjustment. The Note may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to the 180th day after the issuance date of the Note with certain prepayment penalties as set forth therein.
Litigation
On November 16, 2021, Fulton Bank, N.A. (“Fulton”) commenced a lawsuit against the Company in the United States Circuit Court for Montgomery County, Maryland as a result of the Company not making required payments under the Credit Facility. The Company intends to defend this matter and although the ultimate outcome cannot be predicted with certainty, an adverse ruling against the Company could have a material adverse effect on its financial condition and results of operations.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
On December 15, 2021, Donald P. Monaco as trustee of the Donald P. Monaco Insurance Trust, commenced a lawsuit against the Company in the United States Circuit Court for Montgomery County, Maryland as a result of the Company not making required payments under the Monaco Note. The Company intends to defend this matter and although the ultimate outcome cannot be predicted with certainty, an adverse ruling against the Company could have a material adverse effect on its financial condition and results of operations.
On February 7, 2022, Indeglia & Carney, LLP, commenced a lawsuit against the Company in the United States Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland as a result of allegations of the Company not making payment of an outstanding balance due for services rendered. The Company intends to defend this matter and although the ultimate outcome cannot be predicted with certainty, an adverse ruling against the Company could have a material adverse effect on its financial condition and results of operations.
On March 10, 2022, AGC Global Solutions, Inc., commenced a lawsuit against the Company in the United States Circuit Court for Montgomery County, Maryland as a result of the Company not making required payments under a promissory note. The Company intends to defend this matter and although the ultimate outcome cannot be predicted with certainty, an adverse ruling against the Company could have a material adverse effect on its financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended October 31, 2021 and 2020
Continuing Operations
Revenue
Our revenue decreased to $488,589 for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to $870,251 for the year ended October 31, 2020, a decrease of $381,662 or 44%. The decrease is the result of prior year revenue of $820,000 from a one-time biohazard gown order through our Pachyderm Labs subsidiary which did not recur during the current year, partially offset by increased nutraceutical revenue with existing and new customers.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenue totaled $207,143 for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to $694,515 for the year ended October 31, 2020, a decrease of $487,372 or 70%. The decrease is the result of lower revenue and related product costs.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses, which include salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, selling and promotions expense, legal and professional fees, and general and administrative expenses decreased to $1,349,448 for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to $10,274,783 for the year ended October 31, 2020, a decrease of $8,925,335, or 87%. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease of $8445,704 in stock-based compensation expense related to performance warrants earned by our former Chief Executive Officer and a restricted common stock grant to our former Chief Financial Officer, coupled with lower expenses across salaries and benefits, selling and promotions expense, and legal and professional fees categories. The decrease in operating expenses was partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable allowance of $198,000 due to the past due status of certain accounts receivable invoices.
Other Income (Expenses)
Our other income (expense), net decreased by $5,147,231 for the year ended October 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily the result of decreases in interest expense, amortization of original issue discounts and deferred financing costs, loss on convertible note payable extinguishment / settlement, loss on equity issuances under S-1 registration statement, and loss on disposal of subsidiary, coupled with gain on change in fair value of derivative liability, gain on forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program loan, and gain on settlement of liabilities. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in initial derivative liability expense.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Net Loss from Continuing Operations
We generated a net loss from continuing operations of $2,136,679 for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to a net loss of $16,314,955 for the year ended October 31, 2020, a decrease of $14,178,276. The decrease in net loss from continuing operations is primarily driven by the decrease in operating expenses and other expenses, coupled with the increase in gross profit as disclosed above.
Discontinued Operations
Our discontinued operations generated $8,828,080 of revenue, incurred cost of revenue of $7,082,736 and operating expenses of $5,607,561, and generated a net loss of $3,862,217 from discontinued operations for the year ended October 31, 2021. During the year ended October 31, 2020, our discontinued operations generated $20,877,110 of revenue, incurred cost of revenue of $17,685,647 and operating expenses of $2,538,882, and generated net income of $644,764 from discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Anticipated Financing Needs
At October 31, 2021, we had $66,022 of cash on-hand, an increase of $59,872 from $6,150 at October 31, 2020.
Net cash used in operating activities of continuing operations was $4,740,896 for the year ended October 31, 2021, an increase of $3,734,974 from $1,005,922 used during the year ended October 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities of continuing operations was primarily due to a net decrease in non-cash charges, coupled with an increase in accounts receivable and decrease in accounts payable, partially offset by a decrease in net loss, coupled with a decrease in prepaid expenses.
There was no net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations for the year ended October 31, 2021. Net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations for the year ended October 31, 2020 totaled $239,223 consisting of $139,223 for capital expenditures and a $100,000 investment in an unconsolidated entity.
We have financed our operations since inception primarily through proceeds from equity and debt financings and revenue derived from operations. During the year ended October 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $916,925 as compared to $2,378,773 during the year ended October 31, 2020. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities of continuing operations was primarily due to lower net proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable and notes payable, and lower proceeds from the sale of common stock, coupled with higher payments applied to convertible promissory notes. Our continued operations primarily depend upon our ability to raise additional capital from various sources including equity and debt financings, as well as our revenue derived from operations. We can give no assurances that any additional capital that we are able to obtain will be sufficient to meet our needs or will be on favorable terms. Based on our current plans, we believe that our cash provided from the above sources may not be sufficient to enable us to meet our planned operating needs for the next twelve months.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
A novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, surfaced during December 2019 and has spread around the world, including to the United States. During March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. During certain periods of the pandemic thus far, a number of U.S. states and various countries throughout the world had been under governmental orders requiring that all workers remain at home unless their work was critical, essential, or life-sustaining. As a result of these governmental orders, we temporarily closed our domestic and international offices and required all of our employees to work remotely. As economic activity has begun and continues recovering, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business has been more reflective of greater economic and marketplace dynamics. Furthermore, in light of variant strains of the virus that have emerged, the COVID-19 pandemic could once again impact our operations and the operations of our customers and vendors as a result of quarantines, illnesses, and travel restrictions.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments, such as the ultimate duration and scope of the pandemic, its impact on our employees, customers, and vendors, in addition to how quickly normal economic conditions and operations resume and whether the pandemic impacts other risks disclosed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Even after the pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of any economic recession or depression that has occurred as a result of the pandemic. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact at this time. We continue to actively monitor the pandemic and may determine to take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, vendors, and shareholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the policies below as critical to our understanding of the results of our business operations. We discuss the impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
In the ordinary course of business, we have made a number of estimates and assumptions in preparing our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions. The following critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our consolidated financial statements. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies discussed below, refer to Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included in the notes to consolidated financial statements for the year ended October 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We consider the following accounting policies to be those most important to the portrayal of our results of operations and financial condition:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue is derived from the sale of consumable and non-consumable products. The Company recognizes revenue when obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied. Product sales occur once control is transferred upon delivery to the customer. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products. The amount of consideration the Company receives and revenue the Company recognizes varies with changes in customer incentives the Company offers to its customers and their customers. In the event any discounts, sales incentives, or similar arrangements are agreed to with a customer, such amounts are estimated at time of sale and deducted from revenue. Sales taxes and other similar taxes are excluded from revenue (see Note 8).
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Accordingly, deferred tax assets and liabilities arise from the difference between the tax basis of an asset or liability and its reported amount in the consolidated financial statements. Deferred tax amounts are determined using the tax rates expected to be in effect when the taxes will actually be paid or refunds received, as provided under currently enacted tax law. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Income tax expense or benefit is the tax payable or refundable, respectively, for the period plus or minus the change in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the period. we have recorded a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets as of October 31, 2021 and 2020 because realization of those assets is not reasonably assured.
We will recognize a financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
We believe our income tax filing positions and deductions will be sustained upon examination and, accordingly, no reserves, or related accruals for interest and penalties has been recorded at October 31, 2021 and 2020.
Share-Based Compensation
We compute share based payments in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation and related interpretations. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at the fair value of the share-based payments. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the grants.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the compensation committee of our board of directors (the “Board of Directors”). These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of our common stock on the grant date.
We estimate the fair value of stock options and warrants by using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the expected term of the option. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. We are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest.
We account for share-based payments granted to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50, “Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees.” We determine the fair value of the stock-based payment as either the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more readily determinable. If the fair value of the equity instruments issued is used, it is measured using the stock price and other measurement assumptions as of the earlier of either (1) the date at which a commitment for performance by the counterparty to earn the equity instruments is reached, or (2) the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Accounts Receivable
We regularly review outstanding receivables and provide for estimated losses through an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the level of established loss reserves, we make judgments regarding our customers’ ability to make required payments, economic events, and other factors. As the financial condition of these parties’ change, circumstances develop or additional information becomes available, adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. We maintain reserves for potential credit losses, and such losses traditionally have been within our expectations. At October 31, 2021, we determined $198,000 was required for an allowance for doubtful accounts due to the past due status of certain accounts receivable invoices. At October 31, 2020, we determined there was no requirement for an allowance for doubtful accounts.
New Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently adopted and to be adopted accounting standards.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.