ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Results of Operations for the year ended January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2022:
Revenue and cost of goods sold
For the years ended January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2022 the Company generated total revenue of $248,200 and $5,613,200 from selling products to the customer. The cost of goods sold for the year ended January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2022 was $136,000 and $3,545,200, which represent the cost of raw materials.
Operating expenses
Total operating expenses for the year ended January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2022 were $537,582 and $586,894. The operating expenses for the year ended January 31, 2022 included professional fees relating to our status as a public company and rent expense, stock-based compensation of $167,173 and office expense of $28,935.
Net Loss
The net income (loss) for the year ended January 31, 2022 and January 31, 2021 was $1,264,002 and $(425,382) accordingly.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Cash Requirements
At year ended January 31, 2022, the Company had cash of $107,212. The Company had a working capital of $1,505,087.
During the year ended January 31, 2022, the Company used $84,811 of cash in operating activities due to stock-based compensation, inventory, account receivable and account payable and accrued liabilities.
During the year ended January 31, 2022 the Company used $72.997 in investing activities due to purchase of fixed assets.
During the year ended January 31, 2022, the Company generated $50,000 of cash in financing activities.
We cannot guarantee that we will manage to sell all the shares required. We will attempt to raise the necessary funds to proceed with all phases of our plan of operation.
As of the date of this report, the current funds available to the Company will not be sufficient to continue maintaining a reporting status.
Our auditors have issued a “going concern” opinion, meaning that there is substantial doubt we can continue as an on-going business for the next twelve months unless we obtain additional capital. Our only sources for cash at this time are investments by others in this offering, selling our paper dung products and loans from our director. We must raise cash to implement our plan and stay in business.
Management believes that current trends toward lower capital investment in start-up companies pose the most significant challenge to the Company’s success over the next year and in future years. Additionally, the Company will have to meet all the financial disclosure and reporting requirements associated with being a publicly reporting company. The Company’s management will have to spend additional time on policies and procedures to make sure it is compliant with various regulatory requirements, especially that of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. This additional corporate governance time required of management could limit the amount of time management has to implement is business plan and impede the speed of its operations.
Limited operating history; need for additional capital
There is no historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We are in a start-up stage of operations and have generated limited revenues since inception. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible cost overruns due to price and cost increases in services and products.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not maintain any off-balance sheet arrangements, transactions, obligations or other relationships with unconsolidated entities that would be expected to have a material current or future effect upon our financial condition or results of operations.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates, the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We incurred losses from operations of $(425,382) and income of $1,264,002 for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2022, respectively, and had an retained earnings of $816,724 at January 31, 2022. In addition, we used cash from operating activities of $84,811 for the year ended January 31, 2022.
The Company will require additional funding to execute its future strategic business plan. Successful business operations and its transition to attaining profitability are dependent upon obtaining additional financing and achieving a level of revenue adequate to support its cost structure. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
While the Company is attempting to establish an ongoing source of revenues sufficient to cover its operating costs and allow it to continue as a going concern, the Company’s cash position may not be adequate to support the Company’s daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by seeking equity and/or debt financing; however there can be no assurances that it will be successful in those efforts. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to obtain financing, further implement its business plan, and generate revenues.
There are significant risks and uncertainties which could negatively affect the Company’s operations. These are principally related to the existence of events of default under the Company’s outstanding debt obligations, which could trigger penalties. Furthermore, if our current indebtedness is not restructured, paid or converted into equity, which is at the debt holder’s discretion, our current operations do not generate sufficient cash to pay interest and principal on these obligations when they become due. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that we will be able to pay these or other obligations which we may incur in the future. In the event we are unable to restructure, pay or convert into equity the balance of our outstanding indebtedness, the holders may obtain judgments against us and seek to enforce such judgments against our assets, in which event we will be required to cease our business activities and the equity of our stockholders will be effectively wiped out.
Our only sources of additional funds to meet continuing operating expenses, fund additional research and development and fund additional working capital are through the sale of securities, and/or debt instruments. We are actively seeking additional debt or equity financing, but no assurances can be given that such financing will be obtained or what the terms thereof will be. We may need to discontinue a portion or all of our operations if we are unsuccessful in generating positive cash flow or financing for our operations through the issuance of securities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfer of Assets Other than Inventory, which requires the recognition of the income tax consequences of an intra-entity transfer of an asset, other than inventory, when the transfer occurs. ASU 2016-16 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases, which will amend current lease accounting to require lessees to recognize (i) a lease liability, which is a lessee's obligation to make lease payments arising from a lease, measured on a discounted basis, and (ii) a right-of-use asset, which is an asset that represents the lessee's right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the lease term. ASU 2016-02 does not significantly change lease accounting requirements applicable to lessors; however, certain changes were made to align, where necessary, lessor accounting with the lessee accounting model. This standard will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years.
Management has considered all recent accounting pronouncements issued since and their potential effect on our financial statements. The Company's management believes that these recent pronouncements will not have a material effect on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, including its Emerging Issues Task Force, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Securities and Exchange Commission did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company's present or future financial statements.