Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management's Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to provide an understanding of Vishay's financial condition, results of operations and cash flows by focusing on changes in certain key measures from year to year. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes filed herewith, commencing on page of this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Vishay Intertechnology, Inc. ("Vishay," "we," "us," or "our") manufactures one of the world’s largest portfolios of discrete semiconductors and passive electronic components that are essential to innovative designs in the automotive, industrial, computing, consumer, telecommunications, military, aerospace, and medical markets.
We operate in six segments based on product functionality: MOSFETs, Diodes, Optoelectronic Components, Resistors, Inductors, and Capacitors.
We are focused on enhancing stockholder value by growing our business and improving earnings per share. Since 1985, we have pursued a business strategy of growth through focused research and development and acquisitions. We plan to continue to grow our business through intensified internal growth supplemented by opportunistic acquisitions, while at the same time maintaining a prudent capital structure. To foster intensified internal growth, we have increased our worldwide R&D and engineering technical staff; we are expanding critical manufacturing capacities; we are increasing our technical field sales force in Asia to increase our market access to the industrial segment and increase the design-in of our products in local markets; and we are directing increased funding and focus on developing products to capitalize on the connectivity, mobility, and sustainability growth drivers of our business. In addition to our growth plan, we also have opportunistically repurchased our stock and, as further described below, reduced dilution risks by repurchasing substantially all of our convertible senior debentures. Over the next few years, we expect to experience higher growth rates than over the last decade. This expectation is based upon accelerated electrification, such as factory automation, electrical vehicles, and 5G infrastructures.
In 2014, our Board of Directors instituted a quarterly dividend payment program and declared the first cash dividend in the history of Vishay. We have paid dividends each quarter since the first fiscal quarter of 2014, and further increased the quarterly cash dividend by 5% to $0.10 per share in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021. We expect to continue to pay quarterly dividends, although each dividend is subject to approval by our Board of Directors.
We have been re-shaping our capital structure since the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) in December 2017. We repatriated over $1 billion (net of withholding taxes) of cash to the United States since the enactment of the TCJA. We used the repatriated cash, the net proceeds from the 2018 issuance of $600 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2025, and our operating cash flows to fully retire the convertible senior debentures, which had become less tax-efficient because of the TCJA. We repurchased $134.7 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2025 in the year ended December 31, 2020 and remain authorized by our Board of Directors to repurchase an additional $65.3 million principal amount. Our debt instruments and transactions are more fully described in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements.
As a direct result of a change in Israeli tax law, we made the determination during the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 that substantially all unremitted foreign earnings in Israel are no longer permanently reinvested. We recorded additional tax expense of $53.3 million during the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 to accrue the claw-back tax on applicable earnings and withholding taxes necessary to distribute these approximately $385.0 million of accumulated earnings to the United States.
On February 8, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors has adopted a Stockholder Return Policy that will remain in effect until such time as the Board votes to amend or rescind the policy. The Stockholder Return Policy calls for us to return at least 70% of free cash flow, net of scheduled principal payments of long-term debt, on an annual basis. We intend to return such amounts directly, in the form of dividends, or indirectly, in the form of stock repurchases. For 2022, we expect to return at least $100 million to stockholders consisting of approximately $58 million through our existing quarterly dividend program and at least $42 million through share repurchases. The distribution of earnings from Israel to the United States will initially be used to fund our Stockholder Return Policy. Over the long-term we expect to fund the Stockholder Return Policy from our historically strong cash flows from operations.
Our business and operating results have been and will continue to be impacted by worldwide economic conditions. Our revenues are dependent on end markets that are impacted by consumer and industrial demand, and our operating results can be adversely affected by reduced demand in those global markets. The worldwide economy and, specifically, our business were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in 2020. The pandemic significantly impacted the global market, including our customers, suppliers, and shipping partners, which impacted our net revenues. In 2020, we also incurred incremental costs separable from normal operations that are directly attributable to the pandemic and containment efforts, primarily salaries and wages for employees impacted by quarantines and additional safety measures, including masks and temperature scanners, which were partially offset by government subsidies. The net impact of the costs and subsidies are classified as cost of products sold of $4.6 million and selling, general, and administrative benefits of $1.5 million based on employee function on the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Directly attributable costs of the pandemic are no longer incremental and have become part of normal operations. Accordingly, in 2021, they are considered normal operating costs. We excluded indirect financial changes from the COVID-19 pandemic such as general macroeconomic effects and higher shipping costs due to reduced shipping capacity from the COVID-19 pandemic amounts reported. See additional information regarding our competitive strengths and key challenges as disclosed in Part 1.
While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a global impact, the widespread economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Vishay was temporary, as evidenced by our record 2021 revenues. Similar disruptions may continue to occur on a more limited scale. In this volatile economic environment, we continue to closely monitor our fixed costs, capital expenditure plans, inventory, and capital resources to respond to changing conditions and to ensure we have the management, business processes, and resources to meet our future needs. We will react quickly and professionally to changes in demand to minimize manufacturing inefficiencies and excess inventory build in periods of decline and maximize opportunities in periods of growth. We have significant liquidity to withstand temporary disruptions in the economic environment. The global cost reduction and management rejuvenation programs that we began as part of our continuous efforts to improve efficiency and operating performance in 2019 have been fully implemented. Our cost reduction program is more fully described in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements and in "Cost Management" below.
We utilize several financial metrics, including net revenues, gross profit margin, segment operating income, end-of-period backlog, book-to-bill ratio, inventory turnover, change in average selling prices, net cash and short-term investments (debt), and free cash generation to evaluate the performance and assess the future direction of our business. See further discussion in “Financial Metrics” and “Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources” below. The COVID-19 pandemic impacted almost all key financial metrics in 2020. We experienced a broad recovery in orders and sales beginning in the third fiscal quarter of 2020 that continued through 2021. We continue to increase manufacturing capacities and have broadly implemented strategic price increases, which positively impacted almost all key financial metrics versus the prior year. The key financial metrics remained strong in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021, but were slightly negatively impacted by cost increases, particularly in transportation and metal prices, and a slower rate of order and backlog increase versus the prior fiscal quarter.
Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $3.240 billion, compared to net revenues of $2.502 billion and $2.668 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net earnings attributable to Vishay stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $298.0 million, or $2.05 per diluted share, compared to $122.9 million, or $0.85 per diluted share, and $163.9 million, or $1.13 per share, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We define adjusted net earnings as net earnings determined in accordance with GAAP adjusted for various items that management believes are not indicative of the intrinsic operating performance of our business. We define free cash as the cash flows generated from continuing operations less capital expenditures plus net proceeds from the sale of property and equipment. The reconciliations below include certain financial measures which are not recognized in accordance with GAAP, including adjusted net earnings, adjusted earnings per share, and free cash. These non-GAAP measures should not be viewed as alternatives to GAAP measures of performance or liquidity. Non-GAAP measures such as adjusted net earnings, adjusted earnings per share, and free cash do not have uniform definitions. These measures, as calculated by Vishay, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Management believes that adjusted net earnings and adjusted earnings per share are meaningful because they provide insight with respect to our intrinsic operating results. Management believes that free cash is a meaningful measure of our ability to fund acquisitions, repay debt, and otherwise enhance stockholder value through stock repurchases or dividends.
Net earnings attributable to Vishay stockholders for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 include items affecting comparability. The items affecting comparability are (in thousands, except per share amounts):
Although the term "free cash" is not defined in GAAP, each of the elements used to calculate free cash is presented as a line item on the face of our consolidated statements of cash flows prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our free cash results are as follows (in thousands):
Our results for 2021 and 2020 represent the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business that resulted in a sharp decrease in demand in first half of 2020 followed by a sharp and broad recovery in the latter part of 2020 that continued through 2021. Our percentage of euro-based sales approximates our percentage of euro-based expenses so the euro foreign currency impact on revenues was substantially offset by the impact on expenses. Our pre-tax results were consistent with expectations based on our business model.
Our free cash results were significantly impacted by the payment of cash taxes related to the cash repatriated to the U.S. of $16.3 million and $38.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and the installment payments of the U.S. transition tax of $14.8 million in each year in the reporting period.
Financial Metrics
We utilize several financial metrics to evaluate the performance and assess the future direction of our business. These key financial measures and metrics include net revenues, gross profit margin, operating margin, segment operating income, end-of-period backlog, and the book-to-bill ratio. We also monitor changes in our inventory turnover and our or publicly available average selling prices (“ASP”).
Gross profit margin is computed as gross profit as a percentage of net revenues. Gross profit is generally net revenues less costs of products sold, but also deducts certain other period costs, particularly losses on purchase commitments and inventory write-downs. Losses on purchase commitments and inventory write-downs have the impact of reducing gross profit margin in the period of the charge, but result in improved gross profit margins in subsequent periods by reducing costs of products sold as inventory is used. Gross profit margin is clearly a function of net revenues, but also reflects our cost management programs and our ability to contain fixed costs.
Operating margin is computed as gross profit less operating expenses as a percentage of net revenues. We evaluate business segment performance on segment operating margin. Only dedicated, direct selling, general, and administrative expenses of the segments are included in the calculation of segment operating income. Segment operating margin is computed as operating income less items such as restructuring and severance costs, asset write-downs, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairments, inventory write-downs, gain or losses on purchase commitments, global operations, sales and marketing, information systems, finance and administrative groups, and other items, expressed as a percentage of net revenues. We believe that evaluating segment performance excluding such items is meaningful because it provides insight with respect to intrinsic operating results of the segment. Operating margin is clearly a function of net revenues, but also reflects our cost management programs and our ability to contain fixed costs.
End-of-period backlog is one indicator of future revenues. We include in our backlog only open orders that we expect to ship in the next twelve months. If demand falls below customers’ forecasts, or if customers do not control their inventory effectively, they may cancel or reschedule the shipments that are included in our backlog, in many instances without the payment of any penalty. Therefore, the backlog is not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for future periods.
An important indicator of demand in our industry is the book-to-bill ratio, which is the ratio of the amount of product ordered during a period as compared with the product that we ship during that period. A book-to-bill ratio that is greater than one indicates that our backlog is building and that we are likely to see increasing revenues in future periods. Conversely, a book-to-bill ratio that is less than one is an indicator of declining demand and may foretell declining revenues.
We focus on our inventory turnover as a measure of how well we are managing our inventory. We define inventory turnover for a financial reporting period as our costs of products sold for the four fiscal quarters ending on the last day of the reporting period divided by our average inventory (computed using each fiscal quarter-end balance) for this same period. A higher level of inventory turnover reflects more efficient use of our capital.
Pricing in our industry can be volatile. Using our and publicly available data, we analyze trends and changes in average selling prices to evaluate likely future pricing. The erosion of average selling prices of established products is typical for semiconductor products. We attempt to offset this deterioration with ongoing cost reduction activities and new product introductions. Our specialty passive components are more resistant to average selling price erosion. All pricing is subject to governing market conditions and is independently set by us.
The quarter-to-quarter trends in these financial metrics can also be an important indicator of the likely direction of our business. The following table shows net revenues, gross profit margin, operating margin, end-of-period backlog, book-to-bill ratio, inventory turnover, and changes in ASP for our business as a whole during the five fiscal quarters beginning with the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 through the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 (dollars in thousands):
_______________
(1) Gross margin for the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 includes $0.3 million of expenses directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic (see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements).
(2) Operating margin for the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 also includes in total $(0.3) million of expenses (benefits) directly related to the COVID-19 outbreak (see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements).
See “Financial Metrics by Segment” below for net revenues, book-to-bill ratio, and gross profit margin broken out by segment.
Revenues increased significantly versus the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 and slightly versus the prior fiscal quarter, primarily due to higher volume. We continue to experience robust demand for our products, with the backlog continuing to grow. Sales at this time continue to be limited by our capacity. Pressure on average selling prices continues to be very low and we are implementing strategic price increases across the product portfolio to offset increased materials and transportation costs.
Gross profit margin decreased versus the prior fiscal quarter primarily due to higher transportation and metals and materials costs. Gross profit margin increased versus the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 primarily due to increased volume and manufacturing efficiencies.
The book-to-bill ratio in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 remained strong, but decreased to 1.09 versus 1.26 in the third fiscal quarter of 2021. The book-to-bill ratios in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 for distributors and original equipment manufacturers ("OEM") were 1.06 and 1.15, respectively, versus ratios of 1.29 and 1.23, respectively, during the third fiscal quarter of 2021.
Financial Metrics by Segment
The following table shows net revenues, book-to-bill ratio, gross profit margin, and segment operating margin broken out by segment for the five fiscal quarters beginning with the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 through the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 (dollars in thousands):
_________
Stockholder Value
We are focused on enhancing stockholder value by growing our business and improving earnings per share. Over the next few years, we expect to experience higher internal growth rates than over the last decade. This expectation is based upon accelerated electrification, such as factory automation, electrical vehicles, and 5G infrastructures. To meet this expected increase in demand and to fully participate in growing markets, we intend to increase our capital expenditures for expansion in the mid-term. The increased capital expenditures will be primarily used to increase manufacturing capacity for our strategic product lines. The most significant expansion projects include building a 12-inch wafer fab in Itzehoe, Germany adjacent to our existing 8-inch fab, expanding our Inductors manufacturing, and expanding our GaAs fab in Heilbronn, Germany.
Changes in Israel tax law enacted effective November 15, 2021 provide us with an opportunity to efficiently repatriate earnings that we intend to use to enhance stockholder value.
On February 8, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors has adopted a Stockholder Return Policy that will remain in effect until such time as the Board votes to amend or rescind the policy. The Stockholder Return Policy calls for us to return at least 70% of free cash flow, net of scheduled principal payments of long-term debt, on an annual basis. We intend to return such amounts directly, in the form of dividends, or indirectly, in the form of stock repurchases. For 2022, we expect to return at least $100 million to stockholders consisting of approximately $58 million through our existing quarterly dividend program and at least $42 million through share repurchases. The distribution of earnings from Israel to the United States will initially be used to fund our Stockholder Return Policy. Over the long-term we expect to fund the Stockholder Return Policy from our historically strong cash flows from operations.
Our confidence in the sustainability of our strong cash flow generation and balance sheet allows us to increase our allocation of capital to stockholders and enhance stockholder returns over the long-term.
The structure of the Stockholder Return Policy enables us to allocate capital between our business, our lenders, and our stockholders. We will continue to invest in growth initiatives including key product line expansions, targeted R&D, and synergistic acquisitions.
As a direct result of a change in tax law in Israel, we made the determination during the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 that substantially all unremitted foreign earnings in Israel are no longer permanently reinvested. Because most of our operating cash flow is typically generated by our non-U.S. subsidiaries, we may in the future need to change our permanent reinvestment assertion on current earnings of certain subsidiaries, which would have the effect of increasing the effective tax rate. Substantially all of these additional taxes would be withholding and foreign taxes on cash remitted to the U.S., as such dividends are generally not subject to U.S. federal income tax.
Acquisition Activity
As part of our growth strategy, we seek to expand through targeted acquisitions of other manufacturers of electronic components that have established positions in major markets, reputations for product quality and reliability, and product lines with which we have substantial marketing and technical expertise. This includes exploring opportunities to acquire targets to gain market share, penetrate different geographic markets, enhance new product development, round out our existing product lines, or grow our high margin niche market businesses. Acquisitions of passive components businesses would likely be made to strengthen and broaden our position as a specialty product supplier; acquisitions of discrete semiconductor businesses would be made to increase market share and to generate synergies. To limit our financial exposure, we have implemented a policy not to pursue acquisitions if our post-acquisition debt would exceed 2.5x our pro forma earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”). For these purposes, we calculate pro forma EBITDA as the adjusted EBITDA of Vishay and the target for Vishay’s four preceding fiscal quarters, with a pro forma adjustment for savings which management estimates would have been achieved had the target been acquired by Vishay at the beginning of the four fiscal quarter period.
On December 31, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets and certain liabilities of Barry Industries, a Massachusetts-based, privately-held manufacturer of resistive products for $20.8 million. Based on our estimate of their fair values pending finalization of the net working capital adjustment, we allocated $9.6 million of the purchase price to definite-lived intangible assets. After allocating the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on a preliminary estimation of their fair values at the date of acquisition, we recorded goodwill of $7.8 million related to this acquisition. The inclusion of this acquisition did not have an impact on the Company's consolidated results for the year ended December 31, 2021. The goodwill related to this acquisition is included in the Resistors reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing.
On October 1, 2020, we acquired the worldwide business and substantially all of the U.S. assets of Applied Thin-Film Products ("ATP"), a California-based, privately-held manufacturer of custom, build-to-print thin film substrates for the microwave, fiber optic, and life science industries. The total acquisition price was $25.9 million. The results and operations of this acquisition have been included in the Resistors segment since October 1, 2020. ATP did not have a material impact on our consolidated results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
There is no assurance that we will be able to identify and acquire additional suitable acquisition candidates at price levels and on terms and conditions we consider acceptable.
Cost Management
We place a strong emphasis on controlling our costs, and use various measures and metrics to evaluate our cost structure.
We define variable costs as expenses that vary with respect to quantity produced. Fixed costs do not vary with respect to quantity produced over the relevant time period. Contributive margin is calculated as net revenue less variable costs. It may be expressed in dollars or as a percentage of net revenue. Management uses this measure to determine the amount of profit to be expected for any change in revenues. While these measures are typical cost accounting measures, none of these measures are recognized in accordance with GAAP. The classification of expenses as either variable or fixed is judgmental and other companies might classify such expenses differently. These measures, as calculated by Vishay, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
We closely monitor variable costs and seek to achieve the contributive margin in our business model. Over a period of many years, we have generally maintained a contributive margin of between 45% and 47% of revenues. The erosion of average selling prices, particularly of our semiconductor products, that is typical of our industry, and inflation negatively impact contributive margin and drive us to continually seek ways to reduce our variable costs. Our variable cost reduction efforts include increasing the efficiency in our production facilities by expending capital for automation, reducing materials costs, materials substitution, increasing wafer size and shrinking dies to maximize efficiency in our semiconductor production processes, and other yield improvement activities.
Our cost management strategy also includes a focus on controlling fixed costs recorded as costs of products sold or selling, general, and administrative expenses and maintaining our break-even point (adjusted for acquisitions). We seek to limit increases in selling, general, and administrative expenses to the rate of inflation, excluding foreign currency exchange effects and substantially independent of sales volume changes. At constant fixed costs, we would expect each $1 million increase in revenues to increase our operating income by approximately $450,000 to $470,000. Sudden changes in the business conditions, however, may not allow us to quickly adapt our manufacturing capacity and cost structure.
Occasionally, our ongoing cost containment activities are not adequate and we must take actions to maintain our cost competitiveness. We incurred significant restructuring expenses in our past to reduce our cost structure. Historically, our primary cost reduction technique was through the transfer of production to the extent possible from high-labor-cost countries to lower-labor-cost countries. We believe that our manufacturing footprint is suitable to serve our customers and end markets, while maintaining lower manufacturing costs. Since 2013, our cost reduction programs have primarily focused on reducing fixed costs, including selling, general, and administrative expenses.
We continue to monitor the economic environment and its potential effects on our customers and the end markets that we serve.
In 2019, we announced global cost reduction and management rejuvenation programs as part of our continuous efforts to improve efficiency and operating performance. The programs were primarily designed to reduce manufacturing fixed costs and selling, general, and administrative ("SG&A") costs company-wide, and provide management rejuvenation. The programs are fully implemented. We incurred restructuring expense of $24.9 million, primarily related to cash severance costs, to implement these programs. The implementation of these programs did not impact planned research and development activities. No manufacturing facility closures occurred pursuant to these programs.
We do not anticipate any material restructuring activities in 2022. However, a worsening business environment for the electronics industry, a prolonged impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or a significant economic downturn may require us to implement additional restructuring initiatives.
See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In uncertain times, we focus on managing our production capacities in accordance with customer requirements, and maintain discipline in terms of our fixed costs and capital expenditures. Even as we seek to manage our costs, we remain cognizant of the future requirements of our demanding markets. We continue to pursue our growth plans through investing in capacities for strategic product lines, and through increasing our resources for R&D, technical marketing, and field application engineering; supplemented by opportunistic acquisitions of specialty businesses.
Our long-term strategy includes growth through the integration of acquired businesses, and GAAP requires plant closure and employee termination costs that we incur in connection with our acquisition activities to be recorded as expenses in our consolidated statement of operations, as such expenses are incurred. We have not incurred any material plant closure or employee termination costs related to any of the businesses acquired since 2011, but we expect to have some level of future restructuring expenses due to acquisitions.
Foreign Currency Translation
We are exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risks, particularly due to transactions in currencies other than the functional currencies of certain subsidiaries. We occasionally use forward exchange contracts to economically hedge a portion of our projected cash flows from these exposures.
GAAP requires that entities identify the “functional currency” of each of their subsidiaries and measure all elements of the financial statements in that functional currency. A subsidiary’s functional currency is the currency of the primary economic environment in which it operates. In cases where a subsidiary is relatively self-contained within a particular country, the local currency is generally deemed to be the functional currency. However, a foreign subsidiary that is a direct and integral component or extension of the parent company’s operations generally would have the parent company’s currency as its functional currency. We have both situations among our subsidiaries.
Foreign Subsidiaries which use the Local Currency as the Functional Currency
We finance our operations in Europe and certain locations in Asia in local currencies, and accordingly, these subsidiaries utilize the local currency as their functional currency. For those subsidiaries where the local currency is the functional currency, assets and liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets have been translated at the rate of exchange as of the balance sheet date. Translation adjustments do not impact the results of operations and are reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
For those subsidiaries where the local currency is the functional currency, revenues and expenses are translated at the average exchange rate for the year. While the translation of revenues and expenses into U.S. dollars does not directly impact the consolidated statement of operations, the translation effectively increases or decreases the U.S. dollar equivalent of revenues generated and expenses incurred in those foreign currencies. The dollar was weaker during 2021 versus 2020 and 2020 versus 2019, with the translation of foreign currency revenues and expenses into U.S. dollars increasing reported revenues and expenses in 2021 versus 2020 and 2020 versus 2019.
Foreign Subsidiaries which use the U.S. Dollar as the Functional Currency
Our operations in Israel and most significant locations in Asia are largely financed in U.S. dollars, and accordingly, these subsidiaries utilize the U.S. dollar as their functional currency. For those foreign subsidiaries where the U.S. dollar is the functional currency, all foreign currency financial statement amounts are remeasured into U.S. dollars. Exchange gains and losses arising from remeasurement of foreign currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are included in the results of operations. While these subsidiaries transact most business in U.S. dollars, they may have significant costs, particularly payroll-related, which are incurred in the local currency. The cost of products sold and selling, general, and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 have been unfavorably impacted (compared to the respective prior years) by local currency transactions of subsidiaries which use the U.S. dollar as their functional currency.
See