Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed below and as set forth under “Risk Factors.” Please also refer to the section under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements.”
OVERVIEW
We are a late stage development biopharmaceutical company, with ongoing registration directed trials, committed to advancing new medicines for patients battling cancer. Our pipeline is focused on novel anticancer agents that inhibit critical signaling pathways in cancer that promote cancer cell survival and tumor growth, particularly RAF/MEK inhibition and FAK inhibition.
Our most advanced product candidates, VS-6766 and defactinib, are being investigated in both preclinical and clinical studies for treatment of various solid tumors, including, low-grade serous ovarian cancer (LGSOC), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), colorectal cancer (CRC), pancreatic cancer, uveal melanoma, and endometrial cancer. We believe that VS-6766 may be beneficial as a therapeutic as a single agent or when used together in combination with defactinib, other agents, other pathway inhibitors, or other current and emerging standard of care treatments in cancers that do not adequately respond to currently available therapies.
On August 10, 2020, we and Secura Bio, Inc. (Secura) signed an Asset Purchase Agreement (Secura APA) and on September 30, 2020, the transaction closed. Pursuant to the Secura APA, we sold our exclusive worldwide license for the research, development, commercialization, and manufacture in oncology indications of products containing duvelisib. Refer to Note 14. License, collaboration and commercial agreements for a detailed description of the terms and conditions of the Secura APA. With the transition of the duvelisib program to Secura, we are focusing our efforts on our lead product candidates, VS-6766 and defactinib.
Our operations to date have been organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, identifying and acquiring potential product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates and initiating U.S. commercial operations following the approval of COPIKTRA. We have financed our operations to date primarily through public offerings of our common stock, sales of common stock under our at-the-market equity offering programs, our loan and security agreement executed with Hercules Capital, Inc. (Hercules) in March 2017, as amended, the upfront payments under our license and collaboration agreements with Sanofi, Yakult and CSPC, the upfront payment under the Secura APA, the issuance of the 2018 Notes in October 2018, and the proceeds in connection with the PIPE. After the U.S. commercial launch of COPIKTRA on September 24, 2018, through our ownership period ending in September 2020, we financed a portion of our operations through product revenue.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $663.7 million. Our net loss was $71.2 million, $67.7 million, and $149.2 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We expect to incur significant expenses and may continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future as a result of the continued research and development of VS-6766 and defactinib. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and investments of $100.3 million. We expect our existing cash resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations through at least 12 months from the date of the issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
We expect to finance the future development costs of our clinical product portfolio with our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments, through future milestones and royalties received pursuant to the Secura APA or through strategic financing opportunities that could include, but are not limited to, collaboration agreements, future offerings of our equity, or the incurrence of debt. However, there is no guarantee that any of these strategic or financing opportunities will be executed or executed on favorable terms, and some could be dilutive to existing stockholders. If we fail to obtain additional future capital, we may be unable to complete our planned preclinical
studies and clinical trials and obtain approval of certain investigational product candidates from the FDA or foreign regulatory authorities.
COVID-19 pandemic
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our operations. All employees who are able to work from home have been primarily working from home since mid-March 2020. Shortages in personnel in clinics and hospitals have cause some United States sites to institute limits on new clinical trials which could impact our ability to open new sites for our clinical trials. In addition, clinics in Europe and United States continue to have delays in startup activities due to the ongoing pandemic and the increase in COVID-19 variant infections. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, new variants, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included within.
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
Revenue
From our U.S. commercial launch of COPIKTRA on September 24, 2018 through our ownership period ending in September 2020 product revenue, net represented the gross sales of COPIKTRA in the United States less provisions for product sales allowances and accruals. These provisions included trade allowances, rebates, chargebacks and discounts, product returns and other incentives. We sold COPIKTRA to a limited number of specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors. The provisions for product sales and allowances fluctuated based on the mix of sales to either specialty pharmacy or specialty distributor customers. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates” below and Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies located within the notes to the financial statements included within for more information on the components of net U.S. product sales of COPIKTRA.
License and collaboration revenue to date has been generated through our license and collaboration agreements for the development and commercialization of duvelisib with Sanofi in the Sanofi Territory, CSPC in China, and Yakult in Japan. The terms of these agreements contain multiple deliverables which may include (i) licenses, (ii) research and development activities, and (iii) the manufacture of finished drug product, active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), or development materials for a partner, which are reimbursed at a contractually determined rate. Payments to us may include (i) up-front license fees, (ii) payments for research and development activities, (iii) payments for the manufacture of finished drug product, API or development materials, (iv) payments based upon the achievement of certain milestones, and (v) royalties on product sales.
Sale of licenses and related assets revenue to date have been generated through our sale of our duvelisib license and related assets to Secura. The sale included intellectual property related to duvelisib in oncology indications, certain existing duvelisib inventory, certain manufacturing equipment and, claims and rights under certain contracts pertaining to duvelisib including net contract prepaid balances.
Costs of sales - product
Cost of sales - product consisted of costs of COPIKTRA on which product revenue was recognized, royalties owed to Healthcare Royalty Partners (HCR) and Infinity we incurred as a result of such sales of COPIKTRA, and certain period costs. Certain of the costs of COPIKTRA units recognized as revenue during 2020 and 2019 were expensed prior to the September 2018 FDA marketing approval and, therefore, are not included in cost of sales during those periods period. There were no cost of sales - product in 2021.
Costs of sales - sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets
Cost of sales - sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets represent assets delivered to Secura as part of the sale pursuant to the Secura APA. This includes our intangible assets, certain duvelisib inventory, net duvelisib contract prepaid balances, and manufacturing equipment.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with our research activities, including the development of our product candidates. Our research and development expenses consist of:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and stock-based compensation expense;
● external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations (CROs), clinical sites, manufacturing organizations and consultants, including our scientific advisory board;
● license fees;
● facilities, depreciation, and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation of equipment, and laboratory supplies; and
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trial expenses, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations, and information provided us by our vendors on their actual costs incurred or level of effort expended. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected on the consolidated balance sheets as prepaid expenses and other current assets or accrued expenses.
Our research and development expenses may increase significantly in future periods as we undertake costlier development activities for our existing and future product candidates, including larger and later-stage clinical trials.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete development of our product candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from our product candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
● clinical trial results;
● the scope, rate of progress, and expense of our research and development activities, including preclinical research and clinical trials;
● the potential benefits of our product candidates over other therapies;
● our ability to market, commercialize, and achieve market acceptance for any of our product candidates that we receive regulatory approval for;
● the terms and timing of regulatory approvals; and
● the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those which we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation expense, in our executive, finance, legal, information technology, commercial, communication, human resources, and business development functions. Other selling, general, and administrative expenses include allocated facility costs, commercial costs, professional fees for legal, patent, investor and public relations, consulting, insurance premiums, audit, tax, and other public company costs.
Other, interest income and interest expense
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, consists entirely of the mark-to-market adjustment of the bifurcated make-whole interest provision derivative liability related to the 2019 Notes. There was no other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest income reflects interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities.
Interest expense reflects interest expense due under both our term loan facility executed with Hercules and the Notes, as well as non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued and prepaid research and development expenses, leases, stock-based compensation, revenue recognition, and collaborative agreements, described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on our limited historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services in accordance with ASC Topic 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606).
Product revenue, net
Product Revenue, Net - From September 24, 2018 (the date of our U.S. commercial launch of COPIKTRA) through September 30, 2020 (the date we sold COPIKTRA to Secura), we sold COPIKTRA to a limited number of specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors in the United States. We recognized revenue on sales of COPIKTRA when a customer obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point in time (typically upon delivery). Product revenues are recorded at the wholesale acquisition costs, net of applicable reserves for variable consideration. Components of variable consideration include trade discounts and allowances, Third-Party Payer chargebacks and discounts, government rebates, other incentives, such as voluntary co-pay assistance, product returns, and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and customers, payors, and other indirect customers relating to our sale of COPIKTRA. These reserves, are based on the amounts earned, or to be claimed on the related sales, and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable or a current liability. These estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes based upon relevant factors such as customer contract terms, information received from third parties regarding the anticipated payor mix for COPIKTRA, known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which it is entitled with respect to sales made.
The amount of variable consideration which is included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized under contracts will not occur in a future period. Our analyses contemplate the application of the constraint in accordance with ASC 606. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we determined a material reversal of revenue would not occur in a future period for variable consideration, and the transaction price was not reduced further. There was not any product revenue, net recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received could differ from our estimates. However, as of December 31, 2021, we do not have any reserve balances associated with product revenue, net.
Licenses and sales of intellectual property
Licenses of Intellectual Property - We may enter into collaboration and licensing arrangements for research and development, manufacturing, and commercialization activities with collaboration partners for the development
and commercialization of our product candidates, which have components within the scope of ASC 606. The arrangements generally contain multiple elements or deliverables, which may include (i) licenses, or options to obtain licenses, to our intellectual property or sale of our license, (ii) research and development activities performed for the collaboration partner, (iii) participation on joint steering committees, and (iv) the manufacturing of commercial, clinical or preclinical material. Payments pursuant to these arrangements typically include non-refundable, upfront payments, milestone payments upon the achievement of significant development events, research and development reimbursements, sales milestones, and royalties on product sales. The amount of variable consideration is constrained until it is probable that the revenue is not at a significant risk of reversal in a future period. The contracts into which we enter generally do not include significant financing components.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our collaboration and license agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract within the scope of ASC 606; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must use significant judgment to determine: a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; c) the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of transaction price in step (iv) above; and d) the measure of progress in step (v) above. We use judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties on license arrangements, should be included in the transaction price.
For sales of license and intellectual property, that include sale-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, we evaluate whether the royalties and sales-based milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount of royalties to include over the contractual term using the expected value method and estimate the sales-based milestones using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated royalty and milestone value is included in the transaction price. Royalties and sales-based milestones for territories for which there is not regulatory approval are not considered probable until such regulatory approval is achieved. We evaluate factors such as whether consideration is outside of our control, timeline for when the uncertainty will be resolved and historical sales of COPIKTRA if applicable. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and amount of royalty revenue to be received and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment. At December 31, 2021, we determined $0.2 million of future potential royalties, we expect to receive pursuant to the Secura APA, were not constrained and have been recorded in the transaction price. As the consideration for future royalties is conditional, we recorded a corresponding contract asset for the expected future royalties. Portions of the contract asset are reclassified to accounts receivable when the right to consideration becomes unconditional.
Refer to Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies, Note 6. Product revenue reserves and allowances and Note. 14. License, collaboration and commercial agreements to our consolidated financial statements located in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of revenue.
Collaborative Arrangements
Collaborative Arrangements: Contracts are considered to be collaborative arrangements pursuant to GAAP when they satisfy the following criteria defined in ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (ASC 808): (i) the parties to the contract must actively participate in the joint operating activity and (ii) the joint operating activity must expose the parties to the possibility of significant risk and rewards, based on whether or not the activity is successful. Payments received from or made to a partner that are the result of a collaborative relationship with a partner, instead of a customer relationship, such as co-development activities, are recorded as a reduction or increase to research and development expense, respectively.
Accrued and prepaid research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to CROs in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to CROs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Refer to Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies, and Note. 4. Accrued expenses to our consolidated financial statements located in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-based compensation
For service-based awards, we recognize stock-based compensation expense for stock options, and restricted stock units (RSUs) issued to employees, directors and consultants based on the grant date fair value of the awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. In addition, we issue shares under our employee stock purchase plan (ESPP) to employees. The fair value of our stock options and ESPP grants is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
We have also granted performance-based RSUs and stock options with terms that allow the recipients to vest in a specific number of shares based upon the achievement of performance-based milestones as specified in the grants. Stock-based compensation expense associated with these performance-based RSUs and stock options is recognized if the performance condition is considered probable of achievement using management’s best estimates of the time to vesting for the achievement of the performance-based milestones. If the actual achievement of the performance-based milestones varies from our estimates, stock-based compensation expense could be materially different than what is recorded in the period. The cumulative effect on current and prior periods of a change in the estimated time to vesting for performance-based RSUs and stock options will be recognized as compensation cost in the period of the revision, and recorded as a change in estimate.
While the assumptions used to calculate and account for stock-based compensation awards represent management’s best estimates, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if revisions are made to our underlying assumptions and estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could vary significantly from period to period.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 we recorded $7.7 million of stock-based compensation expense. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $10.7 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation related to stock options, which are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 3.2 years. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $6.0 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation related to RSUs, which
are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 3.7 years. See Note 2. Significant accounting policies and Note 9. Stock-based compensation to our consolidated financial statements located in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of stock-based compensation.
Leases
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases (ASC 842). This standard requires lessees to recognize in the statement of financial position a liability to make lease payments and a right-of-use asset representing its right to use the underlying asset for the lease term for both finance and operating leases.
At the inception of an arrangement, we determine whether the arrangement is or contains a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances within the arrangement. A lease is identified where an arrangement conveys the right to control the use of identified property, plant, and equipment for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Leases which are identified within the scope of ASC 842 and which have a term greater than one year are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets as right-of-use assets, lease liabilities and, if applicable, long-term lease liabilities. We have elected not to recognize leases with terms of one year or less on our consolidated balance sheets. Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. However, certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As a result, we utilize our incremental borrowing rates to calculate the present value of lease payments. Incremental borrowing rates are the rates we incur to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. As of December 31, 2021, we have a right-of-use asset of $2.3 million and lease liability of $2.9 million which reflected on the consolidated balance sheets. See Note 2. Significant accounting policies and Note 7. Leases to our consolidated financial statements located in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of leases.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
All financial information presented has been consolidated and includes the accounts of our wholly-owned subsidiaries, Verastem Securities Company and Verastem Europe GmbH. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Product revenue, net. Product revenue net for the year ended December 31, 2021 (2021 Period) was $0.0 million compared to $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (2020 Period). Product revenue, net consisted of net product sales of COPIKTRA in the United States. Pursuant to the Secura APA discussed in greater detail above within section Item 1. Business within heading Licenses and commercial agreements, we have sold our COPIKTRA license and as of September 30, 2020, we no longer sell COPIKTRA in the United States.
License and collaboration revenue. License and collaboration revenue for the 2021 Period was $0.0 million compared to $2.9 million for the 2020 Period. The 2020 Period license and collaboration revenue was comprised of Sanofi achieving two development milestones during the 2020 Period totaling $2.5 million and $0.4 million of duvelisib shipments to Sanofi, Yakult Honsha Co., Ltd. (Yakult), and CSPC Pharmaceutical Group Limited (CSPC).
Sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets revenue. Sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets revenue for the 2021 Period was $1.4 million compared to $70.0 million for the 2020 Period. The sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets revenue for the 2021 Period primarily related to two regulatory milestone for $1.3 million achieved by Secura’s sublicensee and $0.2 million related to royalties we received and expected to be received pursuant to the Secura APA. Sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets revenue for the 2020 Period was comprised of a $70.0 million upfront payment recognized under the Secura APA discussed in greater detail above within section Item 1. Business within heading Licenses and Commercial Agreements.
Transition services revenue. Transition services revenue for the 2021 Period was $0.6 million compared to $0.4 million for the 2020 Period. Transition services revenue in both periods consisted of us providing certain support functions pursuant to the Secura transition service agreement, which was entered into in connection with the Secura APA. The services were provided at a mutually agreed upon rate.
Costs of sales - product. Costs of sales - product for the 2021 Period was $0.0 million compared to $1.8 million for the 2020 Period. Pursuant to the Secura APA discussed in greater detail above within section Item 1. Business within heading Licenses and commercial agreements, we have sold our COPIKTRA license and as of September 30, 2020, we no longer sell COPIKTRA in the United States.
Cost of Sales - intangible amortization. Cost of sales - intangible amortization for the 2021 Period was $0.0 million compared to $0.8 million for the 2020 Period. Pursuant to the Secura APA discussed in greater detail above within section Item 1. Business within heading Licenses and commercial agreements, we have sold our COPIKTRA license, to which our intangible asset related. Therefore, there was no cost of sales - intangible amortization in the 2021 Period.
Cost of sales - sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets. Cost of sales - sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets for the 2021 Period was $0.0 million compared to $31.2 million for the 2020 Period. Cost of sales - sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets for the 2020 Period consisted of certain assets delivered to Secura under the Secura APA. For the 2020 Period, we recognized approximately $19.2 million, $6.0 million, $5.8 million and $0.2 million for the intangible asset, certain duvelisib inventory, net duvelisib contract prepaid balances and manufacturing equipment, respectively which were delivered to Secura as part of the sale.
Research and development expense. Research and development expense for the 2021 Period was $39.3 million compared to $41.4 million for the 2020 Period. The $2.1 million decrease from the 2020 Period to the 2021 Period was primarily related to a decrease of $3.0 million of license fees due to a non-refundable payment of $3.0 million to Chugai in the 2020 Period for the VS-6766 license described further above within section Item 1. Business within heading Licenses and commercial agreements, a decrease of $1.8 million in contract research organization (CRO) costs, a decrease of $1.7 million in consulting costs, and a decrease of $0.4 million in clinical supply costs. The decrease is partially offset by an increase of $2.2 million in investigator fees, an increase of $1.3 million in personnel related costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation, an increase of $0.7 million of drug substance and drug product costs, and an increase of $0.6 million of pre-clinical expenses. In future periods, we continue to expect expenses for VS-6766 and defactinib to increase as we have commenced our registration directed trials.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense for the 2021 Period was $24.1 million compared to $62.8 million for the 2020 Period. The decrease of $38.7 million from the 2020 Period to the 2021 Period primarily resulted from a decrease of $20.1 million of personnel related costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation, as a result of reduced headcount, a decrease of $16.1 million in consulting and professional fees, primarily related to the support of commercial activities in 2020 Period and costs associated with the sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets to Secura, a decrease of $2.1 million in reduced commercial activities costs and a decrease of $0.4 million in reduced travel and other costs.
Other expense. Other expense for the 2020 Period of $1.3 million was for the mark-to-market adjustment related to the bifurcated make-whole interest provision derivative liability related to our 5.00% Convertible Senior Second Lien Notes due 2048 (the 2019 Notes). All 2019 Notes have converted to common stock as of March 31, 2020, and the derivative liability will no longer be remeasured. There was no other expense in the 2021 Period.
Interest income. Interest income for the 2021 Period was $0.2 million compared to $0.5 million for the 2020 Period. The decrease of $0.3 million from the 2020 Period to the 2021 Period was primarily due to lower investment cost basis and lower interest rates on investments.
Interest expense. Interest expense for the 2021 Period was $10.0 million compared to $15.8 million for the 2020 Period. The decrease of $5.8 million was primarily due to $8.1 million of non-cash interest expense recorded in the 2020 Period upon conversion of the 2019 Notes into common stock and decreased interest as a result of repayment of our term loan facility in November 2020. The decrease is partially offset by $7.8 million of non-cash interest expense recorded upon conversion of the 2020 Notes into common stock in the 2021 Period.
Loss on debt extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment for the 2020 Period of $1.6 million represents the loss recognized on early extinguishment of our Hercules term loan facility. On November 9, 2020, we repaid in full all principal, accrued and unpaid interest, fees, and expenses under the Amended Loan Agreement with Hercules in an aggregate amount of $37.4 million (the Payoff Amount). The Payoff Amount, excluding accrued interest, exceeded the carrying amount of the Hercules debt on November 9, 2020 by $1.6 million which was recorded as a loss on debt extinguishment. There was no loss on debt extinguishment in the 2021 Period.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense for the 2020 Period of $0.2 million primarily related to state income tax as a result of the sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets. There was no income tax expense in the 2021 Period.
Restructuring. On February 27, 2020, we committed to an operational plan to reduce overall operating expenses, including the elimination of approximately 31 positions and other cost-saving measures.
In August 2020, in connection with the duvelisib sale to Secura pursuant to the Secura APA we committed to a strategic restructuring (August 2020 Restructuring). The August 2020 restructuring included a workforce reduction of approximately 41 positions primarily in our commercial operations department.
During the 2020 Period, we recorded an aggregate expense of $4.6 million for restructuring expenses, which is reflected in the consolidated statements of operation and comprehensive loss as selling general, and administrative expense and research and development expense of $4.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively, for one-time termination benefits for employee severance, benefits, and related costs. There were no restructuring expenses in the 2021 Period.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of liquidity
We have financed our operations to date primarily through public and private offerings of our common stock, sales of common stock under our at-the-market equity offering programs, our loan and security agreement executed with Hercules in March 2017, as amended, the upfront payments under our license and collaboration agreements with Yakult, CSPC, and Sanofi, the upfront payment under the Secura APA, the issuance of 2018 Notes
in October 2018, and the proceeds in connection with the PIPE. With the commercial launch of COPIKTRA in the United States in September 2018, we had recently begun financing a portion of our operations through product revenue. As of September 30, 2020, in connection with the Secura APA, we no longer sell COPIKTRA in the United States. We expect to finance a portion of our business through future milestones and royalties received pursuant to the Secura APA.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $100.3 million in cash, cash equivalents, and investments. We primarily invest our cash, cash equivalents and investments in U.S. Government money market funds, government bonds, corporate bonds and commercial paper of publicly traded companies.
Risks and uncertainties include those identified under Item 1A. Risk Factors, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Operating activities. The use of cash in 2021 Period and 2020 Period resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in the components of working capital. Our cash outflow from net losses adjusted for non-cash charges was $54.1 million and $45.1 million for the 2021 Period and 2020 Period, respectively. Non-cash charges were primarily related to non-cash interest, net and stock-based compensation expense in both the 2021 Period and 2020 Period. Our cash inflow from operating activities due to changes in operating assets and liabilities was $0.6 million and $11.6 million for the 2021 Period and 2020 Period, respectively. Cash inflow (outflow) due to changes in operating assets and liabilities for the 2021 Period was primarily driven by an increase of $1.8 million in accrued expenses, an increase of $0.6 million in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase in $1.6 million in prepaid expenses, other current assets, and other assets, and an increase of $0.3 million in accounts receivable, net. Cash inflow due to changes in operating assets and liabilities for the 2020 Period was primarily driven by a decrease of $19.5 million in intangible assets and property, plant and equipment, a decrease of $3.1 million in inventory, and a decrease of $2.3 million in accounts receivable, net partially offset by a decrease of $8.0 million in accounts payable, and $5.0 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities. The $20.0 million increase in cash used in operating activities for the 2021 Period compared to the 2020 Period was primarily due to increased net loss, and a net increase in the changes in the components of working capital which was primarily driven by the duvelisib sale to Secura in the 2020 Period. In the 2020 Period, we received $70.0 million of cash and recognized $70.0 million of sale of COPIKTRA license and related assets revenue and we expensed a total of $31.2 million for certain assets delivered to Secura upon finalization of duvelisib sale to Secura.
Investing activities. The cash provided by investing activities for the 2021 Period primarily relates to the net maturities of investments of $0.3 million, partially offset by purchases of fixed assets of $0.2 million. The cash provided by investing activities for the 2020 Period primarily reflects the net maturities of investments of $47.3 million.
Financing activities. The cash provided by financing activities for the 2021 Period primarily represents $6.7 million in net proceeds received under our at-the-market equity offering program, and $1.1 million of proceeds received related to exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan. This is partially offset by $0.9 million of payments for settlement of restricted stock for tax withholdings. The cash provided by financing activities for the 2020 Period primarily represents $93.8 million in net proceeds from sales of our common stock under the Purchase Agreement described below, $12.2 million in net proceeds received under our at-the-market equity
offering program described below, and $3.0 million of proceeds received related to exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan. This is partially offset by $37.4 million for repayment of our Hercules Capital, Inc. (Hercules) term loan facility, $1.8 million of interest-make whole payments on the 2019 Notes and $0.3 million of payments for settlement of restricted stock for tax withholdings.
On February 27, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain institutional investors in which we agreed to sell 46,511,628 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $2.15 per share, which represents 12.6% premium to the last reported sale price of our common stock of $1.91 per share on February 27, 2020. On March 3, 2020, the closing occurred. The aggregate proceeds net of underwriting discounts and offering costs were approximately $93.8 million.
In March 2017, we established an at-the-market equity offering program (2017 ATM) pursuant to which we were able to offer and sell up to $35.0 million of our common stock at then current market prices from time to time through Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (Cantor) as sales agent. In August 2017, we amended our sales agreement with Cantor to increase the maximum aggregate offering price of shares of common stock that can be sold under the at-the-market equity offering program to $75.0 million.
During the 2021 Period, we sold zero shares under the 2017 ATM. During the 2020 Period, we sold 6,769,559 shares under the 2017 ATM for net proceeds of approximately $12.2 million (after deducting commissions and other offering expenses). Through September 30, 2021, we have sold a total of 18,287,913 shares under this program for net proceeds of approximately $59.6 million (after deducting commissions and other offering expenses).
In August 2021, we entered into a sales agreement with Cantor pursuant to which we can offer and sell up to $100.0 million of our common stock at the current market prices from time to time through Cantor as sales agent (August 2021 ATM). During the 2021 Period, we sold 2,930,585 shares under the August 2021 ATM for net proceeds of approximately $6.8 million (after deducting commissions and other offering expenses). As of December 31, 2021, we can issue an aggregate amount of $93.0 million of common stock under this program.
On March 21, 2017, we entered into a term loan facility of up to $25.0 million with Hercules. The term loan facility is governed by a loan and security agreement, dated March 21, 2017 (the Original Loan Agreement). The Original Loan Agreement was amended on January 4, 2018, March 6, 2018, October 11, 2018, April 23, 2019, and November 14, 2019 (the Amended Loan Agreement) to increase the total borrowing limit under the Original Loan Agreement from up to $25.0 million to up to $75.0 million, pursuant to certain conditions of funding.
On November 9, 2020, we repaid in full all principal, accrued and unpaid interest, fees, and expenses under the Amended Loan Agreement with Hercules in an aggregate amount of $37.4 million (the Payoff Amount). The Payoff Amount includes the principal balance of $35.0 million, final payment fee of $1.8 million, prepayment penalty fee of $0.5 million, and accrued and unpaid interest of $0.1 million. On November 9, 2020 the Amended Loan Agreement was terminated along with Hercules’ commitment to provide funding under any future term loans. All liens on substantially all of our assets to secure the loans under the Amended Loan Agreement have been terminated and released.
On October 17, 2018, we closed a registered direct public offering of $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2018 issued 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2048 (the 2018 Notes), for net proceeds of approximately $145.3 million. The 2018 Notes are governed by the terms of a base indenture for senior debt securities (the Base Indenture), as supplemented by the first supplemental indenture thereto (the 2018 Notes Supplemental Indenture and together with the Base Indenture, the 2018 Indenture), each dated October 17, 2018, by and between us and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee. The 2018 Notes are senior unsecured obligations of us and bear interest at a rate of 5.00% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on May 1, 2019. The 2018 Notes will mature on November 1, 2048, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms.
The 2018 Notes are convertible into shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, together, if applicable, with cash in lieu of any fractional share, at an initial conversion rate of 139.5771 shares of common
stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2018 Notes, which corresponds to an initial conversion price of approximately $7.16 per share of common stock and represents a conversion premium of approximately 15.0% above the last reported sale price of our common stock of $6.23 per share on October 11, 2018. Upon conversion, converting noteholders will be entitled to receive accrued interest on their converted Notes.
We will have the right, exercisable at our option, to cause all 2018 Notes then outstanding to be converted automatically if the “Daily VWAP” (as defined in the 2018 Indenture) per share of our common stock equals or exceeds 130% of the conversion price, which equates to approximately $9.31 per share, on each of at least 20 “VWAP Trading Days” (as defined in the 2018 Indenture), whether or not consecutive, during any 30 consecutive VWAP Trading Day period commencing on or after the date we first issued the 2018 Notes.
On November 6, 2020, we entered into a privately negotiated agreement with an investor who is a holder of our 2018 Notes to exchange approximately $28.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2018 Notes for approximately $28.0 million aggregate principal amount of newly issued 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2048 (the 2020 Notes). The issuance of the 2020 Notes closed on November 13, 2020. The 2020 Notes are governed pursuant to the Base Indenture between us and Wilmington dated as of October 17, 2018 as supplemented by the second supplemental indenture thereto dated as of November 13, 2020 (the 2020 Notes Supplemental Indenture and together with the Base Indenture, the 2020 Indenture).
We had the right, exercisable at our option, to cause all 2020 Notes then outstanding to be converted automatically if the “Daily VWAP” (as defined in the 2020 Indenture) per share of our common stock equals or exceeds 123.08% of the conversion price on each of at least 20 “VWAP Trading Days” (as defined in the 2020 Indenture), whether or not consecutive, during any 30 consecutive VWAP Trading Day period commencing on or after the date we first issued the 2020 Notes (2020 Notes Mandatory Conversion Option).
The initial conversion rate for the 2020 Notes was 307.6923 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2020 Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $3.25 per share, representing an approximately 153.9% premium to the sale price of $1.28 per share of our common stock on November 5, 2020, as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market. The conversion rate was subject to adjustment from time to time upon the occurrence of certain events, including, but not limited to, the issuance of stock dividends and payment of cash dividends, but was not subject to adjustment for any accrued and unpaid interest.
Prior to November 1, 2023, we did not have the option to redeem the 2020 Notes. On or after November 1, 2023, we had the option to redeem the 2020 Notes, in whole or in part, at a cash redemption price equal to the principal amount of the 2020 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any.
Unless we had previously called all outstanding 2020 Notes for redemption, the 2020 Notes were subject to repurchase by us at the holders’ option on each of November 1, 2023, November 1, 2028, November 1, 2033, November 1, 2038 and November 1, 2043 (or, if any such date is not a business day, on the next business day) at a cash repurchase price equal to the principal amount of the 2020 Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any.
The 2020 Notes were our senior unsecured obligations and were senior in right of payment to our future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the 2020 Notes, and equal in right of payment with our existing and future indebtedness that is not so subordinated, and effectively subordinated to our existing and future indebtedness, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness. The 2020 Notes were structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent we are not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of our subsidiaries.
On July 1, 2021, we exercised our 2020 Notes Mandatory Conversion Option for the aggregate principal amount of $28.0 million of the 2020 Notes. On July 16, 2021, the aggregate principal of $28.0 million of 2020 Notes was converted into 8,615,384 shares of common stock. Upon conversion of the 2020 Notes, holders received a cash payment equal to the accrued and unpaid interest on the converted 2020 Notes. As a result, as of September 30, 2021, all 2020 Notes have converted into shares of common stock.
As of December 31, 2021, there was $0.3 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of 2018 Notes compared to $0.3 million and $28.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of the 2018 Notes and 2020 Notes, respectively, for a total of $28.3 million aggregate principal amount outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Funding requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and may continue to incur operating losses. Refer to risk factor titled We have incurred significant losses since our inception. We may incur losses for the foreseeable future and may never achieve or maintain profitability within section Item 1A. Risk Factors for detailed activities which may drive our continued operating losses and expenses in future periods.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, and the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the development of our current product candidates. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the costs and timing of commercialization activities for our product candidates for which we expect to receive marketing approval;
● the scope, progress, and results of our ongoing and potential future clinical trials;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates (including our efforts to seek approval and fund the preparation and filing of regulatory submissions);
● revenue received from commercial sales our product candidates, should any of our other product candidates receive marketing approval;
● the costs of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending intellectual property related claims;
● our ability to establish collaborations or partnerships on favorable terms, if at all; and
● Receipt of milestone payments and royalties pursuant to the Secura APA including timing of such receipt.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, and through future milestones and royalties received through the Secura APA. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMITMENTS
On April 15, 2014, we entered into a lease agreement for approximately 15,197 square feet of office and laboratory space in Needham, Massachusetts. The lease term commenced on April 15, 2014, and it was scheduled to expire on September 30, 2019. Effective February 15, 2018, we amended the lease agreement to relocate within the facility to another location consisting of 27,810 square feet of office space (the Amended Lease Agreement). The Amended Lease Agreement extends the expiration date of the lease from September 2019 through June 2025. Pursuant to the Amended Lease Agreement, the initial annual base rent amount is approximately $660,000, which
increases during the lease term to $1.1 million for the last twelve-month period. As of December 31, 2021, the total future minimum lease payments under the agreement are $3.7 million through June 2025.
As discussed in Note 14. License, collaboration and commercial agreements to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are party to several agreements to license intellectual property. The license agreements may require us to pay upfront license fees, ongoing annual license maintenance fees, milestone payments, minimum royalty payments, as well as reimbursement of certain patent costs incurred by the licensors, as applicable. As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any minimum contractual obligations in relation to these agreements because: there were no upfront license fees payable in future periods; no annual license maintenance fees; we cannot estimate if milestone and/or royalty payments will occur in future periods; and patent cost reimbursement costs are perpetual and the agreements are cancelable by us at any time upon prior written notice to the licensor.
TAX LOSS CARRYFORWARDS
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards of $410.6 million and $219.0 million, respectively, which are available to reduce future taxable income. We also had federal and state tax credits of $3.5 million and $1.3 million, respectively, which may be used to offset future tax liabilities. The net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards will expire at various dates through 2041, except for $214.9 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards which may be carried forward indefinitely. Net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards are subject to review and possible adjustment by the Internal Revenue Service and state tax authorities and may become subject to an annual limitation in the event of certain cumulative changes in the ownership interest of significant stockholders over a three-year period in excess of 50%, as defined under Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code, as well as similar state provisions. This could limit the amount of tax attributes that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income or tax liabilities. The amount of the annual limitation is determined based on the value of our company immediately prior to the ownership change. Subsequent ownership changes may further affect the limitation in future years. At December 31, 2021, we recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our NOL and tax credit carryforwards of $103.3 million, as we believe it is more likely than not that the tax benefits will not be fully realized. In the future, if we determine that a portion or all of the tax benefits associated with our tax carryforwards will be realized, net income would increase in the period of determination.
Based on our analysis under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and similar provisions under state law, we believe that our federal net operating loss carryforwards, our state net operating loss carryforwards, our Research and Development (R&D) credits and our Orphan Drug (OD) credits will be limited as of December 31, 2021. The portion of federal NOL, state NOL, R&D credits and OD credits that were determined to be limited by Section 382 have been written off as of December 31, 2021. The remaining unused carryforwards remain available for future periods. Due to our full valuation allowance the write off of NOLs, R&D credits, and OD credits did not have any impact to the statements of operation and comprehensive loss for the 2021 Period and 2020 Period.
RECENTLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Refer to Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements located in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recently adopted accounting standards.