ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This section and other sections of this Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See "Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" included in this Annual Report.
(Dollar amounts in thousands except share and per share data or unless otherwise indicated)
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We review our estimates on an ongoing basis to ensure the estimates appropriately reflect changes in our business and the most recent information available.
We believe the critical accounting policies discussed below affect our most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. For a complete discussion of all our significant accounting policies, see Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
The total amount of revenue we recognize for the sale of our products reflects various sales adjustments for discounts, returns, refunds, allowances, rebates, and other customer incentives. These sales adjustments can vary based on market conditions, customer preferences, timing of customer payments, volume of products sold, and timing of new product launches. These adjustments require management to make reasonable estimates of the amount we expect to receive from the customer. We estimate sales adjustments by customer or by product category on the basis of our historical experience with similar contracts with customers, adjusted as necessary to reflect current facts and circumstances and our expectations for the future. Sales taxes, firearms and ammunition excise tax, and other similar taxes are excluded from revenue.
Allowance for Estimated Credit Losses
We maintain an allowance for credit losses related to accounts receivable for future expected credit losses resulting from the inability or unwillingness of our customers to make required payments. We estimate the allowance based upon historical bad debts, current customer receivable balances, age of customer receivable balances, and the customers' financial condition and in relation to a representative pool of assets consisting of a large number of customers with similar risk characteristics. The allowance is adjusted as appropriate to reflect differences in current conditions as well as changes in forecasted macroeconomic conditions.
Inventories
Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We evaluate the quantities of inventory held against past and future demand and market conditions to determine excess or slow-moving inventory. For each product category, we estimate the market value of the inventory comprising that category based on current and projected selling prices. If the projected market value is less than cost, we provide an allowance to reflect the lower value of the inventory. This methodology recognizes projected inventory losses at the time such losses are evident rather than at the time goods are actually sold. The projected market value of the inventory may decrease due to consumer preferences, legislative changes, or loss of key contracts among other events.
Income Taxes
Provisions for federal, state, and foreign income taxes are calculated based on reported pre-tax earnings and current tax law. Such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and expense are recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for income tax purposes. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We periodically assess our liabilities and contingencies for all periods that are currently open to examination or have not been effectively settled based on the most current available information. Where it is not more likely than not that our tax position will be sustained, we record the entire resulting tax liability and when it is more likely than not of being sustained, we record our best estimate of the resulting tax
liability. As per our policy, any applicable interest and penalties related to these positions are also recorded in the consolidated financial statements. To the extent our assessment of the tax outcome of these matters changes, such change in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period of the change.
Deferred tax assets are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. Significant estimates are required for this analysis. If we determine it is not more likely than not that all of the deferred tax assets will be realized, a valuation allowance will be recorded. Changes in the amounts of valuation allowance are recorded in the tax provision in the period when the change occurs.
Accounting for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles
We test goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets annually or upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the asset might be impaired.
We estimate fair value to assess the recoverability of our goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets using a discounted cash flow model. Our assumptions used to develop the discounted cash flow analysis require us to make significant estimates regarding future revenues and expenses, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, and appropriate discount rates. The projections also take into account several factors including current and estimated economic trends and outlook, costs of raw materials and other factors that are beyond our control. If the current economic conditions were to deteriorate, or if we were to lose significant business, causing a reduction in estimated discounted cash flows, it is possible that the estimated fair value of certain reporting units or indefinite lived intangible assets could fall below their carrying value resulting in the necessity to conduct additional impairment tests in future periods. We continually monitor the reporting units and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment indicators.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price, including contingent consideration, of our acquisitions to the assets and liabilities acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, based on their fair values at the date of acquisition. The fair values are primarily based on third-party valuations using our management assumptions that require significant judgments and estimates. The purchase price allocated to intangibles is based on unobservable factors, including but not limited to, projected revenues, expenses, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, a weighted average cost of capital, among others. The weighted average cost of capital uses a market participant’s cost of equity and after-tax cost of debt and reflects the risks inherent in the cash flows. The unobservable factors we use are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but are also uncertain and unpredictable, as a result these estimates, and assumptions may require adjustment in the future if actual results differ from our estimates.
Contingent Consideration
Our approach to valuing the initial contingent consideration associated with the purchase price uses unobservable factors such as projected revenues and expenses over the term of the contingent earn-out period, discounted for the period over which the contingent consideration is measured, and volatility rates. Based upon these assumptions, the initial contingent consideration is then valued using a Monte Carlo simulation analysis in a risk-neutral framework. As of March 31, 2022, the contingent consideration liability consists of the estimated amounts due for earn-out payments from fiscal year 2023 through 2026. On a recurring basis, we adjust the contingent consideration liability to fair value based on the estimated probability of achieving the earn out targets and changes in any of the other Level 3 inputs above. To the extent our estimates change in the future regarding the likelihood of achieving these targets, we may need to record material adjustments to our contingent consideration liabilities.
See Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, for discussion of new accounting pronouncements.
Executive Summary
Fiscal year 2022 record results and significant growth were supported by strong demand in the market for our portfolio of iconic brands, including the seven new brands acquired during the last two fiscal years.
Financial Highlights and Notable Events of fiscal year 2022
•Net sales increased $819,099 or 36.8%, over the prior fiscal year.
•Sporting Products net sales increased $618,137, or 55.2%.
•Outdoor Products net sales increased $200,962, or 18.2%.
•Gross profit increased $476,272, or 75.2%, as compared to the prior fiscal year. Gross profit as a percentage of sales, increased to 36.4%, an increase of 799 basis points over the prior fiscal year.
•Sporting Products gross profit increased $399,930, or 128.1%.
•Outdoor Products gross profit increased $78,024, or 24.3%
•EBIT increased $361,264, or 126.8%, as compared to the prior fiscal year. EBIT as a percentage of sales increased to 21.2%, an increase of 842 basis points over the prior fiscal year.
•Fiscal year 2022 income was $473,226, or $8.00 per diluted share, an increase of $207,214, or $3.56 per diluted share over the prior fiscal year.
•We acquired QuietKat Inc. (QuietKat) during the first fiscal quarter of 2022, Foresight Sports (Foresight) and Fiber Energy Products (Fiber) during the third fiscal quarter of 2022, and Stone Glacier during the fourth fiscal quarter of 2022. See Note 7, Acquisitions and Divestitures, of the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, for a discussion of our acquisitions during fiscal year 2022.
•We repurchased 2,981 shares for a total of $113,165 during fiscal year 2022 under our 2021 Share Repurchase Program and our 2022 Share Repurchase Program. See Part II, Item 5 of this Annual Report, for details on our share repurchase programs.
•On May 5, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors has unanimously approved preparations for the separation of our Outdoor Products and Sporting Products reportable segments into two independent, publicly-traded companies (the “Planned Separation”). We anticipate that the transaction will be in the form of a distribution to our shareholders of 100% of the stock of Outdoor Products, which will become a new, independent publicly traded company. The distribution is intended to be tax-free to U.S. shareholders for U.S. federal income tax purposes. We currently expect the transaction will be completed in calendar year 2023, subject to final approval by our Board of Directors, a Form 10 registration statement being declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, regulatory approvals and satisfaction of other conditions. There can be no assurance regarding the ultimate timing of the proposed transaction or that the transaction will be completed.
Outlook
Sporting Products Industry
Sales of hunting and shooting-sports related products, including ammunition, are heavily influenced by hunting and recreational shooting participation rates, civil unrest and the political environment. We believe that long-term participation trends support our expectation of continued increased demand for hunting and shooting-sports related products. Participation rates have remained strong, and we are seeing an expanded demographic of users. This broadened end consumer base has resulted in a much larger total addressable market opportunity for the industry and for our company. We believe we are well-positioned to succeed and capitalize on this demand given our scale and global operating platform, which we believe is particularly difficult to replicate in the highly regulated and capital-intensive ammunition manufacturing sector.
Outdoor Recreation Industry
We believe that long-term outdoor participation trends combined with a larger base of participants supports our expectation of continued increased demand for the innovative outdoor recreation-related products produced by our Outdoor Products brands. Participation rates have remained strong and we are seeing an expanded demographic within our end users. Our Outdoor Products brands hold a strong competitive position in the marketplace, and we intend to further differentiate our brands through focused research and development and marketing investments including increased use of social media and other digital marketing. Following significant investments in our brands’ e-commerce capabilities, both directly and through our E-Commerce Center of Excellence, we believe our brands are well-positioned to benefit from the ongoing shift in consumer shopping behavior to utilize online channels.
Results of Operations
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
Our net sales, gross profit, gross profit as a percentage of net sales (gross profit margin), EBIT, EBIT as a percentage of net sales (EBIT margin), interest expense, and tax provision by reporting segment and by corporate and other (where applicable) are presented below (dollars in thousands):
(1) We modified the structure of our reportable segments during the third quarter of fiscal year 2022. Accordingly, prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation. See Note 18, Operating Segment Information, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Sporting Products-The fiscal year 2022 period includes sales from Remington and HEVI-Shot, which we acquired in the third and fourth quarters, respectively, of the prior fiscal year. The increase also reflects improved pricing and strong demand in the market across our Sporting Products line, and production increases over the prior year at all of our facilities. These increases were partially offset by a reduction of sales from small rifle ammunition produced at the Lake City Army Ammunition Plant.
Outdoor Products-The increase in sales was driven by continued demand in the market for most of our categories, and was not restricted by retail store closures that impacted the prior year. The increase also reflects sales from businesses acquired in the current fiscal year. This was partially offset by a decline in our Outdoor Cooking business caused primarily by declining e-commerce sales as foot traffic returned to brick and mortar stores.
Sporting Products-The fiscal year 2022 period gross profit includes profits from Remington and HEVI-Shot, which we acquired in the third and fourth quarters, respectively, of the prior fiscal year. The increase also reflects improved pricing, sales volume and operating efficiencies. These increases were partially offset by increased commodity and input costs. Gross profit margin was 41.0% compared to 27.9% in the prior year.
Outdoor Products-The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by sales volume and operating efficiencies, partially offset by higher logistics costs, input costs, and sales channel mix. The increase also reflects gross profit from acquisitions that occurred during the current fiscal year. Gross profit margin was 30.6% compared to 29.1% in the prior year.
Corporate and Other-The decrease in corporate gross profit was due to inventory step-up expenses from acquisitions during the current year.
Sporting Products-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by the gross profit increase, partially offset by higher selling, general, and administrative expenses from the acquisitions of Remington and HEVI-Shot and higher selling and marketing expenses to support increased sales. EBIT margin was 34.5% compared to 19.9% in the prior year.
Outdoor Products-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by the gross profit increase, partially offset by increased selling, general, and administrative expenses from the current year acquisitions and investments in selling and marketing expenses to support increased sales and industry events, such as trade shows that returned this fiscal year. EBIT margin was 12.6% compared to 12.5% in the prior year.
Corporate and Other-The decrease in EBIT was primarily driven by the prior fiscal year pretax gain related to the divestiture of a non-strategic business in our Sporting Products segment. Additionally, the current fiscal year has higher share-based and incentive compensation expense, higher post-acquisition compensation, and investments in human capital which support our centers of excellence.
The decrease in interest expense was due to a decrease in debt issuance cost write-offs and a reduction in our interest rate on the 4.5% Notes, offset by an increase in our average debt balance.
See Note 15, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, for information regarding income taxes.
The increase in the current period tax rate is primarily due to the impact of the prior year decrease in the valuation allowance driven by earnings, the benefit of the loss carrybacks to prior profitable years as permitted under IRS regulations under the CAREs Act which permitted us to realize previously valued assets, and the release of the reserves for uncertain tax positions due to statute expiration in the prior year.
Our provision for income taxes includes federal, state and foreign income taxes. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2022 of 23.8% differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of state taxes and is partially offset by changes in tax contingency.
The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 of (2.6)% differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of the decrease in the valuation allowance, the release of uncertain tax positions, and the impact of the CAREs Act.
As of March 31, 2022 and 2021, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $24,719 and $23,000, respectively, of which $21,139 and $20,283, respectively, would affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. The remaining balance is related to deferred tax items which only impact the timing of tax payments. Although the timing and outcome of audit settlements are uncertain, it is reasonably possible that a $3,419 reduction of the uncertain tax benefits will occur in the next 12 months. The settlement of these unrecognized tax benefits could result in earnings from $0 to $2,753. See Note 15, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further details.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
Our net sales, gross profit, gross profit as a percentage of net sales (gross profit margin), EBIT, EBIT as a percentage of net sales (EBIT margin), interest expense, and tax provision by reporting segment and by corporate and other (where applicable) are presented below (dollars in thousands):
(1) We modified the structure of our reportable segments during the third quarter of fiscal year 2022. Accordingly, prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation. See Note 18, Operating Segment Information, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Sporting Products-The increase in sales was primarily driven by strong demand in the market across nearly all categories, and improved pricing. Acquisitions accounted for $44,583 of net sales in fiscal year 2021. These increases were partially offset by the sale of our Firearms Business in fiscal year 2020, which accounted for approximately $25,000 of net sales.
Outdoor Products-The increase in sales was driven by strong demand in our Outdoor Accessories, Action Sports, Outdoor Cooking, and Golf businesses. This strong demand was partially offset by retail store closures in our first quarter of fiscal year 2021 and continued supply chain interruptions.
Sporting Products-The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by sales volume and pricing as described above and operating efficiencies. These increases were partially offset by the sale of our Firearms Business in fiscal year 2020. Gross profit margin was 27.9% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 15.8% in the previous year.
Outdoor Products-The increase in our gross profit was primarily driven by sales volume as described above and strong direct-to-consumer sales, partially offset by increased shipping, tariff, and product costs. Gross profit margin was 29.1% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 25.1% in the previous year.
Corporate and Other-The increase in corporate gross profit was due to fiscal year 2020 business restructuring costs, partially offset by inventory step-up expenses during fiscal year 2021.
Sporting Products-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by the gross profit increase as described above, decreased travel and trade show expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, benefits from fiscal year 2020 cost savings initiatives, partially offset by losses attributable to initial marketing and start-up costs at Remington, increased incentive compensation accruals and the sale of our Firearms Business in fiscal year 2020. EBIT margin was 19.9% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 7.7% in the previous year.
Outdoor Products-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by the gross profit increase as described above, partially offset by increased incentive compensation accruals and higher selling and marketing costs. EBIT margin was 12.5% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 4.9% in the previous year.
Corporate and Other-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by fiscal year 2020 goodwill and intangible impairment expenses of $155,588, pretax gain on divestiture of $18,467 in fiscal year 2021, fiscal year 2020 held for sale asset impairment of $9,429 in our Firearms business, and a reduction of fiscal year 2020 restructuring expenses. These were partially offset by higher incentive compensation accrual, the loss on extinguishment of debt and higher transaction and transition costs in the fiscal year 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We manage our business to maximize operating cash flows as the primary source of liquidity. In addition to cash on hand and cash generated by operations, our sources of liquidity include committed credit facilities and access to the public debt and equity markets. We use our cash primarily to fund investments in our existing businesses and for debt payments, acquisitions, share repurchases, and other activities.
Financial Condition
Cash decreased to $22,584 at March 31, 2022 from $243,265 at March 31, 2021, primarily due to cash paid for acquisitions and the repurchase of shares, partially offset by cash provided from our operating activities and proceeds from our ABL Revolving Credit Facility during the last twelve months.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $27,063 from the prior fiscal year. The decrease was primarily driven by inventory purchases in the current fiscal year to position ourselves for future growth and to mitigate supply chain disruption risks caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, timing of accounts payable, and higher accounts receivable balances due to higher sales volume. These decreases were partially offset by net income.
Investing Activities
Cash used for investing activities increased $485,820 from the prior fiscal year. The current fiscal year cash usage was driven by the acquisition of businesses.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $48,967 compared to a use of cash of $31,640 during the prior fiscal year. The increase was primarily driven by net proceeds from our ABL Revolving Credit Facility, partially offset by the decrease in the net cash received from the issuance of our 4.5% Notes and redemption of our 5.875% Notes in fiscal year 2021, and cash used for the repurchase of shares of $113,195 during fiscal year 2022.
Liquidity
In addition to our normal operating cash requirements, our principal future cash requirements will be to fund capital expenditures, debt repayments, employee benefit obligations, share repurchases, and any strategic acquisitions. Our short-term cash requirements for operations are expected to consist mainly of capital expenditures to maintain production facilities and working capital requirements. Our debt service requirements over the next two years consist of required interest payments due under our 4.5% Notes and 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
Based on our current financial condition, management believes that our cash position, combined with anticipated generation of cash flows and the availability of funding, if needed, under our 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility, access to debt and equity markets, as well as other potential sources of funding including additional bank financing, will be adequate to fund future growth, to service our currently anticipated long-term debt obligations, make capital expenditures over the next 12 months and fund the 2022 Share Repurchase Program. As of March 31, 2022, based on the borrowing base less outstanding borrowings of $170,000, outstanding letters of credit of $16,791, less the minimum required borrowing base of $45,000, the amount available under the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility was $218,209.
There can be no assurance that the cost or availability of future borrowings, if any, will not be materially impacted by capital market conditions, including any disruptions to capital markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic (including the emergence and spread of vaccine resistant coronavirus variants), the military conflict in Ukraine and imposition of sanctions on Russia, or our future financial condition and performance. Furthermore, because our 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility is secured in large part by receivables from our customers, a sustained deterioration in general economic conditions, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic (including the emergence and spread of vaccine resistant coronavirus variants) or the military conflict in Ukraine and imposition of sanctions on Russia, that adversely affects the creditworthiness of our customers could have a negative effect on our future available liquidity under the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
Share Repurchases
As of March 31, 2022, there is $186,105 remaining under our $200,000 2022 Share Repurchase Program, which we intend to fund through the fourth fiscal quarter of 2024. Additional information regarding our share repurchases during fiscal year 2022 is presented in Part II, Item 5 of this Annual Report.
Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreements
As of March 31, 2022, we had actual total indebtedness of $670,000, which consisted of the following:
Our total debt as a percentage of total capitalization (total debt and stockholders' equity) was 37% as of March 31, 2022.
See Note 13, Long-term Debt, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, for a detailed discussion of our indebtedness.
Material Cash Requirements
The following tables summarize our material cash requirements as of March 31, 2022:
Payments for interest is based on outstanding debt as of March 31, 2022.
Pension benefit obligation has been excluded from the Contractual Obligations table (see Note 14, Employee Benefit Plans), to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, for details on our required contributions to our pension trust.
The total liability for uncertain tax positions as of March 31, 2022 was approximately $24,719 (see Note 15, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report), none of which is expected to be paid within 12 months. We are unable to provide a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of future payments relating to the non-current uncertain tax position obligations.
Contingencies
Litigation
From time-to-time, we are subject to various legal proceedings, including lawsuits, which arise out of and are incidental to, the conduct of our business. We do not consider any of such proceedings that are currently pending, individually or in the aggregate, to be material to our business or likely to result in a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, or cash flows.
Environmental Liabilities
Our operations and ownership or use of real property are subject to a number of federal, state, and local environmental laws and regulations, as well as applicable foreign laws and regulations, including those governing the discharge of hazardous materials, remediation of contaminated sites, and restoration of damage to the environment. We are obligated to conduct investigation and/or remediation activities at certain sites that we own or operate or formerly owned or operated.
Certain of our former subsidiaries have been identified as PRPs, along with other parties, in regulatory agency actions associated with hazardous waste sites. As a PRP, those former subsidiaries may be required to pay a share of the costs of the investigation and clean-up of these sites. In that event, we would be obligated to indemnify those subsidiaries for such costs. While uncertainties exist with respect to the amounts and timing of the ultimate environmental liabilities, based on currently
available information, we do not currently expect that these potential liabilities, individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, or cash flows.
We could incur substantial additional costs, including cleanup costs, resource restoration, fines, and penalties or third-party property damage or personal injury claims, as a result of violations or liabilities under environmental laws or non-compliance with environmental permits. While environmental laws and regulations have not had a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, or cash flows in the past, and we have environmental management programs in place to mitigate these risks, it is difficult to predict whether they will have a material impact in the future.
See Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information.
Dependence on Key Customers; Concentration of Credit
No customer contributed more than 10% of sales during fiscal years 2022 and 2021; however, Walmart accounted for approximately 13% of our total fiscal year 2020 sales. If a key customer fails to meet payment obligations, our operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Inflation and Commodity Price Risk
We are exposed to inflationary factors such as increases in labor, supplier, logistics and overhead costs that may adversely affect our operating results. Although we do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our financial position or results of operations to date, a high rate of inflation in the future may have an adverse effect on our ability to maintain current levels of gross margin and operating expenses, if the selling prices of our products are not able to offset these increased costs. Additionally, inflation may potentially impact demand as consumers reduce discretionary spending. We have been impacted by changes in the prices of raw materials used in production as well as changes in oil and energy costs. In particular, the prices of commodity metals, such as copper, zinc, and lead continue to be volatile. These prices generally impact our Sporting Products Segment. See Note 4, Derivative Financial Instruments, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information.
We have a strategic sourcing, pricing and hedging strategy to mitigate risk from commodity price fluctuation. We will continue to evaluate the need for future price changes in light of these trends, our competitive landscape, and our financial results. If our sourcing and pricing strategy is unable to offset impacts of the commodity price fluctuations, our future results from operations and cash flows would be materially impacted.