Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (Report) includes forward-looking statements. All statements contained in this Report other than statements of historical fact, including statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, our business strategy and plans, and our objectives for future operations, are forward-looking statements. The words “believe,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “expect” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, business strategy, short-term and long-term business operations and objectives and financial needs. These forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our business is subject to significant risks including, but not limited to, our ability to obtain substantial additional financing, the results of our research and development efforts, the results of nonclinical and clinical testing, the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the effect of regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other domestic and foreign regulatory agencies, the impact of competitive products, product development, commercialization and technological difficulties, the effect of our accounting policies, and other risks as detailed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Report. Further, even if our product candidates appear promising at various stages of development, our share price may decrease such that we are unable to raise additional capital without significant dilution or other terms that may be unacceptable to our management, Board of Directors (Board) and stockholders.
Moreover, we operate in a very competitive and rapidly changing environment. New risks emerge from time to time. It is not possible for our management or Board to predict all risks, nor can we assess the impact of all factors on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements we may make. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the future events and trends discussed in this Report may not occur and actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements.
You should not rely upon forward-looking statements as predictions of future events. The events and circumstances reflected in the forward-looking statements may not be achieved or occur. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. We are under no duty to update any of these forward-looking statements after the date of this Report or to conform these statements to actual results or revised expectations. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
We are a late clinical-stage, central nervous system (CNS)-focused biopharmaceutical company striving to transform the treatment landscape for individuals living with anxiety, depression and other CNS disorders. We are advancing development of therapeutics with the potential to be faster-acting, and with fewer side effects and safety concerns, than those that are currently available. Our clinical-stage candidates are targeting multiple forms of anxiety and depression. They primarily belong to a new class of drugs known as pherines, which are odorless, neuroactive steroids that bind to distinct receptors on chemosensory neurons in the nasal passages and can impact the limbic amygdala without systemic uptake or direct activity on CNS neurons in the brain. Our lead candidate, PH94B, is a nasally administered spray currently in multiple Phase 3 trials in the U.S., with results from two of such Phase 3 studies anticipated in 2022. Should ongoing Phase 3 studies be successful, PH94B has the potential to be the first FDA-approved, fast-acting, acute treatment of anxiety for adults with social anxiety disorder. VistaGen is passionate about transforming mental health care and redefining what is possible for patients and health care providers in the treatment of anxiety and depression - One Mind at a Time.
PH94B is being developed for multiple anxiety disorders. Our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B is underway, anchored by PALISADE-1 and PALISADE-2, each a U.S., multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 clinical study to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with social anxiety disorder (SAD). In addition, our PALISADE Phase 3 Program includes a long-term safety study which is underway in the U.S., and two additional planned clinical studies that we believe are required to support a potential U.S. New Drug Application (NDA) for PH94B in SAD based on our prior discussions with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), should our PALISADE Phase 3 Program be successful overall. In addition, our exploratory Phase 2A clinical program for PH94B, which is designed to assess the therapeutic potential of PH94B in anxiety disorders beyond SAD, is underway, with a Phase 2A clinical study in adults experiencing Adjustment Disorder with Anxiety (AjDA). We are preparing to expand our PH94B exploratory program in 2022 by initiating Phase 2A biomarker studies as an initial step in assessing PH94B’s therapeutic potential in each of procedural anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder. We are also preparing to initiate our exploratory postpartum anxiety program for PH94B with a Phase 1 lactation study as a first step to assess whether PH94B is excreted to breast milk.
PH10 is being developed as a stand-alone treatment for major depressive disorder (MDD) and potentially other depression disorders. Exploratory Phase 2A clinical development of PH10 for MDD has been completed. Based on the positive results demonstrated in that study, we are preparing for further clinical development of PH10 for MDD, including, but not limited to, a planned Phase 2B clinical study.
Exploratory Phase 1B clinical development of AV-101 in combination with probenecid is underway in the U.S. to further assess the potential of the combination in multiple neurological indications involving the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor.
Our goal is to become a biopharmaceutical company that develops and commercializes innovative CNS therapies for highly prevalent neuropsychiatric and neurological indications where current treatment options are inadequate to meet the needs of millions of patients worldwide.
Our Product Candidates
PH94B Nasal Spray
PH94B is a first-in-class, odorless, tasteless rapid-onset (approximately 15 minutes) synthetic investigational pherine nasal spray with a novel mechanism of action (MOA) that regulates the olfactory-amygdala neural circuits of fear and anxiety and attenuates the tone of the sympathetic autonomic nervous system. Based on positive Phase 2 data in SAD patients, VistaGen is currently evaluating PH94B in two Phase 3 clinical studies in the U.S., PALISADE-1 and PALISADE-2, and a long-term safety study, for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD. Designed for intranasal administration in low microgram doses, the novel MOA of PH94B is fundamentally differentiated from all current anti-anxiety medications, including all antidepressants approved by the FDA for treatment of SAD, as well as all benzodiazepines and beta blockers prescribed for treatment of SAD on an off-label basis. VistaGen’s proposed MOA for PH94B does not involve either direct activation of GABA-A receptors or binding to neuronal receptors in the CNS. Rather, PH94B’s proposed MOA involves binding to peripheral chemosensory neurons in the nasal passages to regulate the olfactory-amygdala fear and anxiety neural circuits. Both clinical and preclinical data suggest that PH94B has the potential to achieve rapid-onset anti-anxiety effects without systemic uptake or transport into the brain, reducing the risk of benzodiazepine-like side effects and other safety concerns.
Our ongoing PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B is designed to further demonstrate its potential as a fast-acting, non-sedating, non-addictive acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD. In addition to SAD, for which the FDA has granted Fast Track designation, we also have potential opportunities to develop PH94B in adjustment disorder with anxiety, procedural anxiety, PTSD, postpartum anxiety and panic disorder.
PH10 Nasal Spray
PH10 is an odorless, tasteless synthetic investigational pherine nasal spray with a novel, rapid-onset potential MOA that is fundamentally differentiated from the MOA of all currently approved treatments for depression disorders. PH10, which is administered at microgram-level doses, engages and activates chemosensory cells in the nasal passages, connected to neural circuits in the brain that produce antidepressant effects. Specifically, in a manner similar to PH94B, PH10’s proposed MOA involves binding to peripheral chemosensory neurons in the nasal passages to regulate the olfactory-amygdala neural circuits believed to increase activity of the limbic-hypothalamic sympathetic nervous system and increase the release of catecholamines. Importantly, unlike all currently approved oral antidepressants (ADs) and rapid-onset ketamine-based therapy (KBT), including both intravenous ketamine and intranasal ketamine (esketamine), we believe PH10 does not require systemic uptake and distribution to produce rapid-onset of antidepressant effects. In all clinical studies completed to date, PH10 has been well-tolerated and has not caused psychological side effects (such as dissociation and hallucinations) or other safety concerns that may be associated with KBT. Our planned Phase 2B clinical program for PH10 is designed to further demonstrate its potential as a fast-acting stand-alone treatment for MDD. We also have potential opportunities to develop PH10 for multiple other depression-related disorders.
AV-101
Abnormal function of the NMDAR (N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor), an ionotropic glutamate receptor in the brain, is associated with numerous CNS disorders. AV-101 is an oral prodrug of 7-chloro-kynurenic acid (7-Cl-KYNA), which is a potent and selective full antagonist of the glycine co-agonist site of the NMDAR that inhibits the function of the NMDAR. Unlike ketamine and many other NMDAR antagonists, 7-Cl-KYNA is not an ion channel blocker. At doses administered in all studies completed to date, AV-101 has been observed to be well tolerated and has not exhibited dissociative or hallucinogenic psychological side effects or safety concerns. In light of these observations and findings from preclinical studies, we believe that AV-101, in combination with FDA-approved oral probenecid, has potential to become a new oral treatment alternative for certain CNS indications involving the NMDAR. We are conducting an exploratory Phase 1B drug-drug interaction clinical study of AV-101.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We consider certain accounting policies related to revenue recognition, determination of right-of-use assets under lease transactions and related lease obligations, impairment of long-lived assets, research and development, stock-based compensation, warrant liability and income taxes to be critical accounting policies that require the use of significant judgments and estimates relating to matters that are inherently uncertain and may result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. These estimates include, but are not limited to, those relating to stock-based compensation, revenue recognition, research and development expenses, determination of right-of-use assets under lease transactions and related lease obligations, and the assumptions used to value warrants, warrant modifications, and useful lives for property and equipment and related depreciation calculations. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We have historically generated revenue principally from collaborative research and development arrangements, licensing and technology access fees and government grants. We recognize revenue following the guidance of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) and its related amendments, collectively referred to as ASC (Accounting Standards Codification) Topic 606.
Under ASC Topic 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of Topic 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to a customer.
Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations. Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess whether these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations. The exercise of a material right may be accounted for as a contract modification or as a continuation of the contract for accounting purposes.
We assess whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the performance obligations in the contract. This assessment involves subjective determinations and requires judgments about the individual promised goods or services and whether such are separable from the other aspects of the contractual relationship. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (that is, the good or service is capable of being distinct) and (ii) our promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (that is, the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract). In assessing whether a promised good or service is distinct in the evaluation of a collaboration arrangement subject to Topic 606, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. We also consider the intended benefit of the contract in assessing whether a promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. If a promised good or service is not distinct, we are required to combine that good or service with other promised goods or services until we identify a bundle of goods or services that is distinct.
The transaction price is then determined and allocated to the identified performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices (SSP) on a relative SSP basis. SSP is determined at contract inception and is not updated to reflect changes between contract inception and satisfaction of the performance obligations. Determining the SSP for performance obligations requires significant judgment. In developing the SSP for a performance obligation, we consider applicable market conditions and relevant Company-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated costs. In certain circumstances, we may apply the residual method to determine the SSP of a good or service if the standalone selling price is considered highly variable or uncertain. We validate the SSP for performance obligations by evaluating whether changes in the key assumptions used to determine the SSP will have a significant effect on the allocation of arrangement consideration between multiple performance obligations.
If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We determine the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. We include the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment.
If an arrangement includes development and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received.
In determining the transaction price, we adjust consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the timing of payments provides us with a significant benefit of financing. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensee and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensee will be one year or less. For arrangements with licenses of intellectual property that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize royalty revenue and sales-based milestones at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied.
We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time, and if over time, based on the use of an output or input method.
Right-of-use assets and lease obligations
We account for our leases following the guidance of Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” (ASU 2016-02). ASU 2016-02 requires that we determine, at the inception of an arrangement, whether the arrangement is or contains a lease, based on the unique facts and circumstances present. Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term (Right of use assets) and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease based upon the present value of lease payments over the lease term. When determining the lease term, we include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain, at inception, that we will exercise that option. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable; accordingly, we use our incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate that would be incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment, based upon the information available at the commencement date. The lease payments used to determine our operating lease assets may include lease incentives, stated rent increases and escalation clauses linked to rates of inflation, when determinable, and are recognized in determining our Right-of-use assets. Our operating lease is reflected in the right-of-use asset - operating lease; operating lease obligation - current portion; and operating lease obligation - non-current portion in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Short-term leases, defined as leases that have a lease term of 12 months or less at the commencement date, are excluded from this treatment and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Variable lease payments are amounts owed by us to a lessor that are not fixed, such as reimbursement for common area maintenance costs for our facility lease; and are expensed when incurred.
Financing leases, formerly referred to as capitalized leases, are treated similarly to operating leases except that the asset subject to the lease is included in the appropriate fixed asset category, rather than recorded as a Right-of-use asset, and depreciated over its estimated useful life, or lease term, if shorter.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360-10, Property, Plant & Equipment-Overall, we review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of property and equipment may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. In the event that such cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the carrying amount of the assets, we write down the assets to their estimated fair values and recognize the loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. We do not carry any capitalized intellectual property or product licenses as assets subject to impairment on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are composed of both internal and external costs. Internal costs include salaries and employment-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, of scientific personnel and direct project costs. External research and development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with clinical and nonclinical development of PH94B, PH10, and AV-101. All such costs are charged to expense as incurred.
We also record accruals for estimated ongoing clinical trial costs. Clinical trial costs represent costs incurred by contract research organizations (CROs) and clinical trial sites. Progress payments are generally made to CROs, clinical sites, investigators and other professional service providers. We analyze the progress of the clinical trial, including levels of subject enrollment, invoices received and contracted costs when evaluating the adequacy of accrued liabilities. Significant judgments and estimates must be made in determining the clinical trial accrual in any reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions. Revisions are charged to research and development expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known.
Costs incurred in obtaining product or technology licenses are charged immediately to research and development expense if the product or technology licensed has not achieved regulatory approval or reached technical feasibility and has no alternative future uses. In September 2018, we acquired an exclusive license to develop and commercialize PH94B and an option to acquire a license to develop and commercialize PH10 by issuing an aggregate of 1,630,435 unregistered shares of our common stock having a fair market value of $2,250,000. In October 2018, we exercised our option to acquire an exclusive license to develop and commercialize PH10 by issuing 925,926 shares of our unregistered common stock having a fair market value of $2,000,000. Since, at the date of each acquisition, neither product candidate had achieved regulatory approval and each requires significant additional development and expense, we recorded the costs related to acquiring the licenses and the option as research and development expense in our fiscal year ended March 31, 2019.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation cost for all stock-based awards to employees and non-employee consultants based on the grant date fair value of the award. We record stock-based compensation expense over the period during which the employee or other grantee is required to perform services in exchange for the award, which generally represents the scheduled vesting period. We have not granted restricted stock awards to employees or consultants nor do we have any awards with market or performance conditions. Noncash expense attributable to compensatory grants of our common stock to non-employees is determined by the quoted market price of the stock on the date of grant and is either recognized as fully-earned at the time of the grant or expensed ratably over the term of the related service agreement, depending on the terms of the specific agreement.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards as of the grant date. The Black-Scholes model is complex and dependent upon key data input estimates. The primary data inputs with the greatest degree of judgment are the expected term of the stock options and the estimated volatility of our stock price. The Black-Scholes model is highly sensitive to changes in these two inputs. The expected term of the options represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method in accordance with guidance provided by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to estimate the expected term as an input into the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We determine expected volatility using the historical method, which, because of the historically limited trading volume during the period in which our stock has been publicly traded on a major exchange, is based on the historical daily trading data of the common stock of a peer group of public companies over the expected term of the option.
Warrants Issued in Connection with Equity Financing
We evaluate the appropriate balance sheet classification of warrants we issue as either equity or as a derivative liability. In accordance with ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in the Entity’s Own Equity (ASC 815-40), we classify a warrant as equity if it is “indexed to the Company’s equity” and meets several specific conditions for equity classification. A warrant is not considered “indexed to the Company’s equity,” in general, when it contains certain types of exercise contingencies or potential adjustments to its exercise price. If a warrant is not indexed to the Company’s equity or it has net cash settlement that results in the warrants to be accounted for under ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity or ASC 815-40, it is classified as a derivative liability which is carried on the consolidated balance sheet at fair value with any changes in its fair value recognized immediately in the Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. At March 31, 2022 and 2021, we had both investor warrants and share-based compensation warrants outstanding that were classified as equity.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability approach promulgated by ASC 740, Income Taxes, for financial reporting purposes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce the deferred tax assets to an amount expected to be realized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Report (Financial Statements) for information on recent accounting pronouncements.
Financial Operations Overview and Results of Operations
Net Loss
We have not yet achieved recurring revenue-generating status from any of our product candidates or technologies in amounts sufficient to sustain our operations and enable our strategic business plans. Since we entered into the AffaMed Agreement with respect to PH94B in June 2020 and the Bayer Agreement with respect to cardiac stem cell technology in December 2016, those agreements have provided initial, non-dilutive cash payments, but no recurring revenues, although we may potentially receive additional cash payments and royalties under such agreements in the future, in the event certain performance-based milestones and commercial sales are achieved. Since acquiring our exclusive worldwide licenses to our intranasal investigational product candidates, PH94B and PH10, in 2018, we have devoted substantial resources to advancing initiatives related to research, development, and contract manufacturing of such product candidates, including initiatives related to manufacturing processes, analytical methods and production programs for drug substance and finished drug product, as well as for preclinical and clinical studies focused on potential commercialization of these product candidate for neuropsychiatry indications. For example, with respect to PH94B, during 2021 we initiated our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD, and with respect to PH10, we conducted and are continuing to conduct various preclinical studies and manufacturing activities intended to enable commencement of a Phase 2B clinical study of PH10 as a stand-alone treatment for MDD. In addition, we have devoted substantial resources to advance initiatives related to research, development and contract manufacturing of our oral prodrug candidate, AV-101, including initiatives related to manufacturing processes, analytical methods and production programs for drug substance and finished drug product, as well as several preclinical studies and clinical studies focused on potential commercialization of AV-101 in several CNS indications. For example, our current focus on AV-101 is in combination with probenecid which may provide opportunities to explore the therapeutic potential of the combination for certain CNS indications involving the NMDAR. Also, from-time-to-time in the past but not during the period covered by this Report, we have devoted resources to VistaStem’s stem cell technology research and development, bioassay development and small molecule drug rescue-related initiatives, in addition to creating, protecting and patenting intellectual property (IP) related to our product candidates and technologies, with the corollary initiatives of recruiting and retaining personnel and raising working capital. At March 31, 2022, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $267.6 million. Our net loss for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 was approximately $47.8 million and $17.9 million, respectively. We expect losses to continue for the foreseeable future, primarily as we engage in further research, development and commercialization activities related to PH94B, PH10 and AV-101.
Summary of the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2022
During our fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 (Fiscal 2021) we completed financing and development and commercialization partnering transactions aggregating approximately $25 million prior to our December 2020 completion of a $100 million underwritten public offering (the December 2020 Public Offering) of our securities, from which, after deducting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, we received net proceeds of approximately $93.6 million. Our financial position resulting from those transactions, combined with warrant exercises and other financing activities during our fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 (Fiscal 2022) aggregating approximately $10.5 million, net of expenses, has permitted us to accelerate an important stream of potential catalysts across our CNS pipeline, including, among others, our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD.
From an operational perspective, throughout Fiscal 2022 and through the date of this Report, we have continued to advance our nonclinical and clinical development, manufacturing, and regulatory activities necessary for (i) Phase 3 clinical development of PH94B as a potential acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD, (ii) advancing our planned exploratory Phase 2A clinical program for PH94B with the initiation of our Phase 2A clinical study in adults experiencing AjDA, while also exploring potential opportunities for Phase 2A clinical development of PH94B in anxiety disorders beyond SAD, (iii) Phase 2B development of PH10 as a potential stand-alone treatment of MDD and (iv) exploratory Phase 1B development of AV-101 in combination with probenecid to explore potential opportunities to develop the combination for treatment of multiple CNS indications. Notably, we initiated our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B in SAD with the commencement of PALISADE-1 in May 2021 and PALISADE-2 in August 2021. Each is a U.S. multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD. Each of the studies is being conducted across various sites in the U.S., with a combined target of approximately 416 randomized subjects. Dr. Michael Liebowitz, a Columbia University psychiatrist, former director and founder of the Anxiety Disorders Clinic at the New York State Psychiatric Institute, director of the Medical Research Network in New York City, and creator of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS), is serving as Principal Investigator of both studies. Topline results from PALISADE-1 are anticipated to be released in mid-2022 and those from PALISADE-2 later in 2022. In addition to the initiation of PALISADE-1 and PALISADE-2, during Fiscal 2022, we initiated the PALISADE Long-term Safety study and advanced our planned exploratory Phase 2A clinical program for PH94B with the initiation of our Phase 2A clinical study in adults experiencing AjDA. We are continuing preparations for additional clinical trials of PH94B and PH10 that we plan to commence later in calendar 2022. Further, we continue to expand our regulatory and intellectual property foundation to support broad clinical development and, ultimately, commercialization of our CNS product candidates in the U.S. and foreign markets.
To advance these initiatives, beginning in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, throughout Fiscal 2022, and continuing to the present, we have significantly expanded our employee infrastructure with experienced personnel additions across multiple functional areas, including clinical operations, clinical research, data management, chemistry, manufacturing and controls (CMC) and quality assurance, biostatistics and clinical analytics, regulatory affairs, medical affairs, translational medicine, commercial operations, legal and contracts and corporate affairs, development operations, and investor and public relations. Between April 2021 and July 2021, we filled vacancies on our Board created, in part, by the departure of two of our long-term Board members, by appointing three new independent members to our Board. Five members of our Board are independent. We believe these appointments increase our Board’s diversity and expand its expertise in multiple areas, including among others, communications, drug development, regulatory affairs, product commercialization and marketing.
Throughout Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022 and through the date of this Report, strains of SARS-CoV-2, commonly referred to as COVID-19 and multiple variants of the virus, have spread globally and the outbreak has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a public health emergency in the U.S. by the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services. Operations at our headquarters in South San Francisco were significantly curtailed during Fiscal 2021 and the first half of Fiscal 2022, and, to some extent, periodically thereafter, while state and local restrictions required remote working conditions. Most of our recent employee additions are geographically located away from our headquarters facility in South San Francisco and routinely work remotely. Our employees have worked efficiently and productively while remotely-located and working from home whether as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise. From time to time during the COVID-19 pandemic, however, the efficiency and productivity of certain preclinical and clinical development programs and our third-party collaborators, including , among others, contract research and development organizations (CROs), contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) and other third-party service providers have been, and may be in the future, impacted by prevailing surges in the spread of variants of COVID-19, such as spreads induced by the Delta and Omicron variants and their sub-variants during Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022, shelter-in-place orders, social distancing measures, travel bans and restrictions, and certain business and government closures or reductions in service. From time to time since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced delays in the delivery of supplies of active pharmaceutical product (API) or other key materials required to continue development of PH94B and PH10, as well as temporary disruptions in the availability of third-party personnel and others involved in the conduct of our preclinical and clinical programs. Future unexpected delays may result in a significant, material delay or disruption to our current clinical development plans, programs, and operations.
From a financial perspective, in addition to the December 2020 Public Offering, between December 2020 and the end of Fiscal 2022, holders of outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 13,695,093 shares of our common stock exercised such warrants and we received cash proceeds of approximately $11,132,200, including exercises of warrants to purchase 7,298,791 shares for cash proceeds of $6,207,400 during Fiscal 2022.
In May 2021, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement SM (the Sales Agreement) with Jefferies LLC as sales agent (Jefferies), with respect to an at-the-market offering program (the ATM) under which we may, at our option, offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million through Jefferies as our sales agent. During September and early October 2021, we sold an aggregate of 1,517,798 shares of our common stock and received gross cash proceeds of approximately $4.45 million under the ATM. We have not sold any shares under the ATM from October 2, 2021 through the date of this Report.
Subject to certain restrictions, our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (the S-3 Shelf Registration Statement) remains available for future sales of our equity securities in one or more public offerings, including under the ATM with Jefferies, from time to time. We were added to the Russell 2000® Index at the conclusion of the 2021 Russell Indexes annual reconstitution at the end of June 2021. The Russell 2000® Index is one of the most cited performance benchmarks for small-cap companies and is widely used by investment managers and institutional investors as the basis for index funds and as a benchmark for active investment strategies. We believe our inclusion in the Russell 2000® Index has increased and will continue to increase overall awareness and exposure of the Company by introducing us to a wider investor audience.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2022 and 2021
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 (amounts in thousands).
Revenue
We recognized sublicense revenue pursuant to the AffaMed Agreement in the amount of $1,108,900 in Fiscal 2022 compared to $1,089,500 in Fiscal 2021. In June 2020, we entered into the AffaMed Agreement, which involves the clinical development and commercialization of PH94B for acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD, and potentially other anxiety-related disorders, in Greater China, South Korea, and Southeast Asia. The terms of the AffaMed Agreement included a $5.0 million non-refundable upfront license fee which we received in August 2020. We recorded this payment as deferred revenue and we are recognizing it as revenue on a straight-line basis over the period during which we expect to perform the services required under the AffaMed Agreement. We currently estimate that we will complete our performance obligations under the AffaMed Agreement in mid-calendar 2024. While we may potentially receive additional cash payments and royalties in the future under the AffaMed Agreement in the event certain performance-based milestones and commercial sales are achieved, there can be no assurance that the AffaMed Agreement will provide additional revenue beyond that noted or cash payments to us in the near term, or at all.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development (R&D) expense increased by approximately $23.5 million, from $11.9 million in Fiscal 2021 to $35.4 million in Fiscal 2022, primarily due to expenses related to preparing for, initiating and conducting our ongoing PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B in SAD, including the preparation for and conduct of PALISADE-1 and the preparation for, initiation and advancement of PALISADE-2 and the PALISADE Long-term Safety Study, the preparation for and initiation and advancement of our exploratory Phase 2A study of PH94B for the potential treatment of AjDA, and continuation of both nonclinical and preclinical development and outsourced manufacturing activities for both PH94B and PH10. Such activities accounted for an increase of approximately $17.6 million in expenses in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021. Salaries and benefits expense increased by approximately $4.1 million in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to the hiring of multiple senior personnel. Noncash research and development expenses, primarily stock-based compensation and equipment depreciation in both periods, accounted for approximately $1.5 million and $0.8 million in Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively.
The following table indicates the primary components of R&D expense for each of the periods (amounts in thousands):
The increase in salaries and benefits expense for Fiscal 2022 primarily reflects the impact of the addition of senior management personnel across multiple functional R&D areas, including chemistry, manufacturing and controls (CMC), clinical operations, clinical research, pharmacovigilance, biostatistics and clinical analytics, development operations, regulatory affairs and translational medicine, as well as other R&D personnel during the period from December 2020 through March 2022. Also contributing to the increase is the impact of salary increases effective beginning in January 2022 granted to R&D management and members of our R&D staff. Further, bonus payments for achievement of certain core corporate objectives during calendar year 2021, paid in February 2022, exceeded amounts paid in December 2020 to a smaller number of employees for achievement of calendar 2020 objectives.
Fiscal 2022 stock-based compensation expense reflects the amortization of option grants made to our internal R&D team as well as certain clinical and scientific consultants since May 2019, in addition to grants to new senior management and other employees as indicated above. All outstanding options granted to R&D employees and consultants prior to May 2019 are fully vested and amortized at March 31, 2022. Grants awarded after March 31, 2021, including those granted to new employees, account for approximately $604,000 of Fiscal 2022 expense, offset by the expense reduction compared to Fiscal 2021 of approximately $237,000 for grants made in Fiscal 2021 and prior years that became fully vested during Fiscal 2022. Further, grants to newly hired employees between December 2020 and March 31, 2021 incurred a full year of amortization during Fiscal 2022 compared to a partial year during Fiscal 2021, increasing Fiscal 2022 expense by approximately $343,000. Except for grants to new employees, expense attributable to recent option grants is generally being amortized over two-year to three-year vesting periods, with essentially all of the grants made since May 2019, including those made in Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, being 25% vested and expensed upon grant, in accordance with the terms of the respective grants. Grants to new employees generally vest 25% on the first anniversary of the grant date and ratably monthly over the next three years.
Consulting and other professional services in both periods reflects fees incurred, generally on an as-needed basis, for project-based scientific, CMC, nonclinical and clinical development and regulatory advisory and analytical services rendered to us by third parties, primarily in support of our PH94B and PH10 development initiatives. Fiscal 2022 expense also includes contract recruiting services for certain specialized R&D positions.
The significant increase in PH94B and PH10 clinical and nonclinical project expenses during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 results primarily from the initiation and advancement of our ongoing PALISADE Phase 3 Program, specifically, our PALISADE-1 and ongoing PALISADE-2 clinical trials, and our PALISADE Long-term Safety study, as well as the initiation of our exploratory Phase 2A clinical trial of PH94B as a potential treatment of AjDA and preclinical development activities for PH94B and PH10. In both periods, manufacturing, formulation, validation and analysis of sufficient quantities of drug substance and drug product for both clinical trials and other developmental requirements have been and continue to be significant initiatives for advancing both PH94B and PH10. Due to its later stage of development, costs for PH94B initiatives have significantly exceeded those for PH10 during both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021. In both years, AV-101 project expense includes costs for certain preclinical studies related to the use of AV-101 with adjunctive probenecid and certain AV-101 manufacturing stability studies. Fiscal 2022 expense also includes the impact of initiating our ongoing exploratory Phase 1B AV-101 and probenecid clinical trial. We are actively preparing for and advancing other clinical and nonclinical studies involving PH94B, PH10 and AV-101 in combination with probenecid.
Rent expense for both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021 reflects our implementation of ASC 842 and the requirement to recognize, as an operating lease related to our South San Francisco office and laboratory facility, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability, both of which must be amortized over the expected lease term. The underlying lease reflects commercial property rents prevalent in the South San Francisco real estate market at the time of our November 2016 lease amendment extending the lease of our headquarters facilities in South San Francisco by five years from July 31, 2017 to July 31, 2022. As disclosed in Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Financial Statements, in October 2021, we entered into an amendment to this lease, pursuant to which the term of the lease was extended from August 1, 2022 to July 31, 2027 and the base rent under the lease for the five-year extension period was specified. We allocate total rent expense for our South San Francisco facility between R&D expense and G&A expense based generally on square footage dedicated to each function. In both periods reported, rent expense includes charges for such items as common area maintenance fees, taxes and insurance which are generally assessed to us by our landlord.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (G&A) expense increased by approximately $6.4 million to approximately $13.5 million in Fiscal 2022 compared to approximately $7.1 million in Fiscal 2021. Salaries and benefits expense for Fiscal 2022 increased by approximately $2.0 million versus Fiscal 2021 primarily due to the hiring of senior management personnel, including our Chief Commercial Officer, Vice President, Investor Relations, and Vice President, Strategic Insights and Analytics, as well as other senior administrative personnel. Stock-based compensation expense increased by approximately $0.5 million in Fiscal 2022 as a result of grants to both new and existing G&A employees and members of our Board. Further, in Fiscal 2022, we incurred approximately $2.8 million of consulting expenses in connection with various customary pre-commercialization market research studies and analyses. We incurred additional consulting expense of approximately $0.6 million related to expanding our infrastructure support during Fiscal 2022. Additionally, in Fiscal 2022, we expensed, as a noncash charge, approximately $0.2 million of deferred offering costs attributable to a previous financing arrangement that we terminated in June 2021. Noncash general and administrative expense, approximately $2.4 million during Fiscal 2022, increased from approximately $1.7 million for Fiscal 2021 primarily due to the increase in stock-based compensation expense and the write-off of the deferred offering costs.
The following table indicates the primary components of G&A expense for each of the periods (amounts in thousands):
The increase in salaries and benefits expense in Fiscal 2022 primarily results from the addition of our Chief Commercial Officer in May 2021, our Vice President, Investor Relations in March 2021, our Vice President, Strategic Insights and Analytics in November 2021, our Vice President, Human Resources in January 2022 and three other administrative employees during the period. Also contributing to the increase is the impact of salary increases effective beginning in January 2022 granted to members of our management and administrative staff. Further, bonus payments for achievement of certain core corporate objectives during calendar year 2021, paid in February 2022, exceeded amounts paid in December 2020 to a smaller number of employees for achievement of calendar 2020 objectives.
Fiscal 2022 stock-based compensation expense reflects the amortization of option grants made to our internal management and administrative staff, independent members of our Board and certain consultants since May 2019, in addition to grants to new senior management and other new employees as indicated above. All outstanding options granted to G&A employees, Board members and consultants prior to May 2019 are fully vested and amortized at March 31, 2022. Grants awarded after March 31, 2021, including those granted to new employees, account for approximately $1,008,000 of Fiscal 2022 expense, offset by the expense reduction compared to Fiscal 2021 of approximately $603,000 for grants made in Fiscal 2021 and prior years that became fully vested during Fiscal 2022. Further, grants to newly hired employees between December 2020 and March 31, 2021 incurred a full year of amortization during Fiscal 2022 compared to a partial year during Fiscal 2021, increasing Fiscal 2022 expense by approximately $94,000. Except for grants to new employees, expense attributable to recent option grants is generally being amortized over two-year to three-year vesting periods, with essentially all of the grants made since May 2019, including those made in Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, being 25% vested and expensed upon grant, in accordance with the terms of the respective grants. Grants to new employees generally vest 25% on the first anniversary of the grant date and ratably monthly over the next three years.
Board fees and other consulting services represents, in both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022, fees paid as consideration for Board and Board Committee services to the independent members of our Board of Directors. We modified our cash compensation policy for our independent Board members at the beginning of Fiscal 2022, increasing payments to reflect current market conditions and we added one new independent Board member in April 2021 and two additional independent members during July 2021. Fiscal 2022 expense also includes fees for continuing education activities available to our Board members and for other strategic consulting services. Fiscal 2021 expense also included consulting service fees related to commercial analyses of both PH94B and PH10.
Legal, accounting and other professional fees for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021 includes expense related to routine corporate legal and compliance fees as well as legal counsel and other costs related to patent prosecution and protection pursuant to our stem cell technology license agreements, our AV-101 patents, or patents that we have elected to pursue for commercial purposes, as well as recurring annual license fees. These costs do not necessarily occur ratably throughout the year or between years. In both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, this expense includes legal counsel and other costs we have incurred to advance various patent applications in the U.S. and numerous foreign countries, primarily with respect to AV-101 and our stem cell technology platform, and, to a lesser extent, with respect to our PH94B and PH10 intellectual property portfolios. Accounting expense includes costs related to the annual audit of our prior year financial statements and the three quarterly reviews of our current year financial statements. Fiscal 2022 expense also includes the cost of certain outsourced financial and accounting services and implementation of new accounting software, and an expanded service level from our information technology service provider, all of which commenced at the beginning of Fiscal 2022, as well as certain recruiting fees incurred in connection with searches for certain specialized positions that commenced late in Fiscal 2022. In Fiscal 2021, we incurred additional consulting fees related to revenue recognition accounting for the AffaMed Agreement.
Investor and public relations expense in both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021 includes the fees of our various external service providers for a broad spectrum of investor relations, public relations and social media services, and well as market awareness and strategic advisory and support functions and initiatives. During both years, we conducted numerous virtual meetings and other communication activities focused on expanding global market awareness of the Company, our CNS product candidate pipeline and technologies and our research and development programs, including among registered investment professionals and investment advisors, individual and institutional investors, and prospective strategic collaborators for development and commercialization of our product candidates in major pharmaceutical markets worldwide.
During Fiscal 2022, we incurred expenses for various phase-appropriate and customary pre-commercialization studies, analyses, projections, strategic modeling and awareness services, primarily attributable to PH94B as a potential acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD. We plan to continue such studies and initiatives in parallel with our clinical and regulatory initiatives.
The increase in insurance expense in Fiscal 2022 is primarily attributable to the market-rate increase in the premium for our directors’ and officers’ liability insurance upon renewal of our policy in May 2021, and additional coverages, including cybersecurity, added to our program during Fiscal 2022.
As a result of periodic shelter-in-place restrictions and travel and workplace precautions and restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic continuing throughout both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022, management presentations and historically in-person meetings held in multiple U.S. markets and certain international markets with existing and potential individual and institutional investors, investment professionals and advisors, media, and securities analysts, as well as various investor relations, market awareness and corporate development and partnering initiatives, have generally occurred remotely without requiring in-person business travel by our executives. We incurred nominal travel expenses in Fiscal 2022 for attendance at seminars, and for vendor audits and clinical trial site visits as conditions have permitted.
Rent expense for both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021 reflects our implementation of ASC 842 and the requirement to recognize, as an operating lease related to our South San Francisco office and laboratory facility, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability, both of which must be amortized over the expected lease term. The underlying lease reflects commercial property rents prevalent in the South San Francisco real estate market at the time of our November 2016 lease amendment extending the lease of our headquarters facilities in South San Francisco by five years from July 31, 2017 to July 31, 2022. As disclosed in Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Financial Statements, in October 2021, we entered into an amendment to this lease, pursuant to which the term of the lease was extended from August 1, 2022 to July 31, 2027 and the base rent under the lease for the five-year extension period was specified. We allocate total rent expense for our South San Francisco facility between R&D expense and G&A expense based generally on square footage dedicated to each function. In both years, rent expense includes charges for such items as common area maintenance fees, taxes and insurance which are generally assessed to us by our landlord.
Beginning in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, in connection with our recognition of revenue under the AffaMed Agreement, we also began to amortize the deferred contract acquisition costs related to our acquisition of that agreement. Such costs were composed of the cash payment of $220,000 for sublicense fees which we were obligated to make pursuant to our PH94B license from Pherin, and the $125,000 cash payment and $125,000 fair value of common stock issued for consulting services, in each case exclusively related to our acquisition of the AffaMed Agreement. The contract acquisition costs are amortized over the expected term of the services to be provided under the AffaMed Agreement. We amortized approximately $105,000 and $102,000 of contract acquisition costs during Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively.
As described more completely in Note 8, Capital Stock, in the Financial Statements, in June 2021, we terminated the LPC Agreement. Upon termination of the LPC Agreement, we expensed the remaining $232,100 of deferred offering costs related to the agreement as a noncash charge to G&A expense.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest income, net totaled $19,900 in Fiscal 2022 compared to $1,600 in for Fiscal 2021. The following table indicates the primary components of interest income and expense for each of the periods (amounts in thousands):
In both Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, interest income relates to cash deposits in interest-bearing cash equivalent accounts. Fiscal 2022 interest income reflects higher balances in interest-earning accounts as rates have been minimal during both periods. Interest expense in Fiscal 2021 relates to interest paid on insurance premium financing notes and on our financing lease of office equipment subject to ASC 842 and to interest accrued on our Payroll Protection Program loan prior to its voluntary repayment, including interest, in December 2020. Further, we did not finance insurance premiums for policies that renewed in February 2021 or May 2021 as we had in prior years.
We recognized approximately $945,000 and $1,386,000 during Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively, attributable to the 10% cumulative dividend accrued on outstanding shares of our Series B 10% Convertible Preferred Stock (Series B Preferred) as an additional deduction in arriving at net loss attributable to common stockholders in the Financial Statements. In November 2021, the custodial holder of 1,131,669 outstanding shares of our Series B Preferred exercised its rights for conversion into common stock under the terms of the Certificate of Designation of the Relative Rights and Preferences of the Series B 10% Convertible Preferred Stock (Series B Certificate of Designation) and we issued 1,131,669 shares of our common stock upon conversion. From initial issuance in May 2015 through the time of conversion in November 2021, the Series B Preferred had accrued 10% dividends aggregating $7,217,800 and, in accordance with the terms of the Series B Certificate of Designation, we issued 3,295,778 shares of our unregistered common stock in payment of the accrued dividends. Following this conversion there were no additional shares of Series B Preferred outstanding and no further accrual of dividends on the Series B Preferred. In December 2020, one holder of Series B Preferred converted 28,571 shares of Series B Preferred into an equal number of unregistered shares of our common stock and we issued an additional 160,062 unregistered shares of our common stock in payment of $124,600 of accrued dividends.
The Series D Preferred that we issued in the December 2020 Public Offering contained a beneficial conversion feature (a BCF), which arises when a debt or equity security is issued with an embedded conversion option that is deemed beneficial to the investor, that is, in-the-money, at inception because the conversion option has an effective conversion price that is less than the market price of the underlying stock at the commitment date (with respect to the Series D Preferred, the date the security was actually issued rather than the date the agreement to do so was entered into, referred to as the Commitment Date). In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 470-20, Debt- Debt with Conversion and Other Options (ASC 470-20), an embedded BCF is required to be recognized separately by allocating a portion of the proceeds equal to the intrinsic value of the feature to additional paid-in capital. ASC 470-20 also provides that the intrinsic value is to be calculated as of the Commitment Date. The Series D Certificate of Designation provides that the Series D Preferred has a conversion price of $0.92 per share on an as-converted basis the (Conversion Price). The Conversion Price compared to the closing price of $1.42 per share of our common stock on the Commitment Date results in a difference of $0.50 per share. That difference multiplied by the 46 million shares of our common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series D Preferred resulted in an aggregate BCF of $23.0 million. We did not recognize the impact of the BCF at December 31, 2020 because the Series D Preferred was not convertible into common stock prior to the Approval Date (the date of our Special Meeting of Stockholders held on March 5, 2021). Following approval by our stockholders of the Charter Amendment at the Special Meeting in March 2021, the contingency of the BCF was eliminated and we recognized the BCF as a noncash charge in arriving at net loss attributable to common stockholders in our Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 and as a corresponding increase in additional paid-in capital in our Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit). The recognition of the BCF on the Series D Preferred had no aggregate impact on our stockholders’ equity or on our cash position.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in May 1998 through March 31, 2022, we have financed our operations and technology acquisitions primarily through the issuance and sale of our equity and debt securities for cash proceeds of approximately $208.6 million, as well as from an aggregate of approximately $22.7 million of government research grant awards (excluding the fair market value of government sponsored and funded clinical trials), strategic collaboration payments, intellectual property licensing and other revenues. Additionally, we have issued equity securities with an approximate value at issuance of $38.2 million in noncash acquisitions of product licenses and in settlements of certain liabilities, including liabilities for professional services rendered to us or as compensation for such services.
Recent Developments
During Fiscal 2022, holders of outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 7,298,791 shares of our common stock exercised such warrants, and we received cash proceeds of approximately $6.2 million. Between December 2020 and March 31, 2021, holders of outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 6,396,302 shares of our common stock exercised such warrants and we received cash proceeds of approximately $4.9 million.
As described more completely in Note 8, Capital Stock, in the Financial Statements (Note 8), in May 2021, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement SM (the Sales Agreement) with respect to an at-the-market offering program (the ATM) under which we may offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million through our sales agent. In September 2021 and on October 1, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 1,517,798 shares of our common stock and received gross cash proceeds of approximately $4.45 million under the ATM. We have not sold any additional shares of our common stock under the ATM from October 2, 2021 through the date of this Report.
In December 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement pursuant to which we sold, in an underwritten public offering (the December 2020 Public Offering), 63,000,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $0.92 per share and 2,000,000 shares of a newly authorized series of convertible preferred stock (Series D Preferred and, together with the common stock, the Securities) at a public offering price of $21.16 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of $100 million. The 2.0 million shares of Series D Preferred Stock were convertible into 46.0 million shares of common stock, all of which had been converted by June 30, 2021. Net proceeds to us from the Securities sold in the December 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, was approximately $93.6 million.
In August 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement pursuant to which we sold, in an underwritten public offering (the August 2020 Public Offering), an aggregate of 15,625,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $0.80 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of $12.5 million. Under the terms of an overallotment option we granted, the underwriter exercised such option with respect to 2,243,250 shares of common stock, resulting in additional gross proceeds to us of approximately $1.8 million. Aggregate net proceeds to us from the August 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, were approximately $12.9 million.
As more completely described in Note 11, Licensing, Sublicensing and Collaboration Agreements, in the Financial Statements, in June 2020, we entered into the AffaMed Agreement, a strategic licensing and collaboration agreement for the clinical development and commercialization of PH94B for acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD and other potential anxiety-related disorders, pursuant to which we received a non-refundable upfront license payment of $5.0 million in August 2020. The upfront license payment resulted in net cash proceeds to us of approximately $4.655 million after the sublicense payment we agreed to make to Pherin pursuant to our PH94B license from Pherin, and payment for consulting services related to the consummation of the AffaMed Agreement.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
During Fiscal 2021, we received approximately $119 million in net cash proceeds, primarily from the transactions described above. As described above, during Fiscal 2022, we received an additional $6.2 million in cash proceeds from the exercise of outstanding warrants and approximately $4.45 million in gross cash proceeds from the sale of our common stock under the Sales Agreement. Although we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $68.1 million at March 31, 2022, should the clinical development and regulatory initiatives in our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B in SAD prove successful, it is probable that such cash position will not be sufficient to fund our planned operations, including, notably, our planned expansion of phase-appropriate preparations for commercialization of PH94B in the United States, for the twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements, which raises substantial doubt that we can continue as a going concern without securing additional capital. Additionally, we have not yet developed products that generate recurring revenue and, assuming successful completion of our planned clinical and nonclinical programs, we will need to invest substantial additional capital resources to commercialize any of them.
During the next twelve months, we plan to (i) continue to advance and complete our PALISADE Phase 3 Program designed to develop and commercialize PH94B as a new acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD, (ii) continue to advance our exploratory clinical program for PH94B in a series of small studies to advance our understanding of its therapeutic potential in anxiety disorders beyond SAD, (iii) complete preparations for and initiate Phase 2B clinical development of PH10 as a potential stand-alone treatment for MDD, (iv) complete our exploratory Phase 1B drug-drug interaction clinical study of AV-101 in combination with probenecid to enhance our understanding of its therapeutic potential in certain neurological disorders, (v) conduct various nonclinical studies involving PH94B, PH10 and AV-101, and (vi) continue phase-appropriate preparations for commercialization of PH94B should the development and regulatory initiatives in our PALISADE Phase 3 Program in SAD prove successful.
When necessary and advantageous, we will seek additional financial resources to fund our planned operations through (i) the potential issuance of debt securities, (ii) sales of our equity securities in one or more public offerings, including strategic transactions under the Sales Agreement, (iii) private placements, (iv) the exercises of some or all of the currently outstanding 9,275,858 warrants prior to their expiration and/or (v) strategic licensing and development collaborations involving one or more of our drug candidates in markets outside the U.S., similar to the AffaMed Agreement. Subject to certain restrictions, our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (the S-3 Shelf Registration Statement) remains available for future sales of our equity securities in one or more public offerings from time to time. While we may make additional sales of our equity securities under the S-3 Shelf Registration Statement and/or under the Sales Agreement, we do not have an obligation to do so.
In addition to the potential issuance of debt securities or sale of our equity securities, we may also seek to enter research, development and/or commercialization collaborations similar to the AffaMed Agreement to provide non-dilutive funding for our operations, while also reducing a portion of our future cash outlays and working capital requirements. Although we may seek additional collaborations that could generate revenue and/or provide non-dilutive funding for development and commercialization of our product candidates, no assurance can be provided that any such collaborations, awards or agreements will occur in the future.
Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, without limitation, potential impacts related to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, the scope and nature of opportunities related to our success and the success of certain other companies in nonclinical and clinical trials, including our development and commercialization of our current product candidates, the availability of, and our ability to enter into collaborations on terms acceptable to us. To further advance the clinical development and potential commercialization of PH94B, PH10, and AV-101, as well as support our operating activities, we plan to continue to carefully manage our routine operating costs and our clinical and nonclinical programs and pre-launch commercialization initiatives.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, there can be no assurance that our current strategic collaboration under the AffaMed Agreement will generate revenue from future potential milestone payments, or that future financings or other strategic collaborations will be available to us in sufficient amounts, in a timely manner, or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional financing on a timely basis when needed, our business, financial condition, and results of operations may be harmed, the price of our stock may decline, we may be required to reduce, defer, or discontinue certain of our research and development activities and we may not be able to continue as a going concern. Our auditors have included a going concern qualification to their opinion on our Financial Statements at March 31, 2022 as a result of this uncertainty. The Financial Statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the negative outcome of this uncertainty
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes changes in cash and cash equivalents for the fiscal years stated (in thousands):
As described previously, the combination of the net proceeds we received during Fiscal 2021 from the December 2020 Public Offering and the August 2020 Public Offering followed subsequently by the proceeds from warrant exercises in both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022 and sales of our common stock under the ATM during Fiscal 2022 have provided sufficient funds for us to significantly advance an important stream of initiatives across our CNS pipeline, including, among others, our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B in SAD, our exploratory clinical program for PH94B in multiple anxiety-related indications beyond SAD, our Phase 2B development program for PH10 in MDD, and our exploratory Phase 1B clinical program for AV-101 in combination with probenecid. The increase in cash used in operations during Fiscal 2022 results from the preparation for and initiation and ongoing conduct of our PALISADE Phase 3 Program for PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD, including our PALISADE-1 and PALISADE-2 Phase 3 clinical trials and our PALISADE Long-term Safety Study, as well as other clinical trials of PH94B and preparations for additional clinical and nonclinical studies of our product candidates to be initiated at various points during 2022. Additionally, we have enhanced our internal capabilities with the addition of senior management and other personnel with significant industry expertise in disciplines critical to the development and commercialization of our product pipeline. In parallel with our clinical and regulatory initiatives, we are conducting customary and appropriate phase-timed pre-commercialization analyses, modeling, planning and awareness initiatives. Cash used in investing activities in both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2022 reflects the cost of laboratory analytical equipment and select manufacturing equipment acquired for use by our CMO in connection with the development and production of PH94B drug product and, in Fiscal 2022, laboratory equipment to be used in our internal development initiatives.
Net cash provided by financing activities in an aggregate amount of approximately $10.5 million during Fiscal 2022 is primarily the result of warrant exercises and our sale of common stock under the ATM, net of sales commissions and other expenses related to the ATM facility which are recorded as deferred offering costs. Net cash provided by financing activities in an aggregate amount of approximately $114.1 million during Fiscal 2021 primarily reflects the cash proceeds received by us from sales of our common stock and Series D Preferred stock pursuant to the December 2020 Public Offering as well as sales of our common stock pursuant to the August 2020 Public Offering, the LPC Agreement, exercises of outstanding warrants and from the Payroll Protection Program loan we received in April 2020, net of insurance premium financing note and financing lease payments. We voluntarily repaid the Payroll Protection Program loan and accrued interest in full in December 2020. We did not finance insurance premiums for policies renewed in February 2021 or May 2021 as we had in Fiscal 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than contractual obligations incurred in the normal course of business, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. Throughout Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, VistaStem had two inactive, wholly owned subsidiaries, Artemis Neuroscience, a Maryland corporation, and VistaStem Canada, Inc., an Ontario corporation. VistaStem Canada was dissolved in April 2022 and Artemis Neuroscience was dissolved in June 2022.