ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”," "Business" and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31. As used in this Form 10-K, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” or “VectoIQ” refer to VectoIQ Acquisition Corp. II.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 10, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and, after the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,320,925, which consisted of a fair value adjustment to warrant liabilities of $4,352,898, interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $122,968 offset by general and administrative expenses of $3,154,941 which includes legal expenses of $1,500,000.
For the period from August 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,802, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 11, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) of 34,500,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their overallotment option in the amount of 4,500,000 Units, at $10 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company consummated the sale, in a private placement, of 900,000 units (each, a “Private Placement Unit” and collectively, the “Private Placement Units”) to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit, generating total proceeds of $9,000,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $795,000. Net income of $1,320,925 was decreased by $4,352,898 for the change in fair value of warrant liabilities, $122,968 of interest earned on investments held in the trust account and increased by $687,798 related to offering costs attributable to warrant liabilities and $1,672,143 of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $345,000,000 which represents proceeds from the initial public offering deposited in the trust account and net cash provided by financing activities of $346,516,311 which consisted of the net proceeds from the sale of the class A Units of $346,599,311 offset by the repayment of borrowings of $83,000 pursuant to a promissory note from our sponsor.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in our trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Under the authorized shares method, each share is taxed at a graduated rate based on the number of authorized shares with a maximum aggregate tax of $200,000 per year. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the trust account will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash available to us of $733,875 held outside the trust account. We will use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the trust account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsors or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment.
If the estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to a Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because the Company becomes obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon consummation of a Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, the Company would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of a Business Combination. If the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination because it does not have sufficient funds available, the Company will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following a Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, the Company may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet its obligations.
The Company has until January 11, 2023, to consummate a Business Combination. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date and an extension not requested by the Sponsor, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Although the Company intends to consummate a Business Combination on or before January 11, 2023, it is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s plan is to complete a business combination or obtain an extension on or prior to January 11, 2023, however it is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination or obtain an extension by this time. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after January 11, 2023.