Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information,” and the audited financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (the “MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying audited financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
•Strategy and Plan of Operations. A summary of our strategy for growth and expansion moving forward.
•Description of Material Financial Line Items. a summary of the items making up our revenues, costs of revenues, and other material financial line items.
•Highlights. Highlights of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Results of Operations. an analysis of our financial results comparing the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows and discussion of our financial condition.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. A Summary of critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
Strategy and Plan of Operations
The Principal elements of our strategy include:
•Expand Feedstock Supply Volume. We intend to expand our feedstock supply volume by growing our collection and aggregation operations. We plan to increase the volume of feedstock we collect directly by developing new relationships with generators and working to displace incumbent collectors; increasing the number of collection personnel, vehicles, equipment, and geographical areas we serve; and acquiring collectors in new or existing territories. We intend to increase the volume of feedstock we aggregate from third-party collectors by expanding our existing relationships and developing new vendor relationships. We believe that our ability to acquire large feedstock volumes will help to cultivate new vendor relationships because collectors often prefer to work with a single, reliable customer rather than manage multiple relationships and the uncertainty of excess inventory.
•Broaden Existing Customer Relationships and Secure New Large Accounts. We intend to broaden our existing customer relationships by increasing sales of used motor oil and re-refined products to these accounts. In some cases, we may also seek to serve as our customers’ primary or exclusive supplier. We also believe that as we increase our supply of feedstock and re-refined products that we will secure larger customer accounts that require a partner who can consistently deliver high volumes.
•Re-Refine Higher Value End Products. We intend to develop, lease, or acquire technologies to re-refine our feedstock supply into higher-value end products. We believe that the expansion of our facilities and our technology, and investments in additional technologies, will enable us to upgrade feedstock into end products, such as lubricating base oil, that command higher market prices than the current re-refined products we produce.
•Pursue Selective Strategic Relationships or Acquisitions. We plan to grow market share by consolidating feedstock supply through partnering with or acquiring collection and aggregation assets. Such acquisitions and/or partnerships could increase our revenue and provide better control over the quality and quantity of feedstock available for resale and/or upgrading as well as providing additional locations for the implementation of TCEP, if we deem such commercially reasonable. In addition, we intend to pursue further vertical integration opportunities by acquiring complementary recycling and processing technologies where we can realize synergies by leveraging our customer and vendor relationships, infrastructure, and personnel, and by eliminating duplicative overhead costs.
Description of Material Financial Line Items
Revenues
We generate revenues from three existing operating segments as follows:
BLACK OIL - Revenues for our Black Oil segment are comprised primarily of product sales from our re-refineries and feedstock sales (used motor oil) which are purchased from generators of used motor oil such as oil change shops and garages, as well as a network of local and regional suppliers. Volumes are consolidated for efficient delivery and then sold to third-party re-refiners and fuel oil blenders for the export market. In addition, through used oil re-refining, we re-refine used oil into different commodity products. Through the operations at our Marrero, Louisiana facility, we produce a Vacuum Gas Oil (VGO) product from used oil re-refining which is then sold via barge to crude refineries to be utilized as an intermediate feedstock in the refining process, as well as to the marine fuels market.
Through the operations at our Columbus, Ohio facility, the ownership of 65% of which was transferred to Tensile in connection with the Heartland SPV (discussed above under “Part I” - “Item 1. Business” - “Prior Material Acquisitions and Transactions”), effective January 1, 2020, we produce a base oil finished product which is then sold via truck or rail car to end users for blending, packaging and marketing of lubricants.
Discontinued operations of Vertex include the Black Oil Segment, also referred to as the UMO Business, Refer to Note 19, "Discontinued Operations" in Notes to Financial Statements for additional information.
REFINING AND MARKETING - The Refining and Marketing segment generates revenues relating to the sales of finished products. The Refining and Marketing segment gathers hydrocarbon streams in the form of petroleum distillates, transmix and other chemical products that have become off-specification during the transportation or refining process. These feedstock streams are purchased from pipeline operators, refineries, chemical processing facilities and third-party providers, and then processed at a third-party facility under our direction. The end products are typically three distillate petroleum streams (gasoline blendstock, pygas and fuel oil cutterstock), which are sold to major oil companies or to large petroleum trading and blending companies. The end products are delivered by barge and truck to customers. Additionally, this segment includes the
wholesale distribution of gasoline, blended gasoline, and diesel for use as engine fuel to operate automobiles, trucks, locomotives, and construction equipment.
RECOVERY - The Recovery segment consists primarily of revenues generated from the sale of ferrous and non-ferrous recyclable Metal(s) products that are recovered from manufacturing and consumption. It also includes revenues generated from trading/marketing of Group III Base Oils through January 2021.
Our revenues are affected by changes in various commodity prices including crude oil, natural gas, #6 oil and metals.
Cost of Revenues
BLACK OIL - Cost of revenues for our Black Oil segment are comprised primarily of feedstock purchases from a network of providers. Other cost of revenues include processing costs, transportation costs, purchasing and receiving costs, analytical assessments, brokerage fees and commissions, and surveying and storage costs.
Discontinued operations of Vertex include the Black Oil Segment, also referred to as the UMO Business, Refer to Note 19, "Discontinued Operations" in Notes to Financial Statements for additional information.
REFINING AND MARKETING - The Refining and Marketing segment incurs cost of revenues relating to the purchase of gasoline, blended gasoline, diesel, feedstock, purchasing and receiving costs, and inspection and processing of the feedstock into gasoline blendstock, pygas and fuel oil cutter by a third party. Cost of revenues also includes broker’s fees, inspection and transportation costs.
RECOVERY - The Recovery segment incurs cost of revenues relating to the purchase of ferrous and non-ferrous recyclable Metal(s) products that are recovered from manufacturing and consumption. Cost of revenues also includes broker’s fees, inspection and transportation costs.
Our cost of revenues is affected by changes in various commodity indices, including crude oil, natural gas, #6 oil and metals. For example, if the price for crude oil increases, the cost of solvent additives used in the production of blended oil products, and fuel cost for transportation cost from third party providers will generally increase. Similarly, if the price of crude oil falls, these costs may also decline.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other employee-related benefits for executive, administrative, legal, financial and information technology personnel, as well as outsourced and professional services, rent, utilities, and related expenses at our headquarters, as well as certain taxes.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Our depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily related to the fixed assets and intangible assets acquired in connection with the Vertex Holdings, L.P. (formerly Vertex Energy, L.P.), a Texas limited partnership (“Holdings”), Omega Refining, LLC's (“Omega Refining”) and Warren Ohio Holdings Co., LLC, f/k/a Heartland Group Holdings, LLC (“Heartland”), Acadiana Recovery, LLC (“Acadiana”), Nickco Recycling, Inc. (“Nickco”), Ygriega Environmental Services, LLC (“Ygriega”), Specialty Environmental Services (“SES”) and Crystal Energy, LLC (“Crystal”) acquisitions.
Depreciation and amortization expense attributable to cost of revenues reflects the depreciation and amortization of the fixed assets at our refineries along with rolling stock at our collection branches.
Depreciation and amortization expense attributable to operating expenses reflects depreciation and amortization related to our corporate and administrative offices along with internet technology (IT) related items and intangibles.
Highlights
The continued operations of the Company primarily include the Refining and Marketing Segment and Recovery Segment. Our revenues and cost of revenues are significantly impacted by fluctuations in commodity prices; increases in commodity prices typically result in increases in revenue and cost of revenues.
Total revenues increased 146% to $116 million in 2021, compared with $47 million in 2020. Total cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increased 143% to $111 million in 2021 compared with $45.5 million in 2020. The main reason for the increase in the revenue and cost of sales was the addition of the Crystal business which we only had for the second half of 2020 and have now had the operations of for the full twelve months of 2021, in addition to higher commodity prices, which impacted our feedstock pricing, and increases in volumes throughout the business, due to the increase in overall economic activity following the initial downturns in activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic throughout 2020. The expansion and start-up of business activity at our Myrtle Grove location also had an impact on our overall costs. Gross profit increased 340% to $4.6 million in 2021 compared with $1 million in 2020, primarily due to our increased margins, which were caused by the increase in commodity prices. Our gross profit margin increased to 3.95% in 2021 from 2.21 % in 2020.
Total revenues increased 156% to $47 million in 2020, compared with $18.4 million in 2019. Total cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increased 169% to $45.5 million in 2020 compared with $17 million in 2019. The main reason for the increase was the addition of the Crystal business which we acquired in June 2020. Gross profit increased 10% to $1 million in 2020 compared with $0.9 million in 2019, while gross profit margin decreased to 2.21% in 2020 from 5.14% in 2019, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and decreased commodity prices in 2020 compared with in 2019. Due to the overall market slowdown in 2020, we experienced a reduction in feedstock availability in the market and less demand for our overall services.
Total selling, general and administrative expenses increased 118% to $17.7 million in 2021 compared with $8.1 million in 2020, due to increased business development costs, consulting and legal fees, which related the Refinery Purchase Agreement and Sale Agreement, together with bad debt, which related to the litigation described in greater detail under "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in Note 4 Concentrations, Significant Customers, Commitments and Contingencies".
We had loss on assets impairment of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was mainly due to the assets damaged in our Myrtle Grove facility triggered by Hurricane Ida in August 2021. Refer to "Part II” -“Item 2. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in "Note 5. Fixed Assets" for detailed information.
Total selling, general and administrative expenses increased 22% to $8 million in 2020 compared with $6.7 million in 2019, mainly due to increase of selling, general and administrative expenses related to Crystal, which was acquired in June 2020, increased personnel costs and a decrease in allocation of expenses as a result of the Heartland Share Purchase and related transactions completed in January 2020, which is described in greater detail under "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in Note 6 Share Purchase, Subscription Agreement and Acquisitions".
The total other expenses were $15.0 million in 2021, compared with $1.1 million of other income in 2020, mainly due to the increased derivative liabilities related to warrants granted in connection with the Series B and B1 convertible preferred stock and convertible note.
The net loss decreased 33% to $7.7 million in 2021 compared with $11.4 million in 2020, due to the net income from Black Oil Segment, which is included in discontinued operations. Net income from discontinued operations was $22.7 million in 2021, which increased $28.1 million compared to a $5.4 million loss in 2020. Discontinued operations of Vertex include the Black Oil Segment, also referred to as the UMO Business, Refer to Note 19, "Discontinued Operations" in Notes to Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Quarterly Operation Results for Continued Operations
During the second quarter of 2021, the Company initiated and began executing a strategic plan to sell its UMO Business. On June 29, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Sale Agreement” and the transactions contemplated therein, the “Sale Transaction” or the “Sale”) with Vertex Operating, Vertex LA, Vertex OH, CMT, H & H Oil, as sellers, and Safety-Kleen Systems, Inc., as purchaser (“Safety-Kleen”), dated as of June 28, 2021. On September 28, 2021, the shareholders approved the proposed sale of the Company’s portfolio of used motor oil collection and recycling assets to Safety-Kleen. The Company met all of the criteria to classify the UMO Business’s assets and liabilities as held for sale in the third quarter 2021. The Company has classified the assets, liabilities, and results of operations for this business as “Discontinued Operations” for all periods presented. Refer to Note 19, "Discontinued Operations" in the Notes to Financial Statements for additional information.
The continued operations primarily includes the Refining and Marketing Segment and Recovery Segment. The tables below represent the quarterly operation results for each quarter of the years ended on December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the Company as whole and each segment.
Results of Operations for the Four Quarters Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Four Quarters Ended December 31, 2020
(1) Distillates are finished fuel products such as gasoline and diesel fuels.
(2) Metals consist of recoverable ferrous and non-ferrous recyclable metals from manufacturing and consumption. Scrap metal can be recovered from pipes, barges, boats, building supplies, surplus equipment, tanks, and other items consisting of metal composition. These materials are segregated, processed, cut-up and sent back to a steel mill for re-purposing.
(3) Other re-refinery products include the sales of asphalt, condensate, recovered products, and other petroleum products.
Segment Performance
Our Black Oil segment includes (i) the business operations of MG SPV, in continued operations, which started operations at the end of 2020 and (ii) corporate selling, general and administrative expenses. In our Black Oil segment MG SPV generated revenues of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is derived from used oil collections. The cost of revenues increased $1.1 million to $1.9 million compared with $0.8 million in 2020, due to the increased cost of revenue and facility maintenance. During the year ended December 31, 2020, these revenues were $4,735 with cost of revenues of $0.8 million. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $8.6 million to $13.6 million in 2021, compared to $5 million in 2020, primarily resulting from business development expense and legal expenses, which related to the Refinery Purchase Agreement and Sale Agreement. We had loss on assets impairment of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was mainly due to the assets damaged in our Myrtle Grove facility triggered by Hurricane Ida in August 2021. Refer to “Part II” -“Item 2. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Note 5. Fixed Assets” for more detailed information.
Our Black Oil segment generated minimal revenue in 2020 and 2019 with cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increasing 21% to $0.8 million in 2020 compared with $0.67 million in 2019, mainly attributable to the increases in facility maintenance, personnel cost and other license and permit fees in order to get the operation ready at the end of 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization attributable to cost of revenue is due to the addition of vehicles and equipment in 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $0.7 million to $5 million in 2020, as compared to $4.3 million in 2019, due to a decrease in allocation of expenses as a result of the Heartland Share Purchase and related transactions completed in January 2020, which is described in greater detail under “Part II”-“Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Note 6, “Share Purchase, Subscription Agreement and Acquisitions”. The increase in depreciation and amortization attributable to operating expenses is due to the current period recognition of depreciation and amortization.
The below table shows the operating results of our Black Oil segment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Our Refining segment includes the business operations of our Refining and Marketing operations, as well as the operations of Crystal. Since the acquisition of Crystal in June 2020, we operate as a wholesale distributor of motor fuels which include gasoline, blended gasoline and diesel. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our Refining and Marketing revenue increased $57.4 million to $93.2 million in 2021 compared with $35.8 million in 2020, and cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increased $54.4 million to $89.6 million in 2021 compared with $35.2 million in 2020, and as a result, the gross profit margin increased to 4% in 2021 compared to 1% in 2020. The increase of revenue and gross profit is a result of having the operations of Crystal for the whole year and an increase in commodity prices.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our Refining and Marketing revenue increased $22.8 million to $35.8 million, compared with $13 million in 2019, and cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increased $24.6 million to $35.2 million, compared with $10.7 million in 2019. Revenue increase primarily is a result of Crystal’s operations, which were acquired in June 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 33% to $2.5 million in 2020, compared with $1.9 million in 2019, due to an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses associated with Crystal, acquired in June 2020, and increased personnel costs.
Overall volume for the Refining and Marketing segment increased 116% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Our fuel oil cutter volumes increased 37% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. Our pygas volumes were down 1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The volumes from our Crystal Energy business which we only had for half the year in 2020 and for the whole year in 2021, were up 97% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. We experienced a slight decrease in some of our volumes being received from third party facilities in 2021, compared to the prior 2020 period. Also during 2021, weather delays as a result of the hurricanes in the Gulf which caused some delays in operations for short periods of time.
Our Recovery segment generated revenues of $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, with cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) of $19.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, these revenues were $11.2 million, with cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) of $9.5 million. Revenue increased 95% and cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) increased 103%, and gross profit margin was 11% in 2021 and 13% in 2020, due primarily to increased volumes of steel processed in addition to a large increase in steel values during the period.
Our Recovery segment generated revenues of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, with cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) of $9.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, these revenues were $5.4 million with cost of revenues (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) of $5.6 million. Revenues were up substantially as a result of increased volumes of steel processed in addition to a large increase in steel values during the period. Gross profit increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, as a result of increased volumes attributable to our Recovery segment and margins related thereto, through our various facilities.
Our Recovery segment includes the business operations of Vertex Recovery Management, LLC, as well as our Group III base oil business. Vertex acted as Penthol’s exclusive agent to provide marketing, sales, and logistical duties of Group III base oil from the United Arab Emirates to the United States from June 2016 to January 2021. Vertex and Penthol are currently involved in ongoing litigation described in greater detail above under “Part II” -“Item 2. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Note 4. Concentrations, Significant Customers, Commitments and Contingencies”, under the heading “Litigation”. This segment periodically participates in project work that is not ongoing, thus we expect to see fluctuations in revenue and income before income taxes from period to period.
The Company purchases product/feedstock from third-party collectors as well as internally collected product using its fleet of trucks. Our long-term goal is to collect as much of our product/feedstock as possible as this helps to improve margins and ultimately net income of the Company. The more product/feedstock we can collect with our own fleet and displace third-party purchases improves the overall profitability of the Company through cost reductions, as our internally collected product/feedstock is generally cheaper than product/feedstock we have to purchase from third-parties. In general, the more product/feedstock we are required to acquire from third-parties, the lower our margins. While the breakdown between internally sourced and third-party sourced product/feedstock has no effect on revenue (which is a function of fluctuating product spreads), it does have an effect on cost of revenues, and therefore our profit before selling, general and administrative expenses. Specifically, a higher amount of third-party sourced product/feedstock generally results in increases to costs of revenues. Inventories are also affected to a limited extent by collection and production values - the more product we collect, the greater our inventories of product/feedstock, at least until such product/feedstock is processed into end-products. The inventory levels of our end-products are determined based on supply and demand, and how quickly such products can be transported, and not typically dependent on the amount of products/feedstock we source internally or externally.
The following table sets forth the high and low spot prices during 2021 for our key benchmarks.
The following table sets forth the high and low spot prices during 2020 for our key benchmarks.
The following table sets forth the high and low spot prices during 2019 for our key benchmarks.
We saw a steady increase in each of the benchmark commodities we track during 2021 and a steady decline in 2020 compared with 2019. During the first half of 2020, the commodity markets experienced a steady decline due to overall global economic conditions mostly related to the pandemic and the supply and demand for the products we track.
Our margins are a function of the difference between what we are able to pay for raw materials and the market prices for the range of products produced. The various petroleum products produced are typically a function of Crude Oil indices and are quoted on multiple exchanges such as the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”). These prices are determined by a global market and can be influenced by many factors, including but not limited to supply/demand, weather, politics, and global/regional inventory levels. As such, we cannot provide any assurances regarding results of operations for any future periods, as numerous factors outside of our control affect the prices paid for raw materials and the prices (for the most part keyed to the NYMEX) that can be charged for such products. Additionally, for the near term, results of operations will be subject to further uncertainty, as the global markets and exchanges, including the NYMEX, continue to experience volatility.
As our competitors bring new technologies to the marketplace, which will likely enable them to obtain higher values for the finished products created through their technologies from purchased black oil feedstock, we anticipate that they will have to pay more for feedstock due to the additional value received from their finished product (i.e., as their margins increase, they are able to increase the prices they are willing to pay for feedstock). If we are not able to continue to refine and improve our technologies and gain efficiencies in our technologies, we could be negatively impacted by the ability of our competitors to bring new processes to market which compete with our processes, as well as their ability to outbid us for feedstock supplies. Additionally, if we are forced to pay more for feedstock, our cash flows will be negatively impacted and our margins will decrease.
Other Income and Expenses
We had interest expense of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which increased $3.1 million compared with 2020, mainly due to accrued interest in November and December 2021 on our $155 million of principal amount at maturity convertible notes that were issued on November 1, 2021. Interest expense in 2020 decreased $0.1 million, compared with 2019, mainly due to a greater principal balance outstanding owed on our previously outstanding credit agreement and related loans and term loans made in 2020 resulting in less interest expense incurred.
We had other income of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was mainly due to the debt forgiveness of our $4.22 million Paycheck Protection Program loan (the “PPP loan”) during the second quarter of 2021. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $0.9 million, included the receipt of a payment of $907,500 related to the proceeds of an insurance settlement for a fire that had occurred at the used oil re-refining plant located in Churchill County, Nevada, which we previously rented during the year ended December 31, 2019.
We had a $15.7 million loss on change in value of derivative liability for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $11.4 million of such loss was in connection with certain warrants granted in June 2015 and May 2016 in connection with the sale of Series B and B1 preferred stock and $4.6 million was in connection with conversion options of Convertible Notes that were issued in November 2021, compared to a gain on change in the value of our derivative liability of $1.6 million in 2020 and loss on change in the value of our derivative liability of $0.5 million in 2019. This change was mainly due to the fluctuation in the market price of our common stock (and more specifically the significant increase and decrease in the market price of our common stock during the year 2021 and 2020, respectively), warrant exercises, and non-cash accounting adjustments in connection therewith. This resulted in a significant change in non-cash expense for the period, compared to the prior year’s period. More detailed information is included in “Part II” -“Item 2. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Note 14. Preferred Stock And Temporary Equity”.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The success of our current business operations has become more dependent on repairs, and maintenance to our facilities and our ability to make routine capital expenditures. We also must maintain relationships with feedstock suppliers and end product customers, and operate with efficient management of overhead costs. Through these relationships, we have historically been able to achieve volume discounts in the procurement of our feedstock, thereby increasing the margins of our segments' operations. The resulting operating cash flow is crucial to the viability and growth of our existing business lines.
With the pending closing of the acquisition of the Mobile Refinery, the Company has had discussions with multiple potential financing sources to compete the acquisition of the site, the expansion of the Renewable Diesel project planned thereat, as well as the day-to-day working capital facility, all of which will have a material impact on the overall Liquidity and Capital Resources of the Company going forward. See also the description of the Commitment Letter and planned Term Loan, discussed in greater detail above under “Item 1. Business” - “Recent Transactions” - “Indenture and Convertible Notes” and “Commitment Letter”.
Cash flows for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The analysis of cash flow activities below is combined for both continued and discontinued operations.
Operating activities provided net cash of $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to using cash of $0.7 million in 2020 and providing cash of $2.5 million in 2019. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from our operations through the year and the availability to borrow funds under our credit and loan facilities through November 1, 2021. The primary reason for the increase in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, were the fluctuation in market and commodity prices, which generated a profit from discontinued operations. The primary reasons for the decrease in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, were the fluctuation in market and commodity prices due to the pandemic that generated the increase in net loss, decrease in accounts receivable and increase in accounts payable, decrease in inventory, and decrease in accrued expenses.
Investing activities used cash of $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to using cash of $7.8 million in 2020, due mainly to the purchase of fixed assets and a $13.7 million deposit and investment related to the potential Mobile Refinery acquisition. Investing activities used cash of $7.8 million in 2020, an increase of $4.2 million from cash used in investing activities of $3.6 million in 2019, due mainly to the purchase of fixed assets, offset by the acquisition of Crystal in 2020.
Financing activities provided cash of $133.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to providing cash of $15.3 million and $2.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Financing activities in 2021 were comprised of note proceeds of approximately $143.8 million relating to the sale of the Senior Notes in November 2021 and proceeds from exercise of options and warrants of $6.9 million, offset by approximately $15.8 million used to pay down our long-term debt. Financing activities in 2020 were comprised of note proceeds of approximately $8.2 million ($4.2 million of proceeds from our PPP loan) and contributions from the noncontrolling interest of Tensile of $21.0 million, offset by approximately $10.4 million used to pay down our long-term debt, and $3.1 million of payments on our line of credit. Financing activities for 2019 were comprised of note proceeds of approximately $2.8 million and contributions from the noncontrolling interest of Tensile of $3.2 million and proceeds from issuance of common stock and warrants to Tensile of $2.2 million, offset by approximately $4.6 million used to pay down our long-term debt, and $0.6 million of payments on our line of credit.
We had working capital of $185.0 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to working capital of $3.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is mainly due to the restricted escrow account of more than $100 million in connection with the issuance of convertible notes and the entire assets held for sale of $84 million classified as current asset as of December 31, 2021. Our working capital includes the consolidated assets of certain subsidiaries which may only be used to settle the obligations of the respective subsidiaries. The consolidated liabilities of these subsidiaries are non-recourse to the general credit of our consolidated entity.
Our future operating cash flows will vary based on a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, including commodity prices, the cost of recovered oil, and the ability to turn our inventory. Other factors that have affected and are expected to continue to affect earnings and cash flow are transportation, processing, and storage costs. Over the long term, our operating cash flows will also be impacted by our ability to effectively manage our administrative and operating costs.
We continue to remain focused on maintaining a strong balance sheet and adequate liquidity. Over the near term, we plan to reduce, defer or cancel certain planned capital expenditures and reduce our overall cost structures commensurate with our expected level of activities. We believe that our cash on hand, internally generated cash flows and availability under the Revolving Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our operations and service our debt in the near term.
The Company financed insurance premiums through various financial institutions bearing interest rates from 4.00% to 4.90%. All such premium finance agreements have maturities of less than one year and have a balance of $2,375,071 at December 31, 2021.
Financing Arrangements
The terms of our $155 million principal at maturity of 6.25% senior unsecured notes due 2027, which were issued on November 1, 2021, are discussed further in “Part II” -“Item 2. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Note 9. Financing Arrangements” - “Indenture and Convertible Notes”.
The terms of our proposed $125 million first-lien senior secured term loan are discussed in greater detail above under “Item 1. Business” - “Recent Transactions” - “Commitment Letter”. We continue to monitor our debt instruments and evaluate opportunities where it may be beneficial to refinance or reallocate the portfolio.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants of all of our debt agreements, and we believe we will continue to meet such covenants.
Need for additional funding
Our re-refining business will require significant capital to design and construct any new facilities. The facility infrastructure would be an additional capitalized expenditure to these process costs and would depend on the location and site specifics of the facility.
Additionally, as part of our ongoing efforts to maintain a capital structure that is closely aligned with what we believe to be the potential of our business and goals for future growth, which is subject to cyclical changes in commodity prices, we will be exploring additional sources of external liquidity. The receptiveness of the capital markets to an offering of debt or equities cannot be assured and may be negatively impacted by, among other things, debt maturities, current market conditions, and potential stockholder dilution. The sale of additional securities, if undertaken by us and if accomplished, may result in dilution to our shareholders. However, such future financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
In addition to the above, we may also seek to acquire additional businesses or assets. In addition, the Company is considering selling assets if a more strategic acquisition presents itself. Finally, in the event we deem such transaction in our best interest, we may enter into a business combination or similar transaction in the future.
Consistent with our commitment to maximize value for all investors, we have previously launched an internal review of strategic alternatives for our business. These alternatives may include continuing as a public standalone organization, going private or selling certain assets to a strategic partner, subject to the review and approval of our Board of Directors.
The Mobile Acquisition is expected to close early in the second quarter of 2022.
There is currently volatile market for our common stock, and we anticipate that such market will be subject to wide fluctuations in response to several factors moving forward, including, but not limited to:
(1) actual or anticipated variations in our results of operations;
(2) the market for, and volatility in, the market for oil and gas;
(3) our ability or inability to generate new revenues; and
(4) the number of shares in our public float.
Furthermore, because our common stock is traded on The NASDAQ Capital Market, our stock price may be impacted by factors that are unrelated or disproportionate to our operating performance. These market fluctuations, as well as general economic, political and market conditions, such as recessions, interest rates or international currency fluctuations may adversely affect the market price of our common stock. Additionally, there could be extreme fluctuations in the price of our common stock.
We believe that our stock prices (bid, ask and closing prices) may not relate to the actual value of our company, and may not reflect the actual value of our common stock. Shareholders and potential investors in our common stock should exercise caution before making an investment in our common stock, and should not rely on the publicly quoted or traded stock prices in determining our common stock value, but should instead determine the value of our common stock based on the information contained in our public reports, industry information, and those business valuation methods commonly used to value private companies.
Contractual Obligations
The following table has been included to assist in understanding our debt and similar obligations, excludes convertible note, as of December 31, 2021 and our ability to meet such contractual obligations:
Our convertible note will mature on October 1, 2027, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted, interest is payable semiannually in arrears on April 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on April 1, 2022. The following table represents the interest obligation.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Management regularly evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, leases, variable interest entities, intangible assets, long-lived assets valuation, and legal matters. Actual results may differ from these estimates. “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Revenue Recognition.
We account for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Revenue is recognized when our performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customers are satisfied. Recognition occurs when the Company transfers control by completing the specified services at the point in time the customer benefits from the services performed or once our products are delivered. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for completing our performance obligations. Sales tax and other taxes we collect with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. In the case of contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative stand-alone selling prices of the various goods and/or services encompassed by the contract. We do not have any material significant payment terms, as payment is generally due within 30 days after the performance obligation has been satisfactorily completed. The Company has elected
the practical expedient to recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. In applying the guidance in Topic 606, there were no judgments or estimates made that the Company deems significant.
The nature of the Company's contracts give rise to certain types of variable consideration. The Company estimates the amount of variable consideration to include in the estimated transaction price based on historical experience, anticipated performance and its best judgment at the time and to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved.
From time to time, our fuel oil customers in our black oil segment may request that we store product at our facilities which they purchase from us. We recognize revenues for these “bill and hold” sales only if the following criteria have been met: (1) there is a substantive reason for the arrangement, (2) the product is segregated and identified as the customer's asset, (3) the product is ready for delivery to the customer, and (4) we cannot use the product or direct it to another customer.
Fair value of financial instruments
Under the Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (“FASB ASC”), we are permitted to elect to measure financial instruments and certain other items at fair value, with the change in fair value recorded in earnings. We elected not to measure any eligible items using the fair value option. Consistent with the Fair Value Measurement Topic of the FASB ASC, we implemented guidelines relating to the disclosure of our methodology for periodic measurement of our assets and liabilities recorded at fair market value.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A three-tier fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
•Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
•Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
•Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Our Level 1 assets primarily include our cash and cash equivalents. Valuations are obtained from readily available pricing sources for market transactions involving identical assets or liabilities. The carrying amounts of accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values due to the immediate or short-term maturities of these financial instruments.
Our Level 2 liabilities include our marked to market changes in the estimated value of our open derivative contracts held at the balance sheet date.
Our Level 3 liabilities include our marked to market changes in the estimated value of our derivative warrants issued in connection with our Series B Preferred Stock and Series B1 Preferred Stock, all of which have now been exercised or expired, and our outstanding Convertible Notes.
The Company estimates the fair values of the crude oil swaps and collars based on published forward commodity price curves for the underlying commodity as of the date of the estimate for which published forward pricing is readily available. The determination of the fair values incorporates various factors including the impact of the Company's non-performance risk and the credit standing of the counterparty involved in the Company's derivative contracts. In addition, the Company routinely monitors the creditworthiness of its counterparty.
Nonfinancial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include certain nonfinancial assets and liabilities as may be acquired in a business combination and thereby measured at fair value.
Impairment of long-lived assets
The Company evaluates the carrying value and recoverability of its long-lived assets when circumstances warrant such evaluation by applying the provisions of the FASB ASC regarding long-lived assets. It requires that long-lived assets be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable through the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets. Whenever any such impairment exists, an impairment loss will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value. The Company determined that $2.1 million long-lived asset impairment existed at December 31, 2021.
Derivative transactions.
All derivative instruments are recorded on the accompanying balance sheets at fair value. Derivative transactions are not designated as cash flow hedges under FASB ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedges. Accordingly, these commodity derivative contracts are marked-to-market and any changes in the estimated value of commodity derivative contracts held at the balance sheet date are recognized in the accompanying statements of operations through increases (losses) or decreases (gains) to cost of goods sold. The derivative assets or liabilities are classified as either current or noncurrent assets or liabilities based on their anticipated settlement date. The Company nets derivative assets and liabilities for counterparties where it has a legal right of offset.
The Company, in accordance with ASC 815-40-25 and ASC 815-10-15 Derivatives and Hedging and ASC 480-10-25 Liabilities-Distinguishing from Equity, convertible preferred shares are accounted for net, outside of shareholders' equity and warrants are accounted for as liabilities at their fair value during periods where they can be net cash settled in case of a change in control transaction. The warrants are accounted for as a liability at their fair value at each reporting period. The value of the derivative warrant liability will be re-measured at each reporting period with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. To derive an estimate of the fair value of these warrants, a Dynamic Black Scholes model is utilized that computes the impact of a possible change in control transaction upon the exercise of the warrant shares. This process relies upon inputs such as shares outstanding, estimated stock prices, strike price, term and volatility assumptions to dynamically adjust the payoff of the warrants in the presence of the dilution effect.
In accordance with ASC 815-40-25 and ASC 815-10-15, Derivatives and Hedging, the Convertible Notes are indexed to the Company's stock, and cash settlement requires the conversion feature to be classified as a derivative liability at fair value and to be bifurcated from the convertible notes. To derive an estimate of the fair value of these cash settlement, a Dynamic Black Scholes model is utilized which computes the derivative liability of the cash settlement. This process relies upon inputs such as our quoted stock prices, strike price and volatility assumptions to dynamically adjust the payoff of the settlement.
Preferred Stock Classification.
A mandatorily redeemable financial instrument shall be classified as a liability unless the redemption is required to occur only upon the liquidation or termination of the reporting entity. A financial instrument issued in the form of shares is mandatorily redeemable if it embodies an unconditional obligation requiring the issuer to redeem the instrument by transferring its assets at a specified or determinable date (or dates) or upon an event certain to occur. A financial instrument that embodies a conditional obligation to redeem the instrument by transferring assets upon an event not certain to occur becomes mandatorily redeemable-and, therefore, becomes a liability-if that event occurs, the condition is resolved, or the event becomes certain to occur. The Series B Preferred Stock and Series B1 Preferred Stock required the Company to redeem such preferred stock on the fifth anniversary of the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock and Series B1 Preferred Stock, subject to certain contractual and legal requirements. SEC reporting requirements provide that any possible redemption outside of the control of the Company requires the preferred stock to be classified outside of permanent equity. As of December 31, 2021, all Series B and B1 Preferred Stock were converted to common stock shares.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interest
As more fully described in "Part II” -“Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in "Note 6. Share Purchase and Subscription Agreements and Acquisition", the Company is party to put/call option agreements with the holder of MG SPV’s and Heartland SPV's non-controlling interests. The put options permit MG SPV's and Heartland SPV's non-controlling interest holders, at any time on or after the earlier of (a) the fifth anniversary of the applicable closing date of such issuances and (ii) the occurrence of certain triggering events (an “MG Redemption” and "Heartland Redemption", as applicable) to require MG SPV and Heartland SPV to redeem the non-controlling interest from the
holder of such interest. Applicable accounting guidance requires an equity instrument that is redeemable for cash or other assets to be classified outside of permanent equity if it is redeemable (a) at a fixed or determinable price on a fixed or determinable date, (b) at the option of the holder, or (c) upon the occurrence of an event that is not solely within the control of the issuer. Based on this guidance, the Company has classified the MG SPV and Heartland SPV non-controlling interests between the liabilities and equity sections of the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. If an equity instrument subject to the guidance is currently redeemable, the instrument is adjusted to its maximum redemption amount at the balance sheet date. If the equity instrument subject to the guidance is not currently redeemable but it is probable that the equity instrument will become redeemable (for example, when the redemption depends solely on the passage of time), the guidance permits either of the following measurement methods: (a) accrete changes in the redemption value over the period from the date of issuance (or from the date that it becomes probable that the instrument will become redeemable, if later) to the earliest redemption date of the instrument using an appropriate methodology, or (b) recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying amount of the instrument to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. The amount presented in temporary equity should be no less than the initial amount reported in temporary equity for the instrument. Because the MG SPV and Heartland SPV equity instruments will become redeemable solely based on the passage of time, the Company determined that it is probable that the MG SPV and Heartland SPV equity instruments will become redeemable. The Company has elected to apply the second of the two measurement options described above. An adjustment to the carrying amount of a non-controlling interest from the application of the above guidance does not impact net loss in the consolidated financial statements. Rather, such adjustments are treated as equity transactions.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02 (ASU 2016-02), Leases (Topic 842). ASU 2016-02 requires companies to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclose key information about leasing arrangements. We adopted ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) effective January 1, 2019 and elected certain practical expedients which permit us to not reassess whether existing contracts are or contain leases, to not reassess the lease classification of any existing leases, to not reassess initial direct costs for any existing leases, and to not separate lease and nonlease components for all classes of underlying assets. We also made an accounting policy election to keep leases with an initial term of 12 months or less off of the balance sheet for all classes of underlying assets. Additional information and disclosures required by this new standard are contained in "Part II” -“Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in "Note 18. Leases".
Variable Interest Entities
The Company has investments in certain legal entities in which equity investors do not have (1) sufficient equity at risk for the legal entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support, (2) as a group, (the holders of the equity investment at risk), do not have either the power, through voting or similar rights, to direct the activities of the legal entity that most significantly impacts the entity’s economic performance, or (3) the obligation to absorb the expected losses of the legal entity or the right to receive expected residual returns of the legal entity. These certain legal entities are referred to as “variable interest entities” or “VIEs.”
The Company consolidates the results of any such entity in which it determines that it has a controlling financial interest. The Company has a “controlling financial interest” in such an entity if the Company has both the power to direct the activities that most significantly affect the VIE’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb the losses of, or right to receive benefits from, the VIE that could be potentially significant to the VIE. On a quarterly basis, the Company reassesses whether it has a controlling financial interest in any investments it has in these certain legal entities.