Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are based on our current expectations and reflect our plans, estimates and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors,” our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional information.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing a pipeline of novel small molecule product candidates to address a range of inflammatory diseases with significant unmet need. We leverage the substantial experience of our team in immunology to identify important new targets and to develop differentiated therapeutics against these targets. Our clinical product candidates address therapeutic indications with substantial commercial opportunity for novel small molecules. Our lead clinical product candidate, VTX958, is a selective allosteric tyrosine kinase type 2 (TYK2) inhibitor currently in a Phase 1 multiple ascending dose trial. We expect to initiate Phase 2 trials in the second half of 2022 with VTX958 for one or more therapeutic indications, such as for psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease, among other potential indications for VTX958. In addition, we are developing VTX002, a Sphingosine 1 phosphate receptor (S1P1R) modulator in Phase 2 development for ulcerative colitis. We initiated a Phase 2 trial with VTX002 in the fourth quarter of 2021 in patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis. Our third product candidate, VTX2735, a peripheral-targeted NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome inhibitor is currently in a Phase 1 trial. In addition to VTX2735, we nominated VTX3232, our lead CNS-penetrant NLRP3 inhibitor, as a clinical development candidate in the fourth quarter of 2021 and plan to submit an Investigational New Drug (“IND”) application for this program in the fourth quarter of 2022 with Phase 1 studies planned for the first quarter of 2023. See Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about our business and drug product candidates.
We were incorporated in November 2018. To date, we have focused primarily on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital and identifying our product candidates and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials. We have funded our operations primarily through debt and equity financings. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We have incurred significant operating losses since our inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses were $83.7 million and $28.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $117.8 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially as we conduct our ongoing and planned clinical trials, continue our research and development activities and conduct preclinical studies, and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates, as well as hire additional personnel, protect our intellectual property and incur additional costs associated with being a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on a variety of factors, including the timing and scope of our preclinical studies and clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies. If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed, we could be forced to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product candidate development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Initial Public Offering
On October 25, 2021, we completed an initial public offering of our common stock in which we issued an aggregate of 10,893,554 shares of our common stock (inclusive of 1,420,898 shares pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option) at a price of $16.00 per share. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $158.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.2 million and other offering expenses of $3.3 million.
Asset Acquisitions
In connection with our Series A and Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock financing, in February 2021, we acquired all of the outstanding equity and convertible debt interests of Oppilan Pharma Ltd. (Oppilan) and Zomagen Biosciences Ltd. (Zomagen) which qualified as asset acquisitions for accounting purposes (the Asset Acquisitions). Certain investors or Oppilan and Zomagen were also investors of the Company and are considered related parties. Details of the Asset Acquisitions are as follows:
•Pursuant to the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement (the Oppilan Purchase Agreement), upon closing, we issued to the shareholders of Oppilan 360,854 shares of our common stock valued at $3.06 per share, 4,049,143 shares of our Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock valued at $3.06 per share and options to purchase 75,955 shares of our common stock valued at a weighted average fair value of $1.86 per share in exchange for all of the outstanding equity interests of Oppilan. Oppilan’s lead candidate, VTX002, a modulator of the S1P receptor that has a unique pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile and has completed Phase 1 clinical testing. A Phase 2 clinical trial of VTX002 for the treatment of moderate-to-severe ulcerative colitis was initiated in the fourth quarter of 2021.
•Pursuant to the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement (the Zomagen Purchase Agreement), upon closing, we issued to the shareholders of Zomagen 457,944 shares of our common stock valued at $3.06 per share, 2,003,768 shares of our Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock valued at $3.06 per share and options to purchase 30,483 shares of our common stock valued at a weighted average fair value of $2.87 per share in exchange for all of the outstanding equity interests of Zomagen. Zomagen’s lead candidate, VTX2735, is a NLRP3 inhibitor currently in a Phase 1 trial.
The fair value of total cost of the Asset Acquisitions was $14.0 million and $7.8 million for Oppilan and Zomagen, respectively. The excess of the cost of acquisition over net assets acquired was $12.8 million and $8.9 million for Oppilan and Zomagen, respectively. We determined that there is no alternative future use of the in-process research and development (IPR&D) assets acquired from either acquisition. In accordance with the accounting for Asset Acquisitions, the excess of the cost of acquisition over net assets acquired was expensed as IPR&D at the respective acquisition date. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded the excess IPR&D costs of $21.7 million in research and development costs within our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Convertible Preferred Stock
On February 26, 2021, the Company received gross proceeds of $57.3 million in cash in connection with its Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series A Preferred Stock”) financing from various related party investors. The Series A purchase agreement allowed the original investors to purchase an additional 6,250,504 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Shares (the “Additional Shares”), on the same terms and conditions as the original issuance at the original issue price of $9.12 per share (the “Second Closing” or “Tranche Liability”) upon the election of at least a majority of the then outstanding shares. On June 10, 2021, the Series A Preferred Stock investors exercised their right to purchase the Additional Shares, and the Company received an additional $57.0 million in proceeds in the second closing of the Series A Preferred Stock financing.
On February 26, 2021, the Company issued 4,049,143 and 2,003,768 shares of Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock to the former equity and debt security holders of Oppilan and Zomagen, respectively. Additionally, on February 26, 2021, the Company issued 12,713,585 shares of Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock upon the conversion of the convertible promissory notes and convertible SAFE notes with a principal amount outstanding of $9.8 million.
On September 9, 2021, the Company received gross proceeds of $51.0 million in cash in connection with its Series B Convertible Preferred Stock financing from various related party investors.
In connection with the closing of the initial public offering, all 12.5 million outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock, 18.8 million outstanding shares of Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series A-1 Preferred Stock”) and 4.0 million shares of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series B Preferred Stock”) converted into an aggregate of 35.3 million shares of common stock.
COVID-19
The global COVID-19 pandemic and the related variant continues to rapidly evolve. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and clinical development timelines and plans remains uncertain, and will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and its impact on our operations and those of our CROs, third-party manufacturers and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its potential impact on regulatory authorities and our ability to attract and retain key scientific and management personnel. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change.
We are conducting business as usual, with necessary or advisable modifications, and have modified our business practices, including but not limited to, modifying employee travel and allowing office employees to work remotely. We will continue to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation related to COVID-19. We may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. At this point, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our business, operations and clinical development timelines and plans, including the resulting impact on our expenditures and capital needs, remains uncertain and is subject to change.
Business Update Regarding Military Action in Ukraine
We are currently conducting a Phase 2 trial of VTX002 in patients with moderate-to severe UC in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine. As a result of the military conflict in Ukraine, some clinical trial site operations in Ukraine have been shut down, thus impacting our ongoing clinical trial patients at affected sites. Our operations at additional sites in the region could also be impacted in the future. Our ability to conduct clinical trials in Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and elsewhere in the region may also become restricted under applicable sanctions laws. All of the foregoing creates uncertainty around our ability to project the timing for enrollment of our Phase 2 trial for VTX002 and could impede the execution of such trial and require us to expand clinical site operations in other countries.
We have no way to predict the progress or outcome of the situation, as the conflict and government reactions are rapidly developing and beyond our control. Prolonged unrest, military activities, or broad-based sanctions, should they be implemented, could have a material adverse effect on our operations and business outlook.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
We have not generated any revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future. We may also generate revenues in the future from payments or royalties associated with potential partnering or collaboration agreements, but have no plans to enter into such arrangements at this time.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred while performing research and development activities to discover and develop our product candidates. Research and development costs include salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation charges for those individuals involved in our ongoing research and development efforts; as well as fees paid to consultants and third party research organizations, and the costs of laboratory supplies and development compound materials. Costs incurred in our research and development efforts are expensed as incurred.
We typically use our employee, consultant and infrastructure resources across our research and development programs. We track outsourced development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, other internal costs or external consultant costs to specific product candidates or development programs. These costs are included in unallocated research and development expenses. The following table summarizes research and development expenses by product candidate or development program (in thousands):
We did not separately categorize costs related to VTX3232 in the table above due to the early-stage development status of the drug product candidate during the periods presented.
Substantially all of our research and development expenses to date have been incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We expect our research and development expenses to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as we advance an increased number of our product candidates through clinical development, including the conduct of our ongoing and planned clinical trials. The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of any product candidates and to obtain regulatory approval for one or more of these product candidates.
The costs of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project owing to, but not limited to, the following:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of sites included in the clinical trials;
•the countries in which the clinical trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients that participate in the clinical trials and the drop-out or discontinuation rates of such patients;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the cost of comparative agents used in clinical trials;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient follow-up; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
We do not expect any of our product candidates to be commercially available for the next several years, if ever.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are related to finance, human resources, legal and patent costs our other administrative activities. These expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expenses, outside services, legal expenses, management fees and other general and administrative costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase for the foreseeable future as we expand operations, increase our headcount to support our continued research and development activities and operate as a public reporting company (including increased fees for outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, as well as increased directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums). We also expect to incur increased costs to comply with stock exchange listing and SEC requirements, corporate governance, internal controls, investor relations and disclosure and similar requirements applicable to public companies. Additionally, if and when we believe that a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we expect to incur significant increases in our general and administrative expenses related to the sales and marketing of any approved product candidate.
Interest Expense - Related Parties
Interest expense consists of interest on our convertible notes that converted in February 2021 in connection with the closing of our Series A and Series A-1 Preferred Stock financing.
Increase in Fair Value of Change of Control Derivative Liability - Related Parties
We issued convertible promissory notes in 2019 and 2020. The notes included a change of control feature for which we recorded a liability measured at fair value. Until their conversion into Series A-1 Preferred Stock in February 2021, we adjusted the carrying value of our change in control feature to its estimated fair value at each reporting date, with the increases in fair value of the change of control feature recorded in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We estimated the fair value of our change of control feature using a combination of probability analysis and Monte Carlo simulation methodology. Probabilities were used to establish a distribution of time to a financing or change of control and Monte Carlo simulation was used to forecast future equity values at the time of either event, which then were used to estimate the future values of the notes upon either event. The key inputs to the Monte Carlo simulation included inputs including the common stock price, volatility of common stock, the risk-free interest rate and the probability of conversion into common shares at the conversion rate in the event of a change in control or major transaction (e.g., liquidity). Fair value measurements are highly sensitive to changes in these inputs and significant changes could have resulted in significantly higher or lower fair value and resulting expense or gain.
Increase in Fair Value of Convertible SAFE Notes - Related Parties
We issued SAFEs in 2019 and 2020 which we accounted for at fair value. Until their conversion into Series A-1 Preferred Stock in February 2021, we adjusted the carrying value of our SAFEs to their estimated fair value at each reporting date, with the increases in fair value of the SAFEs recorded in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We estimated the fair value of our SAFEs using a combination of probability analysis and Monte Carlo simulation methodology. Probabilities were used to establish a distribution of time to a financing or change of control and Monte Carlo simulation was used to forecast future equity values at the time of either event, which then were used to estimate the future values of the notes upon conversion or payout upon either event. The key inputs to the Monte Carlo simulation included inputs including the common stock price, volatility of common stock, the risk-free interest rate and the probability of conversion into common shares at the conversion rate in the event of a change in control or major transaction (e.g., liquidity). The SAFEs were initially recorded at an amount equal to the value of consideration received.
Increase in Fair Value of Series A Tranche Liability - Related Parties
On February 26, 2021, we issued 6,283,401 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock for gross proceeds of $57.3 million at the original issue price of $9.12 per share. The Series A purchase agreement allowed the original investors to purchase an additional 6,250,504 shares of the Additional Shares on the same terms and conditions as the original issuance at the original issuance price of $9.12 per share. In addition, we were obligated to issue 507,133 shares of common stock to a Series A investor if such investor participated in the second tranche. We concluded that these rights or obligations of the investors to participate in the second tranche of the Series A Preferred Stock met the definition of a freestanding instrument that was required to be recorded as a liability at fair value (“Series A tranche liability”). Given the common shares were linked to the second tranche, they were also considered a component of the Tranche Liability. On June 10, 2021, the investors purchased an additional 6,250,504 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, on the same terms and conditions as the original issuance for gross proceeds of $57.0 million in a second closing. Until the conversion of our Series A tranche liability into Series A Preferred Stock on June 10, 2021, we adjusted the carrying value of our Series A tranche liability to its estimated fair value at each reporting date, with the increases in fair value of the Series A tranche liability recorded as an increase in fair value of our Series A tranche liability in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We estimated the Series A tranche liability using a combination of probability analysis and Monte Carlo simulation methodology. Probabilities were used to establish a distribution of time to a financing or change of control and Monte Carlo simulation was used to forecast future equity values at the time of either event, which then were used to estimate the future values of the notes upon conversion or payout upon either event. The key inputs to the Monte Carlo simulation included inputs including the common stock
price, volatility of common stock, the risk-free interest rate and the probability of conversion into common shares at the conversion rate in the event of a change in control or major transaction (e.g., liquidity).
Results of Operations
The presentation of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflect the financial results of Ventyx Biosciences, Inc., and the financial results of our two acquired subsidiaries, Oppilan and Zomagen, from the acquisition date to December 31, 2021, on a consolidated basis.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses were $58.5 million and $6.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $52.1 million was due primarily to $21.7 million of IPR&D expenses associated with the acquisitions of Oppilan and Zomagen (related to there being no alternative future use of the IPR&D assets acquired), and increases in costs associated with the Phase 1 trial for VTX958 of $7.9 million, compensation related expenses of $3.4 million, stock-based compensation expense of $0.8 million and consultant fees of $0.6 million. The remaining increase is attributable to increased expenses from the operations of Oppilan and Zomagen following their acquisition. The increased expenses from the operations of Oppilan were attributable to costs associated with the Phase 2 trial for VTX002 of $10.9 million. The increased expenses from the operations of Zomagen were primarily attributable to costs associated with the Phase 1 trial for VTX2735 of $3.3 million and drug candidate discovery costs of $2.8 million.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses were $8.7 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $8.0 million was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation and professional service fees. The remaining increase is attributable to increased expenses from the operations of Oppilan and Zomagen following their acquisition.
Other Expense
Other expenses were $16.6 million and $21.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $4.5 million was due primarily to a decrease in the change in fair value of the related party notes and the associated derivative, offset by an increase in the change in fair value of the Series A tranche liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From inception through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of $164.2 million of convertible preferred stock, net of offering costs, to outside investors and related parties and $10.3 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible notes and SAFEs issued to related parties. Additionally, in October 2021 through our initial public offering (IPO), we received net proceeds of approximately $158.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, from the sale of our shares of common stock in the IPO. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $286.7 million.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Future Funding Requirements
To date, we have generated no revenue and do not expect to generate revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates and we do not know when, or if, this will occur. In addition, we expect our expenses to significantly increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Moreover, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. We expect that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•continue research and development, including preclinical and clinical development of our existing product candidates;
•seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
•seek to discover and develop additional product candidates;
•establish a commercialization infrastructure and scale up our manufacturing and distribution capabilities to commercialize any of our product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•seek to comply with regulatory standards and laws;
•maintain, leverage and expand our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire clinical, manufacturing, scientific and other personnel to support our product candidates;
•development and future commercialization efforts;
•add personnel, financial and management information systems and personnel; and
•incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company.
Based upon our current operating plan, we expect that the net proceeds from our IPO, together with our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditures requirements into the first half of 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
The Company enters into contracts in the normal course of business with various third-party consultants, contract research organizations ("CRO") and contract manufacturing organizations ("CMO") for preclinical research, clinical trials and manufacturing
activities. These contracts generally provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist of cancellation fees and payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. Actual expenses associated with these arrangements may be higher or lower than anticipated due to various factors, including progress of our development candidates, enrollment in ongoing clinical trials, which may be competitive and challenging and results from our ongoing and planned clinical trials.
Material short-term liquidity needs relate to $0.4 million related to future minimum rental payments. Material long-term liquidity needs pertaining to our operating leases on an undiscounted basis is approximately $1.3 million with our latest minimum rental payment due in June 2026. Currently, we have no short-term or long-term purchase commitments.
Our capital expenditures to date have been immaterial and we do not expect to incur significant costs related to capital expenditures in the short or long-term.
The successful development of any product candidate is highly uncertain. Due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, if approved, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the development of our product candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, preclinical and clinical development and obtaining any regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•the costs of manufacturing, distributing and processing our product candidates;
•the number and characteristics of any other product candidates we develop or acquire;
•the degree and rate of market acceptance of any approved products;
•the emergence, approval, availability, perceived advantages, relative cost, relative safety and relative efficacy of other products or treatments;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•the costs associated with being a public company;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing intellectual property claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, any approved products; and
•any product liability or other lawsuits related to our product candidates.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity, equity-linked and debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and/or licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical partners, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
We have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $286.7 million.
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $38.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was primarily due to our net loss of $83.7 million offset by $41.1 million for noncash items and a net increase of $4.0 million in operating assets and liabilities. The noncash items included $21.7 million for acquired in-process research and development expense, $16.6 million due to the change in the fair value of related party notes, the associated derivative, and the Series A tranche liability, and $2.7 million from stock-based compensation expense. The $4.0 million change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to increases in accrued expenses of $6.0 million and accounts payable of $2.4 million, offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $4.4 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to our net loss of $28.2 million offset by $21.2 million for noncash items and a $0.8 million increase in operating assets and liabilities. The noncash items were comprised of $20.8 million pertaining to the change in the fair value of related party notes and the associated derivative and $0.4 million from related party interest expense. The change in operating assets and liabilities primarily related to increases in accounts payable of $0.6 million and accrued expenses of $0.2 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $214.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the purchase of $232.5 million of investments in available-for-sale marketable securities, partially offset by $16.5 million of proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale marketable securities and $1.9 million of net cash assumed in connection with the acquisition of Oppilan and Zomagen. We had no cash flows from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $323.6 million and $6.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to $164.2 million of proceeds from the issuance of our Series A and Series B Preferred Stock net of offering costs, $158.8 million of proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in connection with our IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses and $0.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of SAFEs. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to net proceeds from the issuance of SAFEs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accruals for research and development expenses, stock-based compensation and fair value measurements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making
judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Acquisitions
We account for acquisitions of an asset or group of similar identifiable assets that do not meet the definition of a business as asset acquisitions. Intangible assets acquired in an asset acquisition for use in research and development activities which have no alternative future use are expensed as in-process research and development (IPR&D) on the acquisition date. In connection with the acquisitions of Oppilan and Zomagen as described above, we considered the accounting treatment for the acquisitions in accordance with GAAP. We apply judgment when concluding if our acquisitions meet the definition of a business in accordance with GAAP and substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired are concentrated in a group of similar assets. We determined that substantially all of the fair value of the net assets acquired of Oppilan and Zomagen were concentrated in a group of similar assets. As a result, the transactions were accounted for as an asset acquisition and as such, no goodwill was recorded. The excess of the cost of the acquisitions over the net assets acquired was classified as IPR&D assets and expensed at the acquisition date as we determined there was no alternative future use.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each consolidated balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each consolidated balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expenses when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense represents the cost of the grant date fair value of equity awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. We estimate the fair value of equity awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize forfeitures as they occur. Estimating the fair value of equity awards as of the grant date using valuation models, such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model, is affected by assumptions regarding a number of variables, including the risk-free interest rate, the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of stock options, the expected dividend yield and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and
generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted, if any, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock and our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock at the time of the grant of stock options and restricted stock awards by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including:
•valuations of our common stock performed with the assistance of independent third-party valuation specialists;
•our stage of development and business strategy, including the status of research and development efforts of our platforms, programs and product candidates, and the material risks related to our business and industry;
•our results of operations and financial position, including our levels of available capital resources;
•the valuation of publicly traded companies in the life sciences and biotechnology sectors, as well as recently completed mergers and acquisitions of peer companies;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock as a private company;
•the prices of our convertible preferred stock sold to investors in arm’s length transactions and the rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our common stock, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions;
•trends and developments in our industry; and
•external market conditions affecting the life sciences and biotechnology industry sectors.
Prior to our IPO, determinations of the fair value of our common stock includes valuations prepared by an independent third-party valuation specialist using methodologies, approaches and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting Valuation Guide: Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the Practice Aid). We estimated the enterprise value of our business using a market approach. In accordance with the Practice Aid, we considered the various methods for allocating the enterprise value across our classes and series of capital stock to determine the fair value of our common stock at each valuation date. Based on our stage of development and other relevant factors, we concluded that the Option Pricing Method (OPM) was most appropriate for the valuation of our common stock performed by an independent third-party valuation specialist.
In February 2021, as a result of our Series A and Series A-1 Convertible Preferred Stock financing, we updated our market approach to include the back-solve method that assigns an implied enterprise value based on the most recent round of funding or investment and allows for the incorporation of the implied future benefits and risks of the investment decision assigned by an outside investor. In consideration of the IPO, we allocated enterprise value using a hybrid method of the probability weighted expected return method (PWERM), whereby the enterprise value in the IPO scenario is allocated to each class of shares using the fully-diluted shares outstanding and whereby the enterprise value in the non-IPO scenario is allocated using an OPM to reflect the full distribution of possible non-IPO outcomes. The hybrid method is useful when certain discrete future outcomes can be predicted, but also accounts for uncertainty regarding the timing or likelihood of specific alternative exit events.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Since our IPO in October 2021, the fair value of our common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as quoted on the date of grant on the Nasdaq Global Select Market (Nasdaq).
Other Company Information
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (“JOBS Act”)
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act, and we may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable to public companies. We have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards; and as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. The JOBS Act also exempts us from having to provide an auditor attestation of internal control over financial reporting under Sarbanes-Oxley Act Section 404(b).
We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest to occur of (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which our annual gross revenue is $1.07 billion or more, (2) the last day of 2026, (3) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter; and (4) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during any three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” because the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of our initial public offering is less than $700 million as of June 30, 2021, and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company in any given year if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million as of June 30 in the most recently completed fiscal year or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million as of June 30 in the most recently completed fiscal year. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited consolidated financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recent accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial positions, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.