Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes. The MD&A is intended to assist in understanding our financial condition and results of operations. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated due to various factors discussed under “Risk Factors,” “Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this 2021 Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading provider of experiential leisure travel and live events and marketing experiences company with operations in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, continental Europe, the United Arab Emirates, and Iceland. We are committed to providing unforgettable experiences to our clients and guests. We operate through two reportable business segments: Pursuit and GES.
Impact of COVID-19
Starting in mid-March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant and negative impact on our operations and financial performance, with severe disruptions in live event and tourism activity. In response, we implemented aggressive cost reduction measures to preserve cash, including furloughs, layoffs, mandatory unpaid time off or salary reductions for all employees, and the reduction of discretionary spending. We also accelerated our transformation and streamlining efforts at GES to significantly reduce costs and create a lower and more flexible cost structure focused on servicing GES’ more profitable market segments. In 2020, GES exited 21 leased facilities across its warehouse and office network and sold its San Diego area production warehouse. We also suspended future common stock dividend payments and share repurchases, and we availed ourselves of governmental assistance programs for wages and other expense relief. Additionally, in May and August 2020, we obtained waivers of the financial covenants under our then $450 million revolving credit facility (the “2018 Credit Facility”), which we subsequently refinanced in July 2021 as discussed below, and we secured additional capital to strengthen our liquidity position by entering into an investment agreement with funds managed by private equity firm Crestview Partners who made an investment of $135 million, offset in part by $9.2 million in fees, in newly issued perpetual convertible preferred stock. Refer to Note 15 - Common and Preferred Stock of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further information.
During 2021, we continued to preserve cash and closely managed our costs as pandemic-related restrictions slowly eased. GES continued to reduce costs as part of its transformation and streamlining efforts. In 2021, GES sold its Orlando area production warehouse. GES continues to evaluate its physical presence and look for additional opportunities to improve its cost structure. In connection with COVID-19 vaccination programs, we began to see signs of recovery in the travel and hospitality and live event sectors in mid-2021 as people started to feel more comfortable traveling and gathering in larger groups. Pursuit’s operations in the United States experienced strong visitation primarily from domestic travelers, while tourism in Canada and Iceland remained constrained by border closures and travel restrictions. Canada reopened its border with the United States in early August 2021 to fully vaccinated travelers and to travelers from other countries beginning in September 2021, which accelerated short-term bookings from travelers to our Pursuit operations in Canada. The live event markets also began to re-open in 2021 with smaller scale live events starting to take place during the first half of the year. During the second half of 2021, we began to see an acceleration in the recovery of in-person trade shows as event organizers began to schedule larger-scale face-to-face live events. However, as variants of COVID-19, including the predominant Delta and Omicron variants, became more widespread, we saw some cancellations of smaller events during the fourth quarter of 2021. For larger-scale in-person events that took place, the overall attendance was lower than pre-pandemic levels.
Effective July 30, 2021, we refinanced our 2018 Credit Facility, which was scheduled to mature on October 24, 2023, with the new $500 million senior secured credit facility (the “2021 Credit Facility”). The 2021 Credit Facility provides for a $400 million term loan with a maturity date of July 30, 2028 (“Term Loan B”) and a $100 million revolving credit facility with a maturity date of July 30, 2026. The $400 million in Term Loan B proceeds were offset in part by $14.8 million in related fees. The proceeds from the Term Loan B were used to repay the $327 million outstanding balance under the 2018 Credit Facility. The $100 million revolving credit facility and the remaining proceeds from the Term Loan B will be used to provide for financial flexibility to fund future acquisitions and growth initiatives and for general corporate purposes. Refer to Note 12 - Debt and Finance Obligations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further information.
Due to the evolving and uncertain nature of COVID-19, and depending on the success of ongoing vaccination and other mitigation efforts as well as the scope and magnitude of infections and hospitalizations, we are not able at this time to fully estimate the effect of these factors on our business; however, the adverse impact on our business, results of operations, and cash flows has been significant. We will continue to evaluate and implement additional actions necessary to mitigate the negative financial and operational impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Results of Operations
A discussion related to our results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020 is presented below. A discussion related to our results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2021, and is incorporated herein by reference. During the first quarter of 2021, we changed our segment reporting as a result of operational changes and how our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) reviews the financial performance of GES and makes decisions regarding the allocation of resources. Accordingly, GES is now a single reportable segment. We did not include the prior year discussion as we believe the change in GES as a single reportable segment is not a material change to understand the financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations of our business. Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K).
Financial Highlights
(1)Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure, segment operating income (loss), to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
** Change is greater than +/- 100%
•Total revenue increased $91.9 million, primarily due to increased revenue at Pursuit of $110.2 million. Although Pursuit continued to be affected by pandemic-related restrictions in certain international geographies, overall revenue at Pursuit improved from 2020 as health and travel restrictions lessened and people felt more comfortable traveling. Visitation from domestic travelers increased at Pursuit’s Glacier Park Collection and the Alaska Collection. Additionally, Canada’s border reopened to the United States in early August 2021 to fully vaccinated travelers and in September 2021 to other countries. There also continues to be strong regional and national demand from Canadians as they were required to stay closer to home. GES revenue decreased $18.3 million as live events remained largely shut down during the first half of 2021. Large scale in-person events started to take place during the second half of 2021 with generally lower exhibitor participation and lower attendance than pre-pandemic occurrences.
•Net loss attributable to Viad improved $281.4 million during 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily reflecting impairment charges of $203.1 million recorded during 2020 and higher restructuring charges of $7.4 million recorded during 2020 as compared to 2021, as well as improved segment operating results during 2021 of $69.2 million.
•Total segment operating loss(1) improved $69.2 million during 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to a 144% increase in revenue at Pursuit, offset in part by the elimination of performance-based incentives in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and GES’ 5.4% decrease in revenue.
Foreign Exchange Rate Variances
We conduct our foreign operations primarily in Canada, the United Kingdom, Iceland, the Netherlands, Germany, and to a lesser extent, in certain other countries.
The following table summarizes the foreign exchange rate variance effects (or “FX Impact”) on revenue and segment operating income (loss) from our significant international operations:
Revenue and segment operating income (loss) were primarily impacted by variances of the British pound, the Canadian dollar, the Euro, and the Icelandic krona relative to the United States dollar. Future changes in exchange rates may impact overall expected profitability and historical period-to-period comparisons when revenue and segment operating income (loss) are translated into U.S. dollars.
Analysis of Revenue and Operating Results by Reportable Segment
Pursuit
The following table presents a comparison of Pursuit’s reported revenue and segment operating income (loss) to organic revenue(3) and organic segment operating income (loss)(3) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
** Change is greater than +/- 100%
(1)Revenue by line of business does not agree to Note 2 - Revenue and Related Contract Costs and Contract Liabilities of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) as the amounts in the above table include product revenue from food and beverage and retail operations within each line of business.
(2)Acquisitions include the Golden Skybridge (acquired March 2021 and opened June 2021). We did not adjust for Sky Lagoon (opened April 2021) or FlyOver Las Vegas (opened September 2021) as these attractions were new build projects.
(3)Organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss) are non-GAAP financial measures that adjust for the impacts of exchange rate variances and acquisitions, if any, until such acquisitions are included in the entirety of both comparable periods presented. For more information about organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss), see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section of this MD&A.
(4)Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure, segment operating income (loss), to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Pursuit revenue increased $110.2 million, which reflects the continued strengthening of leisure travel demand during the second half of 2021 versus 2020 as pandemic-related restrictions lessened and as people started to feel more comfortable traveling. Pursuit is affected by consumer discretionary spending on tourism activities. Travel restrictions and border closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively affected long-haul travelers to Canada and Iceland, which have affected customer volumes and the results of operations. Pursuit’s seasonal attractions and properties were open starting in the second quarter of 2021 through the end of the year, although some operated at reduced capacities, whereas Pursuit’s properties and attractions were temporarily closed in 2020 from mid-March through most of the second quarter. The Glacier Park Collection and the Alaska Collection experienced increased visitation during the 2021 peak season from strong domestic leisure travel, which resulted in an increase in revenue from the Glacier Park Collection of $27.7 million and from the Alaska Collection of $31.1 million. Pursuit opened or acquired three new attractions in 2021, Sky Lagoon (opened April 2021), the Golden Skybridge (opened June 2021), and FlyOver Las Vegas (opened September 2021), which generated $15.6 million in incremental revenue during 2021. Organic revenue* increased $102.2 million.
Pursuit segment operating income was $4.6 million during 2021 as compared to a loss of $42.3 million during 2020. This improvement was primarily due to the increase in revenue. Organic segment operating income* was $4.3 million during 2021 as compared to a loss of $42.3 million during 2020.
* Refer to footnote (3) in the above table for more information about the non-GAAP financial measures of organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss).
Performance Measures
We use the following key business metrics to evaluate the performance of Pursuit’s attractions business:
•Number of visitors. The number of visitors allows us to assess the volume of tickets sold at each attraction during the period.
•Revenue per attraction visitor. Revenue per attraction visitor is calculated as total attractions revenue divided by the total number of visitors at all Pursuit attractions during the period. Total attractions revenue includes ticket sales and ancillary revenue generated by attractions, such as food and beverage and retail revenue. Total attractions revenue per visitor measures the total spend per visitor that attraction properties are able to capture, which is important to the profitability of the attractions business.
•Effective ticket price. Effective ticket price is calculated as revenue from the sale of attraction tickets divided by the total number of visitors at all comparable Pursuit attractions during the period.
We use the following key business metrics, common in the hospitality industry, to evaluate Pursuit’s hospitality business:
•Revenue per Available Room. RevPAR is calculated as total rooms revenue divided by the total number of room nights available for all comparable Pursuit hospitality properties during the period. Total rooms revenue does not include non-rooms revenue, which consists of ancillary revenue generated by hospitality properties, such as food and beverage and retail revenue. RevPAR measures the period-over-period change in rooms revenue per available room for comparable hospitality properties. RevPAR is affected by average daily rate and occupancy, which have different implications on profitability.
•Average Daily Rate. ADR is calculated as total rooms revenue divided by the total number of room nights sold for all comparable Pursuit hospitality properties during the period. ADR is used to assess the pricing levels that the hospitality properties are able to realize. Increases in ADR lead to increases in rooms revenue with no substantial effect on variable costs, therefore having a greater impact on margins than increases in occupancy.
•Occupancy. Occupancy is calculated as the total number of room nights sold divided by the total number of room nights available for all comparable Pursuit hospitality properties during the period. Occupancy measures the utilization of the available capacity at the hospitality properties. Increases in occupancy result in increases in rooms revenue and additional variable operating costs (including housekeeping services, utilities, and room amenity costs), as well as increases in ancillary non-rooms revenue (including food and beverage and retail revenue).
The following table provides Pursuit’s same-store key performance indicators. The same-store metrics indicate the performance of all Pursuit’s properties and attractions that we owned and operated at full capacity, considering seasonal closures, for the entirety of both periods presented. For Pursuit properties and attractions located outside of the United States, comparisons to the prior year are on a
constant United States dollar basis, using the current year quarterly average exchange rates for previous periods, to eliminate the FX Impact. We believe this same-store constant currency basis provides better comparability between reporting periods.
(1)The Same-Store Key Performance Indicators for attractions exclude Open Top Touring (opened September 2020), Sky Lagoon (opened April 2021), the Golden Skybridge (opened June 2021), and FlyOver Las Vegas (opened September 2021).
(2)The rooms that were out of service as a result of property closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic were excluded from room nights available when calculating hospitality RevPAR and occupancy.
Attractions. The increase in same-store visitors during 2021 reflects the temporary closure of our attractions beginning in mid-March 2020 and extending through most of the second quarter of 2020 as a result of COVID-19 in addition to the reopening of the Canadian border with the United States in early August 2021 to fully vaccinated travelers and to travelers from other countries in September 2021, which accelerated visitation from international travelers. Revenue per attraction increased due to higher effective ticket prices and ancillary revenue.
Hospitality. Room nights available increased as all of Pursuit’s properties were fully open during the 2021 peak season, whereas in 2020, Pursuit temporarily closed its properties in mid-March 2020 through most of the second quarter of 2020. The increase in RevPAR and ADR was primarily driven by Pursuit’s properties being open in 2021.
GES
During the first quarter of 2021, we changed our segment reporting as a result of operational changes and how our CODM reviews the financial performance of GES and makes decisions regarding the allocation of resources. Accordingly, GES is now a single reportable segment.
The following table presents a comparison of GES’ reported revenue and segment operating loss to organic revenue(2) and organic segment operating loss(2) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Organic revenue and organic segment operating loss are non-GAAP financial measures that adjust for the impacts of exchange rate variances and acquisitions, if any, until such acquisitions are included in the entirety of both comparable periods presented. For more information about organic revenue and organic segment operating loss, see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section of this MD&A.
(2)Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure, segment operating loss, to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
GES revenue decreased $18.3 million primarily due to show postponements and cancellations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in mid-March 2020. During the first half of 2021, GES serviced clients primarily with virtual and hybrid events while in-person events remained largely shut down. Larger-scale in-person events began to take place toward the end of the second quarter and during the second half of 2021 with generally lower exhibitor participation and lower attendance than pre-pandemic occurrences.
Revenue earned during 2020 was primarily driven by shows completed during the first quarter of 2020 before the onset of the pandemic. Organic revenue* decreased $20.4 million during 2021.
GES segment operating loss improved $22.3 million during 2021, primarily due to the reduction in operating costs through the reduction of head count and facilities, implementation of a flex workforce, and a continued focus on managing discretionary costs. Additionally, GES’ operating results included a $9.1 million gain on sale of a GES warehouse in Orlando in 2021 and a $13.5 million gain on sale of a GES warehouse in San Diego in 2020. Organic segment operating loss* improved $23.1 million during 2021.
* Refer to footnote (1) in the above table for more information about the non-GAAP financial measures of organic revenue and organic segment operating loss.
Other Expenses
** Change is greater than +/- 100%.
Corporate Activities - The increase in corporate activities expense during 2021 relative to 2020 was primarily due to higher performance-based compensation expense as we reduced our estimated performance achievement to zero in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, offset in part by fees and expenses related to the equity raise and credit facility amendment in 2020.
Interest Expense - The increase in interest expense relative to 2020 was primarily due to higher interest rates and higher debt balances during 2021. As a result of the refinance and the repayment of the 2018 Credit Facility, we recorded $2.1 million of interest expense related to the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs during 2021.
Restructuring Charges - Restructuring charges during 2021 and 2020 were primarily related to facility closures and the elimination of certain positions at GES. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated our transformation and streamlining efforts at GES to significantly reduce costs and create a lower and more flexible cost structure focused on servicing our more profitable market segments, as well as charges related to the closure of GES’ United Kingdom based audio-visual services business in 2020. Restructuring charges in 2020 also included the elimination of certain positions at our corporate office.
Impairment Charges - Due to the deteriorating macroeconomic environment in 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in disruptions to our operations and the decline in our stock price, we recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges of $185.8 million, a non-cash impairment charge to intangible assets of $15.7 million related to GES’ United States audio-visual production business, and a fixed asset impairment charge of $1.6 million.
Income Tax Expense - Our effective income tax rate was 1.9% for 2021 as compared to a negative 3.9% for 2020. The effective tax rate for 2021 was lower than the blended statutory rate primarily as a result of excluding the tax benefit on losses recognized in the United States, the United Kingdom, and other European countries where we have a valuation allowance. The negative effective tax rate for 2020 was due to the recording of a $25.5 million valuation allowance against our remaining net deferred tax assets in the United States, United Kingdom, and other European countries, as well as no tax benefits on non-deductible goodwill impairments and losses recognized in those jurisdictions.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations - Income from discontinued operations during 2021 was primarily due to a favorable legal settlement and an insurance recovery related to a previously sold operation, offset in part by legal expenses. Loss from discontinued operations during 2020 was primarily due to a settlement and legal expenses related to previously sold operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash were $64.3 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $42.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Our total available liquidity was $149.0 million, including the available capacity on our revolving credit facility of $87.4 million ($100 million total facility size, less $12.6 million in outstanding letters of credit) and unrestricted cash of $61.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $37.9 million.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into an investment agreement with funds managed by private equity firm Crestview Partners (the “Investment Agreement”) who made an investment of $135 million, offset in part by $9.2 million in fees, in newly issued perpetual convertible preferred stock that carries a 5.5% cumulative quarterly dividend, which is payable in cash or in-kind at Viad’s option (the “Convertible Preferred Stock”). The Convertible Preferred Stock is convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $21.25 per share. The proceeds from Crestview’s investment were used to repay a portion of our then 2018 Credit Facility, which we subsequently refinanced in July 2021 as discussed below, and provided us additional short-term liquidity to fund capital expenditures and supported general corporate purposes.
Effective July 30, 2021, we refinanced our 2018 Credit Facility, which was scheduled to mature on October 24, 2023, with a new $500 million 2021 Credit Facility. The 2021 Credit Facility provides for a $400 million Term Loan B and a $100 million revolving credit facility with a maturity date of July 30, 2026. The $400 million in Term Loan B proceeds were offset in part by $14.8 million in related fees. The proceeds from the Term Loan B were used to repay the $327 million outstanding balance under the 2018 Credit Facility. The $100 million revolving credit facility and the remaining proceeds from the Term Loan B will be used to provide for financial flexibility to fund future acquisitions and growth initiatives and for general corporate purposes. The 2021 Credit Facility requires us to maintain liquidity of $75 million under the revolving credit facility through June 30, 2022, with liquidity defined as unrestricted cash and available capacity on our revolving credit facility, and other financial covenants beginning September 30, 2022. Refer to Note 12 - Debt and Finance Obligations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for additional information.
As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $45.7 million of our cash and cash equivalents outside of the United States, consisting of $29.2 million in Canada, $5.5 million in the Netherlands, $4.2 million in Iceland, $2.9 million in the United Arab Emirates, $2.2 million in the United Kingdom, and $1.7 million in other countries.
We believe that our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund operations and capital commitments, including approximately $75-$80 million in capital expenditures that includes approximately $30 million in select maintenance projects, for at least the next 12 months.
We have entered into two facility lease obligations that have not yet commenced for two new FlyOver attractions in development, FlyOver Chicago and FlyOver Canada Toronto. The lease commencement dates begin in 2022 with estimated future lease obligations of $27 million through a lease term of 20 years for both leases.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
The decrease in net cash used in operating activities of $42.4 million was primarily due to improved segment operating results of $69.2 million at Pursuit and GES, offset in part by the increased use of working capital.
Investing Activities
The increase in net cash used in investing activities of $45.0 million was primarily due to 2020 activity including proceeds from the termination of our life insurance policies and proceeds of $17.1 million from the sale of the GES warehouse in San Diego. In 2021, we used cash in investing activities for the acquisition of the Golden Skybridge, offset in part by the proceeds from the sale of a GES warehouse in Orlando.
Financing Activities
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities of $41.6 million was primarily due to net debt proceeds of $116.0 million during 2021 compared to net debt payments of $49.9 million during 2020. In July 2021, we received $400 million in Term Loan B proceeds from the 2021 Credit Facility, which was used to repay the 2018 Credit Facility. Proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Series A Preferred Stock in 2020 were offset in part by the 2020 net debt payments.
Debt and Finance Obligations
Refer to Note 12 - Debt and Finance Obligations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further discussion all of which is incorporated by reference herein.
Guarantees
Refer to Note 21 - Litigation, Claims, Contingencies, and Other of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further discussion all of which is incorporated by reference herein.
Share Repurchases
Our Board of Directors previously authorized us to repurchase shares of our common stock from time to time at prevailing market prices. Effective February 7, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 500,000 shares. In March 2020, our Board of Directors suspended our share repurchase program for the foreseeable future. Prior to the suspension, we had repurchased 53,784 shares on the open market for $2.8 million in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, 546,283 shares remained available for repurchase. The Board of Directors’ authorization does not have an expiration date.
Additionally, we repurchased shares related to tax withholding requirements on vested restricted share-based awards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with United States GAAP. We are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Critical accounting policies are those policies that are most important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations, and that require us to make the most difficult
and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. We identified and discussed with our audit committee the following critical accounting policies and estimates and the methodology and disclosures related to those estimates:
Revenue recognition - Revenue is measured based on a specified amount of consideration in a contract with a customer, net of commissions paid to customers and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. We recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of a product or service to a customer. Revenue for goods and services provided for which we do not have control of the goods or services before that good or service is transferred to a customer is recorded on a net basis to reflect only the fees received for arranging these services.
GES’ service revenue is primarily derived through its comprehensive range of marketing, event production, and other related services to event organizers and corporate brand marketers. GES’ service revenue is earned over time over the duration of the live event, which generally lasts one to three days. We recognize service revenue at the close of the event when we have the right to invoice, or when a customer cancels a contract. GES’ product revenue is derived from the build of exhibits and environments and graphics. GES’ product revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the product, or when a customer cancels a contract.
Pursuit’s service revenue is derived through its accommodations, admissions, transportation, and travel planning services. Pursuit’s product revenue is derived through food and beverage and retail sales. Pursuit’s revenue is recognized at the time services are performed or upon delivery of the product. Pursuit’s service revenue is recognized over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits. Pursuit’s product revenue is recognized at a point in time.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets - Goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives and are reviewed for impairment if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the intangible asset’s carrying value may not be recoverable.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of October 31, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more-likely-than-not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. Our reporting units are defined, and goodwill is tested, at either an operating segment level or at the component level of an operating segment, depending on various factors including the internal reporting structure of the operating segment, the level of integration among components, the sharing of assets and other resources among components, and the benefits and likely recoverability of goodwill by the component’s operations.
For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, we use a discounted expected future cash flow methodology (income approach) to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. The estimates and assumptions regarding expected future cash flows (the most significant being revenue and EBITDA margins), discount rates, and terminal values require considerable judgment and are based on market conditions, financial forecasts, industry trends, and historical experience.
The most critical assumptions and estimates in determining the estimated fair value of our reporting units relate to the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows for each reporting unit and the reporting unit cost of capital (discount rate) applied to those cash flows. We estimate the assumed reporting unit cost of capital rates (discount rates) using a build-up method based on the perceived risk associated with the cash flows pertaining to the specific reporting unit. In order to assess the reasonableness of our fair value estimates, we perform a reconciliation of the aggregate fair values of our reporting units to our market capitalization.
As noted above, the estimates and assumptions regarding expected future cash flows, discount rates, and terminal values require considerable judgment and are based on market conditions, financial forecasts, industry trends, and historical experience. These estimates have inherent uncertainties, and different assumptions could lead to materially different results. Our goodwill balance was $112.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and $99.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and pertained to our Pursuit business.
Pursuit’s goodwill was assigned to, and tested at, the reporting unit level. The results of our most recent impairment analysis performed as of October 31, 2021, indicated that no impairment existed for Pursuit’s reporting units with reported goodwill. The excess of the estimated fair value over the carrying value for Pursuit’s reporting units with reported goodwill under step one of the impairment test for the Banff Jasper Collection, the Alaska Collection, and FlyOver was significant. Significant reductions in our reporting unit’s expected future revenue, operating income, or cash flow forecasts and projections, or an increase in a reporting unit’s cost of capital, could trigger additional goodwill impairment testing, which may result in impairment charges.
If an impairment indicator related to intangible assets is identified, or if other circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, we perform an assessment to determine if an impairment loss should be recognized. This assessment includes a recoverability test to identify if the expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the related assets. If the results of the recoverability test indicate that expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the related assets, we perform a measurement of impairment and we recognize any carrying amount in excess of fair value as an impairment. We periodically evaluate the continued
recoverability of intangible assets which were previously evaluated due to an impairment indicator to determine if remeasurement is necessary.
Income taxes - We are required to estimate and record provisions for income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Accordingly, we must estimate our actual current income tax liability, and assess temporary differences arising from the treatment of items for tax purposes, as compared to the treatment for accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We use significant judgment in forming conclusions regarding the recoverability of our deferred tax assets and evaluate all available positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more-likely-than-not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. To the extent recovery does not appear likely, a valuation allowance must be recorded. We had gross deferred tax assets of $117.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and $99.2 million as of December 31, 2020. We had a valuation allowance against gross deferred tax assets of $103.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and $81.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
While we believe that the deferred tax assets, net of existing valuation allowances, will be utilized in future periods, there are inherent uncertainties regarding the ultimate realization of these assets. It is possible that the relative weight of positive and negative evidence regarding the realization of deferred tax assets may change, which could result in a material increase or decrease in our valuation allowance. Such a change could result in a material increase or decrease to income tax expense in the period the assessment was made.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process: first we determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position; and, if so, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority.
Pension and postretirement benefits - Our pension plans use traditional defined benefit formulas based on years of service and final average compensation. Funding policies provide that payments to defined benefit pension trusts shall be at least equal to the minimum funding required by applicable regulations. We presently anticipate contributing $0.9 million to our funded pension plans and $0.9 million to our unfunded pension plans in 2022.
We have defined benefit postretirement plans that provide medical and life insurance for certain eligible employees, retirees, and dependents. The related postretirement benefit liabilities are recognized over the employees’ service period. In addition, we retain the obligations for these benefits for retirees of certain sold businesses. While the plans have no funding requirements, we expect to contribute $0.8 million to the plans in 2022.
The discount rates used in determining future pension and postretirement benefit obligations are based on rates determined by actuarial analysis and management review and reflect the estimated rates of return on a high-quality, hypothetical bond portfolio whose cash flows match the timing and amounts of expected benefit payments. Refer to Note 18 - Pension and Postretirement Benefits of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further information.
Share-based compensation - We grant share-based compensation awards to our officers, directors, and certain key employees pursuant to the 2017 Viad Corp Omnibus Incentive Plan, which has a 10-year term and provides for the following types of awards: (a) incentive and non-qualified stock options; (b) restricted stock awards and restricted stock units; (c) performance units or performance shares; (d) stock appreciation rights; (e) cash-based awards; and (f) certain other stock-based awards.
Share-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements was $7.7 million in 2021, $2.7 million in 2020, and $7.2 million in 2019. We recorded total tax benefits related to such costs of $0.1 million in 2021 and $2.2 million in 2019. There was no income tax benefit related to such cost in 2020 due to the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. No share-based compensation costs were capitalized during 2021, 2020, or 2019.
We account for share-based payment awards that will be settled in cash as liability-based awards. We measure share-based compensation expense of liability-based awards at fair value at each reporting date until the date of settlement based on the number of units expected to vest and, where applicable, the level of achievement of predefined performance goals. These awards are remeasured on each reporting date based on our stock price and the Monte Carlo simulation model. A Monte Carlo simulation requires the use of several assumptions, including historical volatility and correlation between our stock price and the price of the common shares of a comparator group, a risk-free rate of return, and an expected term. We account for share-based awards that will be settled in shares of our common stock as equity-based awards. We measure share-based compensation expense of equity-based awards at fair value on the grant date on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The estimated number of units to be achieved is updated each reporting period based on the number of units expected to vest and, where applicable, the level of achievement of predefined performance goals, until the date of settlement. The fair value of stock option grants is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes stock option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of several assumptions, including expected volatility, a risk-free interest rate, a forfeiture rate, and expected life. We measure share-based compensation for performance-based options on a straight-line basis over the performance period and the underlying shares expected to be settled are adjusted each reporting period based on estimated future achievement of the respective performance metrics. Service-based options are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period on a
graded-vesting schedule. Refer to Note 3 - Share-Based Compensation of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further information.
Self-Insurance Liabilities - We are self-insured up to certain limits for workers’ compensation and general liabilities, which includes automobile, product general liability, and client property loss claims. We have also retained and provided for certain workers’ compensation insurance liabilities in conjunction with previously sold businesses. We are also self-insured for certain employee health benefits. Provisions for losses for claims incurred, including actuarially derived estimated claims incurred but not yet reported, are made based on historical experience, claims frequency, and other factors. We have purchased insurance for amounts in excess of the self-insured levels.
Impact of Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 - Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for further information.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to disclosing financial results that are determined in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we also disclose the following non-GAAP financial measures: Segment operating income (loss), organic revenue, and organic segment operating income (loss) (collectively, the “Non-GAAP Measures”). Our use of Non-GAAP Measures is supplemental to, but not as a substitute for, other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. As not all companies use identical calculations, our Non-GAAP Measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. We believe that our use of Non-GAAP Measures provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations for trending, analyzing, and benchmarking our performance and the value of our business.
•“Segment operating income (loss)” is net income (loss) attributable to Viad before income (loss) from discontinued operations, corporate activities, interest expense and interest income, income taxes, restructuring charges, impairment charges, and the reduction for income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests. Segment operating income (loss) is used to measure the profit and performance of our operating segments to facilitate period-to-period comparisons. Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of segment operating income (loss) to income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes.
•“Organic revenue” and “organic segment operating income (loss)” are revenue and segment operating income (loss) (as defined above), respectively, without the impact of exchange rate variances and acquisitions, if any, until such acquisitions are included in the entirety of both comparable periods. The impact of exchange rate variances is calculated as the difference between current period activity translated at the current period’s exchange rates and the comparable prior period’s exchange rates. We believe the presentation of “organic” results permits investors to better understand our performance without the effects of exchange rate variances or acquisitions and to facilitate period-to-period comparisons and analysis of our operating performance. Refer to “Analysis of Revenue and Operating Results by Reportable Segment” of this MD&A for reconciliations of organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss) to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
We believe non-GAAP Measures are useful operating metrics as they eliminate potential variations arising from taxes, debt service costs, impairment charges, restructuring charges, the reduction of income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interests, and the effects of discontinued operations, resulting in additional measures considered to be indicative of our ongoing operations and segment performance. Although we use Non-GAAP Measures to assess the performance of our business, the use of these measures is limited because these measures do not consider material costs, expenses, and other items necessary to operate our business. These items include debt service costs, expenses related to United States federal, state, local and foreign income taxes, impairment and restructuring charges, and the effects of discontinued operations, and amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests. As the Non-GAAP Measures do not consider these items, net income (loss) attributable to Viad should be considered as an important measure of financial performance because it provides a more complete measure of our performance.