Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we”, “us”, “our” and “the Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Vintage Wine Estates, Inc. ("VWE") and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
Vintage Wine Estates is a leading vintner in the United States ("U.S."), offering a collection of wines produced by award-winning, heritage wineries, popular lifestyle wines, innovative new wine brands, packaging concepts, as well as craft spirits and cider. Our name brand wines include Layer Cake, Cameron Hughes, Clos Pegase, B.R. Cohn, Firesteed, Bar Dog, Kunde, Cherry Pie and many others. Since our founding over 20 years ago, we have grown organically through wine brand creation and through acquisitions to become the 14th largest wine producer based on cases of wine shipped in California. We sell over 2.5 million cases annually.
Our key differentiator is our diversification-what we call our three-legged stool business model.
We are diversified in our brand collection, producing nearly 60 brands ranging in retail price from $10 to $150, with a focus on the fastest growing $10 to $20 segment. Over eighty percent of our business is done in this critical segment.
We are diversified in our omni-channel sales strategy balanced between direct-to-consumer, 31.5% of sales, traditional wholesale, 28.8% of sales and business-to-business at 38.8% of sales. Our direct-to-consumer segment is particularly robust. Where most wine companies have two direct sales levers to pull: tasting rooms and wine clubs, we have seven: tasting rooms, wine clubs, ecommerce, Cameron Hughes, Windsor/custom label design and engraving, QVC/HSN and The Sommelier Company.
We are diversified in our sourcing with a strong asset base of 3,300 owned and leased vineyard acres in located in the premier winegrowing regions of the U.S. and 10 owned winery estates. These properties extend from the Central Coast of California to storied appellations in Napa Valley and Sonoma County, north to Oregon and Washington. We obtain fruit for our wines from owned and leased vineyards, as well as other sources, including independent growers and the spot wine market.
We have completed over 20 acquisitions in the past 10 years and completed over 10 acquisitions in the past 5 years. We generally acquire the brands and inventories of a targeted business, eliminating redundant corporate overhead. We then integrate the acquired assets into our highly efficient production, distribution and omni channel selling networks, quickly increasing the sales and margins of the acquired business.
Our growth has allowed us to reinvest in our business and create the scale and infrastructure needed to successfully manage a variety of different wine brands and channels and reduce costs. Our owned winery facilities have the capacity to store up to 9.0 million gallons of wine per year. In addition, we have a high-speed bottling facility with the capacity to bottle over 13.5 million cases annually.
Additional bottling capacity is not only used for our products, but also allows us to further expand our bottling and fulfillment services offered to third parties on a contract basis. The additional capacity of the bottling facility may not initially be fully utilized but provides us with capacity consistent with our growth plans. Our scale and consolidated operations are expected to enable us to increase margins of the businesses that we acquire, providing accretive value promptly after the acquisition.
Strategy
Our strategy is to continue to grow organically and through acquisitions with a view towards making two to three acquisitions per year over the next five years. We believe we have completed more brand mergers and acquisitions in the U.S. wine industry over the last 10 years than any other company in the industry. These acquisitions have allowed us to diversify our wine sourcing into regions outside of California, expand our portfolio of brands, increase our vineyard assets and provide our DTC and retail customers with a range of products to choose from.
To achieve these results, our acquisitions are subject to a rigorous, data-driven, due diligence and underwriting process, to assure that minimum financial thresholds with meaningful upside can be satisfied in each transaction. In accordance with GAAP, the results of the acquisitions we have completed are reflected in our consolidated financial statements. We typically incur minimal transaction costs in connection with identifying and completing acquisitions and ongoing integration costs as we integrate acquired companies and seek to achieve synergies.
Key Measures to Assess the Performance of our Business
We consider a variety of financial and operating measures in assessing the performance of our business, formulating goals and objectives and making strategic decisions. The key GAAP measures we consider are net revenues; gross profit; selling, general and administrative expenses; and income from operations. The key non-GAAP measure we consider is Adjusted EBITDA. We also monitor our case volume sold and depletions from our distributors to retailers to help us forecast and identify trends affecting our growth.
Net Revenues
We generate revenue from our segments: Wholesale, Business-to-Business ("B2B"), Direct-to-Consumer ("DTC") and Corporate and Other. We recognize revenue from sales when obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied. Generally, this occurs when the product is shipped, and title passes to the customer, and when control of the promised product or service is transferred to the customer. Our standard terms are free on board, or FOB, shipping point, with no customer acceptance provisions. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for transferring products. We recognize revenue net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities. We account for shipping and handling as activities to fulfill our promise to transfer the associated products. Accordingly, we record amounts billed for shipping and handling costs as a component of net sales and classify such costs as a component of costs of sales. Our products are generally not sold with a right of return unless the product is spoiled or damaged. Historically, returns have not been significant to us.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to net revenues less cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the direct cost of manufacturing, including direct materials, labor and related overhead, and physical inventory adjustments, as well as inbound and outbound freight and import duties.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses include expenses arising from activities in selling, marketing, warehousing, and administrative expenses. Other than variable compensation, selling, general and administrative expenses are generally not directly proportional to net revenues, but are expected to increase over time to support the needs of the Company.
Income from Operations
Income from operations is gross profit less selling, general and administrative expenses; acquisition and restructuring related expense or income and amortization of intangible assets. Income from operations excludes interest expense, income tax expense, and other expenses, net. We use income from operations as well as other indicators as a measure of the profitability of our business.
Case Volumes
In addition to acquisitions, the primary drivers of net revenue growth in any period are attributable to changes in case volumes and changes in product mix and sales price. Case volumes represents the number of 9-liter equivalent cases of wine that we sell during a particular period. Case volumes are an important indicator of what is driving gross margin. This metric also allows us to develop our supply and production targets for future periods.
The following table summarize 9-liter equivalent cases by segment:
Case volumes were up 35.7% for the fiscal year driven by volume increases in the Wholesale and DTC segments. Wholesale volumes grew 61.1% for the year due to increased volumes of core brands as well as volumes associated with the acquisition of ACE Cider. DTC volumes were up 15.2% driven by increased tasting room, wine club, and event activity coupled with volumes related to the acquisition of Vinesse. B2B volumes remained relatively flat for the year.
Depletions
Within our three tier distribution structure, depletion measures the sale of our inventory from the distributor to the retailer. Depletions are an important indicator of customer satisfaction, which management uses for evaluating performance of our brands and for forecasting.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we use EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. These metrics are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, when considered alongside other GAAP measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, casualty losses or gains, impairment losses, changes in the fair value of derivatives, restructuring related income or expenses, acquisition and
integration costs, and certain non-cash, non-recurring, or other items included in net income (loss) that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance, including non-cash inventory write downs and COVID related adjustments. COVID related adjustments relate to the delayed GAZE brand launch and nonrecurring costs of implementing safety protocols for production facilities, warehouse, tasting rooms and offices. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenues.
The following is a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not recognized measures of financial performance under GAAP. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide analysts, investors and other interested parties with additional insight into the underlying trends of our business and assists these parties in analyzing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance, which allows for a better comparison against historical results and expectations for future performance.
Management uses these non-GAAP measures to understand and compare operating results across reporting periods for various purposes including internal budgeting and forecasting, short and long-term operating planning, employee incentive compensation, and debt compliance. These non-GAAP measures are not intended to replace the presentation of our financial results in accordance with GAAP. Use of the terms Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not calculated in the same manner by all companies, and accordingly, are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as indicators of our operating performance in isolation from, or as a substitute for, net income (loss), which is prepared in accordance with GAAP. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin solely as supplemental disclosure because we believe it allows for a more complete analysis of our results of operations. In the future, we may incur expenses such as those added back to calculate Adjusted EBITDA. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these items.
Trends and Other Factors Affecting Our Business
Various trends and other factors affect or have affected our operating results, including:
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic ("COVID-19"), which the World Health Organization declared a pandemic in March 2020, continues to disrupt the U.S. and global economies, resulting in adverse economic conditions and business disruptions, as well as significant volatility in global financial markets. While many measures implemented by governments in an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19 have been lifted or eased, some are continuing despite vaccines due to the emergence of variants of the virus.
In the longer-term, the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to adversely affect the economies and financial markets, and could result in an economic downturn and a recession. It is uncertain how this would affect demand for our products. While we continue to see robust demand in our industry, and have seen little impact to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the full impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our future results of operations, liquidity and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic, the actions that may be taken by government authorities across the U.S., the impact to our customers, employees and suppliers, and other factors described in the section titled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These factors are beyond our knowledge and control and, as a result, at this time, we are unable to predict the ultimate impact, both in terms of severity and duration, that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Invasion of Ukraine
Russia's invasion of Ukraine has not had a direct impact on the Company. The Company does not have assets, operations or human capital resources located in Russia or Ukraine, does not invest or hold securities that trade in those areas and does not rely on goods or services sourced in Russia or Ukraine. However, the Company receives its capsules for wine bottles from a supplier in Italy, who has plants located in Ukraine, Italy and Poland. While the Company has not been impacted directly by supply chain disruptions as a result of the invasion, including potential cybersecurity risks and other indirect operational or supply chain challenges, the competition has increased from suppliers due to the closing of the plant in Ukraine.
Seasonality
There is a degree of seasonality in the growing cycles, procurement and transportation of grapes. The wine industry in general tends to experience seasonal fluctuations in revenues and net income. Typically, we have lower sales and net income during our third fiscal quarter (January through March) and higher sales and net income during or second fiscal quarter (October through December) due to usual timing of seasonal holiday buying, as well as wine club shipments. We expect these trends to continue.
Weather Conditions
Our ability to fulfill the demand for wine is restricted by the availability of grapes. Climate change, agricultural and other factors, such as wildfires, disease, pests, extreme weather conditions, water scarcity, biodiversity loss and competing land use, impact the quality and quantity of grapes available to us for the production of wine from year to year. Our vineyards and properties, as well as other sources from which we purchase grapes, are affected by these factors. For example, the effects of abnormally high rainfall or drought in a given year may impact production of grapes, which can impact both our revenues and costs from year to year.
In addition, extreme weather events, such as wildfires can result in potentially significant expenses to repair or replace a vineyard or facility as well as impact the ability of grape suppliers to fulfill their obligations to us.
Industry Conditions
The wine industry is recession resistant, with sustained growth over the past 25 years despite downturns in economic conditions from time to time. Consumers are increasingly purchasing higher priced wines and other alcoholic beverages, which has accelerated throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. Consumption increases are largely in the $10.00 or more retail price per bottle premium and luxury wine categories. Approximately 80% of our wine sales are in the premium segment.
U.S. Wildfires
Significant wildfires in California, Oregon and Washington states, have historically engulfed the affected regions in smoke and flames. The long-term trend is that wildfires are increasing resulting from drought conditions. Drought conditions due to global climate change have increased the severity of destructive wildfires which have affected the U.S. grape harvest. When vineyards and grapes are exposed to smoke, it can result in an ashy, burnt, or smoky aroma, described as "smoke tainted”. Industry grape suppliers have also experienced smoke and fire damage from the wildfires. Damage to our grape harvest and vineyards caused from the wildfires has impacted our revenues, costs of revenues and winery overhead for the periods presented.
Casualty Gains
We suffered smoke-tainted inventory damage resulting from the October 2017 Napa and Sonoma County wildfires. We filed an insurance claim for this damage, which was settled in fiscal 2021 for approximately $3.8 million, net of legal costs. In fiscal 2022, we received an additional $2.7 million, net of legal costs, related to wildfire claims. The gain of litigation proceeds consists of payments we received from our insurer.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
The following table summarizes our operating results for the periods presented:
*Not meaningful
Net Revenues
Net revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased $73.0 million, or 33.1%, to $293.8 million, from $220.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was driven by an increase in B2B net revenues of approximately $36.5 million, of which $7.3 million related to acquisitions, DTC net revenues of approximately $25.8 million, of which $11.0 million related to acquisitions, and Wholesale net revenues of $11.6 million, of which $13.4 million related to acquisitions, partially offset by a decrease in Other net revenues of approximately $0.9 million.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased $14.6 million, or 19.4%, to $90.0 million, from $75.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by the strong DTC post-COVID growth of $10.6 million. Acquisitions contributed an additional $13.1 million of gross profit. These increases were partially offset by $19.1 million of non-cash inventory write-downs identified through material weakness remediation efforts.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased $32.8 million, or 45.2%, to $105.3 million, from $72.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was driven primarily by our acquisitions, increased compensation and benefits due to staffing increases and inflation.
(Loss) Income from Operations
Loss from operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $7.9 million, a decrease of $17.1 million from income of $9.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was driven by $19.1 million non-cash inventory write-downs identified through material weakness remediation efforts, offset by increased growth in our B2B and DTC segments.
Other Income
Total other income was $8.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to income of $1.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a net increase of $6.6 million. The change was due primarily to an unrealized gain on our interest rate swap agreements of $23.0 million, partially offset by increased interest expense on increased outstanding debt balances and $6.6 million related to the forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan in the prior year period.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax expense was $1.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to income tax expense of $0.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The income tax expense in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to changes in pre-tax income and non-deductible stock based compensation. The income tax expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in annual net income and costs related to the transaction, partially offset by the PPP Loan forgiveness, stock based compensation and research and development tax credits.
Segment Results
Our financial performance is classified into the following segments: Wholesale, B2B, DTC and Corporate and Other. Our corporate operations, including centralized selling, general and administrative expenses and other factors, such as the re-measurements of contingent consideration and impairment of intangible assets and goodwill are not allocated to the segments, as management does not believe such items directly reflect our core operations. Other than our long-term property, plant and equipment for wine tasting facilities, and customer lists, trademarks and trade names specific to acquired companies, our revenue generating assets are utilized across segments. Accordingly, the foregoing items are not allocated to the segments and are not discussed separately as any results that had a significant impact on operating results are included in the consolidated results discussion above.
We evaluate the performance of our segments on income from operations, which management believes is indicative of operational performance and ongoing profitability. Management monitors income from operations to evaluate past performance and identify actions required to improve profitability. Income from operations assists management in comparing the segment performance on a consistent basis for purposes of business decision-making by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect the core operations and, therefore, are not included in measuring segment performance. We define income from operations as gross margin less operating expenses that are directly attributable to the segment. Selling expenses that can be directly attributable to the segment are allocated accordingly.
Segment Results for the Years Ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
Wholesale Segment Results
Wholesale net revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased by approximately $11.6 million, or 15.9%, from the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was attributable to $13.4 million in net revenues related to acquisitions, partially offset by discontinued brands.
Wholesale income from operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 decreased by approximately $9.5 million from the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was attributable to increased cost of sales of $5.8 million primarily related to non-cash inventory write-downs identified through material weakness remediation efforts, increased cost of sales of $1.6 million related to inflation and supply chain challenges as well as an operating loss of $0.2 million related to acquisitions driven by $1.6 million of amortization of intangible assets acquired.
B2B Segment Results
B2B net revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased by approximately $36.5 million, or 47.1% from the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to bulk distilled alcohol sales and $7.3 million in net revenues related to acquisitions.
B2B income from operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 decreased by $1.0 million, or 5.7%, from the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was attributable to increased cost of sales of $34.3 million primarily related to cost of sales attributed from bulk distilled alcohol sales and non-cash inventory write-downs identified through material weakness remediation efforts, $1.0 million in net losses related to acquisitions, driven by $0.6 million of amortization of intangible assets acquired.
DTC Segment Results
DTC net revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased by approximately $25.8 million, or 38.8%, from the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increased case volumes from tasting rooms, wine clubs, revenues earned from events as restrictions related to COVID-19 have been lifted and $11.0 million in net revenues related to acquisitions.
DTC income from operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased by approximately $3.6 million, or 31.6%, from the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was due to increased margin contribution from improved traffic in tasting rooms, wine club shipments, events and $0.9 million of income related to acquisition, net of $1.1 million of amortization of acquired customer lists.
Corporate and Other Segment Results
Other net revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 decreased by approximately $0.9 million, or 23.8%, from the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to fewer bulk wine sales in the year compared to the year prior.
Other losses from operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased by $10.2 million, or 28.8%, from the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was due to costs related to increased infrastructure required to be a public company and the continued increased costs of labor, warehousing, freight and insurance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our ongoing operations have, to date, been funded by a combination of cash flow from operations, the Business Combination with BCAC, borrowings under our credit facility and other debt financing. As of June 30, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents on hand of $50.3 million and $22.0 million in borrowing capacity available under our credit facility. We had $328.2 million in total debt as of June 30, 2022.
Our principal uses of cash have been to provide working capital, meet debt service requirements, fund capital expenditures and finance strategic plans, including acquisitions. We continuously reinvest in our properties and production assets. Our capital expenditures are expected to be between $12.0 million and $15.0 million over the next twelve months.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, and availability under our credit facility will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our current obligations, projected working capital requirements, debt service requirements and capital spending requirements. We may also seek to finance capital expenditures under capital leases or other debt arrangements that provide liquidity or favorable borrowing terms. COVID-19 and inflation has negatively impacted the global economy and financial markets which could interfere with our ability to access sources of liquidity at favorable rates and generate operating cash flows. In fiscal 2021, we took advantage of the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”).
We continue to consider acquisition opportunities, but the size and timing of any future acquisitions and the related potential capital requirements cannot be predicted. While we have in the past financed certain acquisitions with internally generated cash, term loans and our credit facility, if suitable businesses are available for acquisition upon acceptable terms, we may obtain all or a portion of the necessary financing through the incurrence of additional long-term borrowings.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including funding needs to support our business growth and to respond to business opportunities, challenges or unforeseen circumstances. If our forecasts prove inaccurate, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing from outside sources, which we may not be able to raise on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations would be adversely affected.
Indebtedness
Credit Facility
On April 13, 2021, we entered into an amended and restated loan and security agreement to increase the credit facility from an aggregate of $350.0 million to $480.0 million, consisting of an accounts receivable and inventory revolving facility up to $230.0 million, a term loan in a principal amount of up to $100.0 million, a capital expenditures facility in an aggregate principal of up to $50.0 million, and a new delay draw term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million. All other terms of the original agreement generally remained the same.
The credit facility can be used to fund acquisitions, real estate purchases, capital equipment purchases and for other general corporate purposes.
The credit facility is collateralized by our eligible inventory and accounts receivable and matures as follows:
Repayments of the term loan and the capital expenditure facility are calculated based on whether the purpose of the original loan or draw was for real estate or capital equipment purchases or draw and are subject to periodic third-party valuations. For real estate purchases, quarterly repayments are equal to 1.0% of the original principal balance at closing. For capital equipment purchases, quarterly repayments are equal to 1/28th of the original balance. Any unpaid principal is due upon the termination of these loans at maturity. Repayment of the revolving credit facility is required if the borrowing base (as defined in the credit facility) does not support the amount of borrowing on the facility. Borrowings under the credit facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, either (a) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the LIBOR rate for dollar deposits with a term equivalent to the interest period relevant to such borrowing as administered by the ICE Benchmark Administration, plus an applicable margin or (b) an adjusted base rate, or ABR, determined by reference to the highest of (i) 0.50% above the federal funds effective rate, (ii) the rate of interest established by the administrative agent as its “prime rate” and (iii) 1.0% above the LIBOR rate for dollar deposits with a one-month term commencing that day, plus an applicable margin. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of our interest rate swap transactions.
In addition, we pay certain recurring fees with respect to the credit facility, including (i) a fee for the unused commitments of the lenders under the revolving credit facility and the capital expenditure facility as of the end of each month, accruing at a rate equal to 0.125% per annum, which may be reduced to 0.0% if the average availability under the revolving credit facility is less than 50%, (ii) letter of credit fees, including a fronting fee and processing fees to each issuing bank, which vary depending on the applicable margin rate based on the average availability under the revolving credit facility and (iii) administration fees. Amortization expense related to debt issuance fees was $0.1 million and $0.1 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
The credit facility contains various covenants and restrictions.
We are required to maintain compliance with a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio covenant of not less than 1.10:1.00.
We may prepay, in full or in part, borrowings under the credit facility without premium or penalty, subject to notice requirements, minimum prepayment amounts and increment limitations, provided that prepayments on all LIBOR loans will be subject to customary “breakage” costs.
Paycheck Protection Program
Our Paycheck Protection Program loan (the “PPP Loan”), under Division A, Title I of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act on April 14, 2020, of approximately $6.5 million required monthly amortized principal and interest payments to begin six months after the date of disbursement. In October 2020, the deferral period associated with the monthly payments was extended from six to ten months. While the PPP Loan had a two-year maturity, the amended law permitted the borrower to request a five-year maturity from its lender.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, as amended by the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020, we were eligible to apply for and receive forgiveness for all or a portion of the PPP Loan. Such forgiveness was determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for certain permissible purposes as set forth in the PPP, including, but not limited to, payroll costs (as defined under the PPP) and mortgage interest, rent or utility costs (collectively, “Qualifying Expenses”), and on the maintenance of employee and compensation levels during the twenty-four week period following the funding of the PPP Loan.
On June 25, 2021, the Company received notification from the Small Business Association that the Company’s Forgiveness Application of the PPP Loan and accrued interest, totaling approximately $6.6 million, was approved in full, and the Company had no further obligations related to the PPP Loan. Accordingly in fiscal 2021, the Company recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan.
Cash Flows
Information about our cash flows, by category, is presented in our consolidated statements of cash flows and is summarized below:
Cash Flows provided by (used in) Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $15.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to net cash provided in operating activities of $9.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, representing an increase of net cash provided of $6.9 million. The increase in net cash provided was primarily attributable to the decrease in net income of $10.8 million, net changes in certain non-cash adjustments of $21.4 million to reconcile net income to operating cash flow and net changes in other operating assets and liabilities as detailed on the consolidated statement of cashflows.
Cash Flows provided by (used in) Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $98.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $60.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, representing an increase of net cash used of $38.2 million. Cash flows from investing activities are utilized primarily to fund acquisitions, capital expenditures for improvements to existing assets and other corporate assets. The increase in net cash used was primarily attributable to an increase in business acquisitions of $50.1 million, partially offset by a reduction in purchases of plant, property and equipment of $13.2 million.
Cash Flows provided by (used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $9.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to net cash provided of $173.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, representing a decrease of net cash provided of $164.0 million. The decrease in net cash provided consisted primarily of cash used of $26.0 million to repurchase shares of the Company's common stock and decrease in proceeds of $250.1 million related to the Merger and PIPE financing in the prior year, partially offset by proceeds, net of payments on our line of credit and long-term debt of $137.7 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from the sale of wine, spirits and cider, including private label wines, to wholesale distributors and to consumers. We also recognize revenue from custom winemaking and production services, grape and bulk sales, private events held at its winery estates and storage services, as well as the sale of other merchandise and services.
We recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for its arrangements, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We recognize revenue when obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied. Generally, this occurs when the product is shipped, and title passes to the customer, and when control of the promised product or service is transferred to the customer. Our standard terms are free on board (“FOB”) shipping point, with no customer acceptance provisions. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for transferring products. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities. We account for shipping and handling as activities to fulfill our promise to transfer the associated products. Accordingly, we record amounts billed for shipping and handling costs as a component of net sales and classify such costs as a
component of costs of sales. Our products are generally not sold with a right of return unless the product is spoiled or damaged. Historically, returns have not been significant to us.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes are determined using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded when the expected recognition of a deferred income tax asset is considered to be unlikely.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefit is measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters as a component of income tax expense.
Inventories
Inventories of bulk and bottled wines and spirits and inventories of non-wine products and bottling and packaging supplies are valued at the lower of cost using the FIFO method or net realizable value. Costs associated with winemaking, and other costs associated with the manufacturing of products for resale, are recorded as inventory. Net realizable value is the value of an asset that can be realized upon the sale of the asset, less a reasonable estimate of the costs associated with either the eventual sale or the disposal of the asset in question. Inventories are classified as current assets in accordance with recognized industry practice, although most wines and spirits are aged for periods longer than one year.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of consideration transferred over the estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We have three reporting units under which goodwill has been allocated. We conduct a goodwill impairment analysis annually for impairment, as of the end of the respective fiscal year, or sooner if events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable.
Our intangible assets represent purchased intangible assets consisting of both indefinite and finite lived assets. Certain criteria are used in determining whether intangible assets acquired in a business combination must be recognized and reported separately. Our indefinite lived intangible assets, representing trade names, trademarks and winery use permits, are initially recognized at fair value and subsequently stated at adjusted costs, net of any recognized impairments. The indefinite lived assets are not subject to amortization. Our finite-lived intangible assets, comprised of trade names, trademarks, customer relationships and Sommelier relationships, are amortized using a method that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible assets are consumed or otherwise used. If that pattern cannot be reliably determined, the intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives and are tested for impairment along with other long-lived assets. Amortization related to the finite-lived assets is included in selling, general and administrative expenses. Intangible assets are reviewed annually for impairment, as of the end of the reporting period, or sooner if events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation provided to employees is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations based on the grant date fair value of the awards. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined by the grant date market price of our common shares. The fair value of stock options is determined on the grant date using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of the grant date fair value of stock option awards granted is affected by a number of variables, including the fair value of the Company's common stock, the expected common stock price volatility over the life of the awards, the expected term of the stock option, risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of the Company's common stock. Due to the Company's limited trading history since becoming a public company on June 7, 2021, the Company derived its volatility from the average historical stock volatilities of several peer public companies over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards.
The compensation expense recognized for stock-based awards is net of estimated forfeitures and is recognized ratably over the service period of the awards. All income tax effects of stock-based awards are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations as awards vest or are settled. We classify stock-based compensation expense in selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
Emerging Growth Company Election
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, and have elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. We expect to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although we may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. We expect to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and non-public companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial
results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act and compliance with applicable laws, if, as an emerging growth company, we rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things: (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002; (b) provide all of the compensation disclosures that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010; (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (d) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) December 31, 2026, (b) the last date of our fiscal year in which we had total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC or (d) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting standards and pronouncements.