ITEM 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis reflects our consolidated financial statements and other relevant statistical data, and is intended to enhance your understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. The information in this section has been derived from the consolidated financial statements, which appear elsewhere in this annual report. You should read the information in this section in conjunction with the other business and financial information provided in this annual report.
Overview
Our business consists primarily of taking deposits from the general public and investing those deposits, together with funds generated from operations, in residential real estate loans and, to a lesser extent, commercial real estate loans, agricultural mortgage loans, construction loans, commercial and industrial loans, home equity lines of credit, and consumer loans. We also invest in securities, which have historically consisted primarily of mortgage-backed securities and obligations issued by U.S. government sponsored enterprises, state and municipal securities. We offer a variety of deposit accounts including checking accounts, savings accounts and certificate of deposit accounts. Van Wert Federal is subject to comprehensive regulation and examination by the OCC.
Our results of operations depend primarily on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities. Our results of operations also are affected by our provisions for loan losses, non-interest income and non-interest expense. Non-interest income currently consists primarily of service charges on deposit accounts, other service charges and fees, and income from bank owned life insurance. Non-interest expense currently consists primarily of expenses related to salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, data processing, contract services, director fees, and other expenses.
We invest in bank owned life insurance to provide us with a funding source to offset some costs of our benefit plan obligations. Bank owned life insurance provides us with non-interest income that is nontaxable. Federal regulations generally limit our investment in bank owned life insurance to 25% of our Tier 1 capital plus our allowance for loan losses. At June 30, 2022, our investment in bank owned life insurance was $5.1 million, which was within this investment limit.
Our results of operations also may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies and actions of regulatory authorities.
Business Strategy
Our principal objective is to build long-term value for our stockholders by operating a profitable community-oriented financial institution dedicated to meeting the banking needs of our customers by emphasizing personalized and efficient customer service. Highlights of our current business strategy include:
● Continue to focus on originating residential mortgage loans for retention in our portfolio. We are primarily a residential mortgage loan lender for borrowers in our primary market area. At June 30, 2022, $65.6 million, or 79.8% of our total loan portfolio, consisted of residential mortgage loans. We expect that residential mortgage lending will remain our primary lending activity.
● Grow and diversify our loan portfolio prudently by increasing originations of commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loans. Although we intend to continue our historical focus on the origination of residential mortgage loans, we intend to prudently increase our originations of commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loans in order to diversify our loan portfolio and increase yield. At June 30, 2022, commercial real estate loans amounted to $5.1 million, or 6.2% of total loans, and commercial and industrial loans amounted to $339,000, or 0.4% of total loans.
Commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loans have higher credit risk than one- to four-family residential mortgage loans.
● Maintain our strong asset quality through conservative loan underwriting. We intend to maintain strong asset quality through what we believe are our conservative underwriting standards and credit monitoring processes. At June 30, 2022, our nonperforming assets and troubled debt restructurings totaled $266,000, or 0.32% of total loans.
● Continue to grow low-cost “core” deposits. We consider our core deposits to include statement savings accounts, money market accounts, other savings deposits and checking accounts. We will continue our efforts to increase our core deposits to provide a stable source of funds to support loan growth at costs consistent with improving our interest rate spread and net interest margin. Core deposits totaled $74.8 million, or 68.0% of total deposits, at June 30, 2022.
● Remain a community-oriented institution and relying on high quality service to maintain and build a loyal local customer base. We were established in 1889 and have been operating continuously in Van Wert since that time. Through the goodwill we have developed over years of providing timely, efficient banking services, we believe that we have been able to attract a loyal base of local retail customers on which we hope to continue to build our banking business.
● Grow organically and through opportunistic acquisitions or branching. We intend to grow our balance sheet organically on a managed basis. In addition to organic growth, we may also consider expansion opportunities in our market area or in contiguous markets that we believe would enhance both our franchise value and stockholder returns. These opportunities may include acquiring other financial institutions and/or establishing loan production offices, establishing new, or de novo, branch offices and/or acquiring branch offices. We have no current plans or intentions regarding any such expansion activities.
We intend to continue to pursue these business strategies, subject to changes necessitated by future market conditions, regulatory restrictions and other factors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which are prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of income and expenses. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions that we use are based on historical experience and various other factors and are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, resulting in a change that could have a material impact on the carrying value of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. As an “emerging growth company” we may delay adoption of new or revised accounting pronouncements applicable to public companies until such pronouncements are made applicable to private companies. We intend to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Accordingly, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
The following represent our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is the estimated amount considered necessary to cover inherent, but unconfirmed, credit losses in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The allowance is established through the provision for losses on loans which is charged against income. In determining the allowance for loan losses, management makes significant estimates and has identified this policy as one of our most critical accounting policies.
Management performs a quarterly evaluation of the allowance for loan losses. Consideration is given to a variety of factors in establishing this estimate including, but not limited to, current economic conditions, delinquency statistics, geographic and industry concentrations, the adequacy of the underlying collateral, the financial strength of the borrower, results of internal loan reviews and other relevant factors. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires material estimates that may be susceptible to significant change.
The analysis has two components, specific and general allowances. The specific percentage allowance is for unconfirmed losses related to loans that are determined to be impaired. Impairment is measured by determining the present value of expected future cash flows or, for collateral-dependent loans, the fair value of the collateral adjusted for market conditions and selling expenses. If the fair value of the loan is less than the loan’s carrying value, a charge is recorded for the difference. The general allowance, which is for loans reviewed collectively, is determined by segregating the remaining loans by type of loan, risk weighting (if applicable) and payment history. We also analyze historical loss experience, delinquency trends, general economic conditions and geographic and industry concentrations. This analysis establishes historical loss percentages and qualitative factors that are applied to the loan groups to determine the amount of the allowance for loan losses necessary for loans that are reviewed collectively. The qualitative component is critical in determining the allowance for loan losses as certain trends may indicate the need for changes to the allowance for loan losses based on factors beyond the historical loss history. Not incorporating a qualitative component could misstate the allowance for loan losses. Actual loan losses may be significantly more than the allowances we have established which could result in a material negative effect on our financial results.
Deferred Tax Assets. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We exercise significant judgment in evaluating the amount and timing of recognition of the resulting tax liabilities and assets. These judgments require us to make projections of future taxable income. The judgments and estimates we make in determining our deferred tax assets, which are inherently subjective, are reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors
change. Determining the proper valuation allowance for deferred taxes is critical in properly valuing the deferred tax asset and the related recognition of income tax expense or benefit. Any reduction in estimated future taxable income may require us to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets.
Fair Value Measurements. The fair value of a financial instrument is defined as the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale. We estimate the fair value of a financial instrument and any related asset impairment using a variety of valuation methods. Where financial instruments are actively traded and have quoted market prices, quoted market prices are used for fair value. When the financial instruments are not actively traded, other observable market inputs, such as quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics, may be used, if available, to determine fair value. When observable market prices do not exist, we estimate fair value. These estimates are subjective in nature and imprecision in estimating these factors can impact the amount of gain or loss recorded. For a detailed description of the fair values measured at each level of the fair value hierarchy and the methodology we utilize, see note 12 of the notes to financial statements.
Selected Financial Data
The following selected consolidated financial data sets forth certain financial highlights of the Company and should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1) Represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(2) Represents net interest income as a percentage of average interest-earning assets.
(3) Represents noninterest expenses divided by the sum of net interest income and noninterest income.
(4) Van Wert Federal has adopted the “community bank leverage ratio (CBLR)” framework for measuring regulatory capital adequacy, which became effective January 1, 2020. The CBLR is the ratio of Tier 1 capital to average assets. To be considered well capitalized under the CBLR framework, Van Wert Federal was required to have a CBLR ratio of at least 9.0% at June 30, 2022 and 8.0% at June 30, 2021. See note 9 of notes to financial statements.
Comparison of Financial Condition at June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021
Total Assets. Total assets were $149.3 million at June 30, 2022, an increase of $22.1 million, or 17.4%, over the $127.2 million at June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily comprised of an increase in cash and due from banks of $25.1 million and an increase in loans of $3.3 million, which were partially offset by a decrease in investment securities of $4.0 million and a decrease in interest-bearing time deposits of $3.4 million.
Cash and Due from Banks. Cash and due from banks increased by $25.1 million, or 215.3%, to $36.7 million at June 30, 2022 from $11.7 million at June 30, 2021. The increase was due primarily to stock subscription proceeds of $15.3 million and an increase in deposits of $8.9 million.
Interest Bearing Time Deposits. Interest-bearing time deposits decreased by $3.4 million, or 69.9%, during the year ended June 30, 2022, to $1.5 million at June 30, 2022 from $4.9 million at June 30, 2021. Proceeds from maturing certificates of deposit during the year ended June 30, 2022 were used to fund the originations of new loans.
Investment Securities. Investment securities decreased $4.0 million, or 14.1%, to $24.5 million at June 30, 2022 from $28.5 million at June 30, 2021. Aggregate securities purchases of $12.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2022, were more than offset by sales of $9.7 million and calls, maturities and repayments of $4.0 million as well as a $2.6 million decline in fair value of the securities year-to-year.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, management elected to sell the Bank’s investment in U.S. Government agency securities. The securities were sold as management implemented a strategy to replace lower-yielding securities with higher-yielding securities, and subsequent to the sale, management made purchases of new U.S. Government agency securities and mortgage-backed securities.
The $2.6 million decline in the fair value of the investment securities was primarily attributable to the increases in interest rates in the economy. As the interest rates increased, the fair value of the securities declined. The unrealized losses are recorded to equity, net of tax, as management has determined that there are no credit quality concerns with the issuers of the securities and there is no intent to sell the securities and, as a result, the fair value is expected to recover as the securities approach their maturity dates.
The yield on our investment securities increased to 1.29% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 1.14% for the year ended June 30, 2021 and at June 30, 2022 the investment securities portfolio had a yield of 1.78%.
Net Loans. Net loans increased by $3.3 million, or 4.5%, to $77.7 million at June 30, 2022 from $74.4 million at June 30, 2021. During the year ended June 30, 2022, loan originations totaled $23.0 million, comprised of $19.1 million of loans secured by one- to four-family residential real estate, $1.7 secured by commercial real estate, $1.0 secured by agricultural real estate, along with $60,000 of commercial and industrial loans, $731,000 of multifamily loans and $364,000 of consumer loans.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, residential real estate loans increased $4.3 million, or 7.0%, to $65.6 million at June 30, 2022, construction loans increased $1.1 million, or 23.2%, to $6.0 million at June 30, 2022, multifamily loans increased $719,000 and agricultural real estate loans increased $475,000, or 15.9%, to a total of $3.5 million at June 30, 2022, while commercial real estate loans decreased $1.4 million, or 21.6%, to $5.1 million at June 30, 2022.
Increases in loan balances reflect our strategy to grow our loan portfolio, continuing to focus primarily on owner-occupied one-to-four family residential real estate loans while increasing our emphasis on commercial loans. The Bank is currently undertaking a search for a new President and Chief Executive Officer. Once the new Chief Executive Officer is appointed, the current President and Chief Executive Officer is expected to become the Chief Operating Officer and Chief Risk Officer, which will allow him to better leverage his competency in commercial lending.
Such growth has been achieved amid strong competition for one- to four-family residential mortgage loans in our market area. Management intends to continue this activity in future periods.
Deposits. Deposits increased by $9.1 million, or 9.0%, to $110.0 million at June 30, 2022 from $100.9 million at June 30, 2021. Core deposits increased $12.4 million, or 19.8%, to $74.8 million at June 30, 2022 from $62.4 million at June 30, 2021. Certificates of deposit decreased $3.3 million, or 8.5%, to $35.2 million at June 30, 2022 from $38.5 million at June 30, 2021.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, management continued its strategy of pursuing growth in demand accounts and other lower cost core deposits, in part by enhancing products and services offered, including mobile banking. Management intends to continue its efforts to increase core deposits, with an emphasis on growth in consumer and business demand deposits.
Stock Subscription Proceeds in Escrow. Stock subscription proceeds in escrow totaled $15.3 million at June 30, 2022. This balance represented the proceeds received for stock orders during the subscription period that began during June and was scheduled to end in July 2022. These proceeds earned interest at a rate of 0% during the period held until July 13, 2022, the date the shares were issued.
Total Equity. Total equity decreased $2.0 million, or 8.0%, to $23.4 million at June 30, 2022 from $25.4 million at June 30, 2021. The decrease resulted primarily from a $2.0 million decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income and a net loss of $9,000 during the year ended June 30, 2022. The $2.0 million decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income was comprised solely of the unrealized losses, net of tax, on the investment securities portfolio.
Average Balances and Yields. The following table sets forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the years indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made, as the effects are immaterial. Average balances are calculated using month-end actual balances, rather than daily average balances. We believe the use of month-end actual balances is representative of our operations. Non-accrual loans are included in average balances only. Average yields include the effect of deferred fees, discounts, and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or interest expense. Deferred loan fees are immaterial.
(1) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted average rate of interest-bearing liabilities.
(2) Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume. There were no out-of-period items or adjustments required to be excluded from the table below.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021
General. Net loss for the year ended June 30, 2022, was $9,000, a decrease of $267,000, compared to net income of $258,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in net income was primarily due to a $554,000 increase in noninterest expenses, which was partially offset by a $218,000 increase in net interest income, and a $67,000 decrease in federal income taxes.
Interest Income. Interest income increased $89,000, or 2.9%, to $3.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, from $3.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. This increase was attributable to a $140,000, or 67.5%, increase in interest on investment securities, which was partially offset by a $14,000, or 0.5%, decrease in interest on loans receivable, and a $36,000, or 23.2%, decrease in interest on interest-bearing deposits and other assets.
The average balance of loans during the year ended June 30, 2022, increased by $10.1 million, or 14.3%, from the balance for the year ended June 30, 2021, while the average yield on loans decreased by 51 basis points to 3.38% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 3.89% for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in average yield on loans was due to the declining interest rate environment that prevailed for much of the fiscal year, as well as an increase in payoffs of higher interest rate loans as customers refinanced loans at lower interest rates.
The average balance of investment securities increased $8.5 million to $26.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 from $18.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, while the average yield on investment securities increased by 15 basis points to 1.29% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 1.14% for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in average yield on securities was due primarily to management’s efforts to restructure the investment portfolio by selling lower-yielding securities and replacing them with higher yielding instruments. The average balance of other interest-bearing deposits, comprised primarily of certificates of deposit in other financial institutions, overnight deposits and stock in the Federal Home Loan Bank, increased $14.7 million, or 164.1%, for the year ended June 30, 2022, while the average yield declined 125 basis points, to 0.51% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 1.76% for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decline in average yield was due to the decline in interest rates in the overall economy during the periods.
Interest Expense. Total interest expense decreased $128,000, or 28.3%, to $325,000 for the year ended June 30, 2022 from the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of 15 basis points in the average cost of deposits to 0.31% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 0.46% for the year ended June 30, 2021, reflecting the declining interest rate environment, which was partially offset by an increase of $7.5 million, or 7.7%, in the average balance of deposits to $105.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 from $97.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $218,000, or 8.2%, to $2.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $2.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase reflected an increase in the average net interest earning assets of $25.7 million, which was partially offset by a decline in the interest rate spread to 2.14% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 2.73% for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our net interest margin decreased to 2.19% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 2.72% for the year ended June 30, 2021. The interest rate spread and net interest margin were impacted by a continuation of a low interest rate environment that prevailed over much of the two-year period.
Provision for Loan Losses. Based on an analysis of the factors described in “Critical Accounting Policies-Allowance for Loan Losses,” management concluded that a provision for loan losses was not required for each of the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. The allowance for loan losses was $223,000 at both June 30, 2022 and 2021 and represented 0.27% of total loans at June 30, 2022, and 0.30% of total loans at June 30, 2021. The determination over the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses was due primarily to the low balances of nonperforming loans, delinquent loans and no net charge-offs in both periods.
Total nonperforming loans were $360,000 at June 30, 2022, compared to $183,000 at June 30, 2021. Classified loans totaled $123,000 at June 30, 2022, compared to $177,000 at June 30, 2021, and total loans past due greater than 30 days were $307,000 and $276,000 at those respective dates. As a percentage of nonperforming loans, the allowance for loan losses was 62.0% at June 30, 2022 compared to 121.9% at June 30, 2021.
The allowance for loan losses reflects the estimate management believes to be appropriate to cover incurred probable losses which were inherent in the loan portfolio at June 30, 2022 and 2021. While management believes the estimates and assumptions used in the determination of the adequacy of the allowance are reasonable, such estimates and assumptions could be proven incorrect in the future, and the actual amount of future provisions may exceed the amount of past provisions, and the increase in future provisions that may be required may adversely impact the Bank’s financial condition and results of operations. In addition, bank regulatory agencies periodically review the allowance for loan losses and may require an increase in the provision for possible loan losses or the recognition of loan charge-offs, based on judgments different than those of management.
Non-Interest Income. Non-interest income totaled $217,000 for the year ended June 30, 2022, an increase of $3,000, or 1.2%, from $214,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $5,000, or 4.9%, increase in other income, which was partially offset by a $2,000, or 2.3%, decline in earnings on bank-owned life insurance.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense increased $554,000, or 21.5%, to $3.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was due primarily to a $291,000 loss on sale of
investment securities, a $118,000, or 8.7%, increase in salaries and employee benefits, a $70,000, or 49.7%, increase in professional fees, a $52,000, or 16.0%, increase in other expense and a $31,000, or 15.1%, increase in data processing fees, which were partially offset by a $37,000, or 18.3%, decrease in directors fees. The increase in salaries and employee benefits was due primarily to expense related to the Chairman of the Board rejoining management staff to assist with the pending conversion and stock offering, along with normal merit increases period-to-period. The increase in professional fees was due primarily to costs incurred indirectly related to the mutual to stock conversion. The increase in data processing was due primarily to costs associated with additional services from the Bank’s primary provider to increase service capabilities for customers. The increase in other operating expense was due primarily to consulting services related to the management search commitment, as well as cost increases related to the Bank’s overall growth period-to-period.
Noninterest expense can be expected to increase because of costs associated with operating as a public company and increased compensation costs related to possible implementation of one or more stock-based benefit plans, if approved by our stockholders.
Federal Income Taxes. Federal income taxes decreased by $67,000, or 188.9%, to a $31,000 benefit for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to tax expense of $35,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in the federal income tax provision was due primarily to a $333,000, or 113.8% decrease in pretax income.
Management of Market Risk
General. Our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk because, as a financial institution, the majority of our assets and liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Therefore, a principal part of our operations is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our financial condition and results of operations to changes in market interest rates. All directors participate in discussions during the regular board meetings evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, and the level of risk that is appropriate. These discussions take into consideration our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives consistent with the policy and guidelines approved by them.
Our asset/liability management strategy attempts to manage the impact of changes in interest rates on net interest income, our primary source of earnings. Among the techniques we are using to manage interest rate risk are:
● maintaining capital levels that exceed the thresholds for well-capitalized status under federal regulations;
● maintaining a high level of liquidity;
● growing our volume of core deposit accounts;
● managing our investment securities portfolio so as to reduce the average maturity and effective life of the portfolio; and
● continuing to diversify our loan portfolio by adding more commercial-related loans, which typically have shorter maturities and/or balloon payments.
By following these strategies, we believe that we are better positioned to react to increases and decreases in market interest rates.
We have not engaged in hedging activities, such as engaging in futures or options. We do not anticipate entering into similar transactions in the future.
Economic Value of Equity. We also compute amounts by which the net present value of our assets and liabilities (economic value of equity or “EVE”) would change in the event of a range of assumed changes in market
interest rates. This model uses a discounted cash flow analysis and an option-based pricing approach to measure the interest rate sensitivity of net portfolio value. The model estimates the economic value of each type of asset, liability and off-balance sheet contract under the assumptions that the United States Treasury yield curve increases instantaneously by 100, 200, 300 and 400 basis point increments or decreases instantaneously by 100 or 200 basis point increments, with changes in interest rates representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve.
The following table sets forth, at June 30, 2022, the calculation of the estimated changes in our EVE that would result from the designated immediate changes in the United States Treasury yield curve.
(1) Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities.
(2) EVE is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts.
(3) Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
(4) EVE Ratio represents EVE divided by the present value of assets.
The table above indicates that at June 20, 2022, we would have experienced a 6.82% decrease in EVE in the event of an instantaneous parallel 200 basis point increase in market interest rates and a 5.23% increase in EVE in the event of an instantaneous 200 basis point decrease in market interest rates.
Change in Net Interest Income. The following table sets forth, at June 30, 2022, the calculation of the estimated changes in our net interest income (“NII”) that would result from the designated immediate changes in the United States Treasury yield curve.
(1) Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities.
The table above indicates that at June 30, 2022, we would have experienced an 8.00% increase in NII in the event of an instantaneous parallel 200 basis point increase in market interest rates and a 22.87% decrease in NII in the event of an instantaneous 200 basis point decrease in market interest rates.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurement. Modeling changes in EVE and NII require making certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. For instance, the EVE and NII tables presented above assume that the composition of our interest-sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. However, the shape of the yield curve changes constantly and the value and pricing of our assets and liabilities, including our deposits, may not closely correlate with changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, although the EVE and NII tables may provide an indication of our interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time and in the context of a particular yield curve, such measurements are not intended to and do not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on EVE and NII and will differ from actual results.
EVE and net interest NII calculations also may not reflect the fair values of financial instruments. For example, decreases in market interest rates can increase the fair values of our loans, deposits and borrowings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity describes our ability to meet the financial obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet the borrowing and deposit withdrawal requirements of our customers and to fund current and planned expenditures. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities, and proceeds from maturities of securities. We also have the ability to borrow from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati. At June 30, 2022, we had no outstanding borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati. At June 30, 2022, we had the capacity to borrow $44.9 million from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati.
While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. Our most liquid assets are cash and short-term investments. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending, and investing activities during any given period.
Our cash flows are comprised of three primary classifications: cash flows from operating activities, cash flows from investing activities, and cash flows from financing activities. For further information, see the statements of cash flows contained in the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report.
We are committed to maintaining a strong liquidity position. We monitor our liquidity position on a daily basis. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds to meet our current funding commitments. Based on our deposit retention experience and current pricing strategy, we anticipate that a significant portion of maturing time deposits will be retained.
At June 30, 2022, Van Wert Federal’s Tier 1 leverage capital was $25.5 million, or 17.5% of adjusted assets. Accordingly, it was categorized as well-capitalized at June 30, 2022 under the “community bank leverage ratio” framework. Management is not aware of any conditions or events since the most recent notification that would change our category. For further information, see note 9 to the notes to financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. At June 30, 2022, we had $6.7 million of outstanding commitments to originate loans, $6.5 million of which represents the balance of remaining funds to be disbursed on construction loans in process. Certificates of deposit that are scheduled to mature in less than one year from June 30, 2022 totaled $18.4 million at June 30, 2022. Management expects that a substantial portion of the maturing certificates of deposit will be renewed. However, if a substantial portion of these deposits is not retained, we may utilize Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati advances or raise interest rates on deposits to attract new accounts, which may result in higher levels of interest expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of the impact of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 of the notes to financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented in this prospectus have been prepared according to GAAP which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates, generally, have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than does inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.