Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere. This discussion contains a number of forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in the Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” The forward-looking statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are made only as of the date hereof.
Company Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company primarily focused on the development of oral recombinant vaccines based on our Vector-Adjuvant-Antigen Standardized Technology (“VAAST”) proprietary oral vaccine platform. Our oral vaccines are designed to generate broad and durable immune responses that may protect against a wide range of infectious diseases and may be useful for the treatment of chronic viral infections and cancer. Our investigational vaccines are administered using a room temperature-stable tablet, rather than by injection.
We are developing prophylactic vaccine candidates that target a range of infectious diseases, including SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”)), norovirus (a widespread cause of acute gastro-intestinal enteritis), seasonal influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (“RSV”) (a common cause of respiratory tract infections). We have completed a Phase 1 clinical trial for our first SARS CoV-2 vaccine candidate, that commenced in October 2020; the study met its primary and secondary endpoints. A Phase 2 study with our second-generation SARS CoV-2 vaccine candidate commenced dosing in October 2021 and is currently ongoing. Three Phase 1 human studies for our norovirus vaccine candidate have been completed, including a study with a bivalent norovirus vaccine which, as we disclosed in September 2019, met its primary and secondary endpoints. Additional Phase 1 studies with our norovirus vaccine are currently ongoing. Our monovalent H1 influenza vaccine protected participants against H1 influenza infection in a Phase 2 challenge study, as published in 2020 (Lancet ID). In addition, we are in early development of our first therapeutic vaccine targeting cervical cancer and dysplasia caused by human papillomavirus (“HPV”).
Having previously disclosed that we were no longer prioritizing internal manufacturing and planned to rely primarily on third party manufacturers for the current Good Manufacturing Practice (“cGMP”) manufacturing of our candidate vaccines, we are now also relying on internal manufacturing for production in pre-commercial quantities.
Vaxart Biosciences, Inc. was originally incorporated in California under the name West Coast Biologicals, Inc. in March 2004 and changed its name to Vaxart, Inc. (“Private Vaxart”) in July 2007, when it reincorporated in the state of Delaware. In February 2018, Private Vaxart completed a reverse merger (the “Merger”) with Aviragen Therapeutics, Inc. (“Aviragen”), pursuant to which Private Vaxart survived as a wholly owned subsidiary of Aviragen. Under the terms of the Merger, Aviragen changed its name to Vaxart, Inc. and Private Vaxart changed its name to Vaxart Biosciences, Inc.
Through the Merger, we acquired two royalty-earning products, Relenza and Inavir. We also acquired three Phase 2 clinical stage antiviral compounds, which we have discontinued independent clinical development of. However, for one of these, Vapendavir, we have entered into an exclusive worldwide license agreement with Altesa Biosciences, Inc. (“Altesa”) on July 6, 2021, permitting Altesa to develop and commercialize this capsid-binding broad spectrum antiviral.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
Revenue from Customer Service Contracts
We have been earning revenue from a fixed price service contract, as amended, for a total of $617,000, which we completed in the first three months of 2021.
Revenue from Government Contract
The government contract with the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (“HHS BARDA”), as modified, was a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, under which we were reimbursed for allowable direct contract costs plus allowable indirect costs and a fixed-fee totaling $15.7 million from September 2015 through September 30, 2018. Activities were completed in 2018 and no future revenue is expected from this contract.
Royalty Revenue
We earn royalty revenue on sales of Inavir and, until the patent expired, earned royalty revenue on sales of Relenza (both treatments for influenza) through our licensees Daiichi Sankyo Company, Limited and GlaxoSmithKline, plc, respectively, under royalty agreements with expiry dates in December 2029 and July 2019, respectively, based on fixed percentages of net sales of these drugs.
Non-Cash Royalty Revenue Related to Sale of Future Royalties
In April 2016, Aviragen sold certain royalty rights related to Inavir in the Japanese market for $20.0 million to HealthCare Royalty Partners III, L.P. (“HCRP”). We pay HCRP the first $3 million plus 15% of the next $1 million of royalties earned in annual periods ending on March 31. At the time of the Merger, the estimated future benefit to HCRP was remeasured at fair value and was estimated to be $15.9 million, which we account for as a liability and amortize using the effective interest method over the remaining estimated life of the arrangement. The estimated future benefit was remeasured as of December 31, 2021, when the fair value was estimated to be $11.5 million, resulting in a revaluation gain of $3.8 million. Even though we do not retain the related royalties under the transaction, as the amounts are remitted to HCRP, we will continue to record revenue related to these royalties until the amount of the associated liability and related interest is fully amortized.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, including the development of our tablet vaccine platform, and the manufacturing, preclinical and clinical development activities of our tablet vaccine candidates. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of the following:
●
employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
●
expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations (“CROs”), that conduct clinical trials on our behalf;
●
expenses incurred under agreements with contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”), that manufacture product used in the clinical trials;
●
manufacturing materials, analytical and release testing services required to produce vaccine candidates used primarily in clinical trials;
●
process development expenses incurred internally and externally to improve the efficiency and yield of the bulk vaccine and tablet manufacturing activities;
●
laboratory supplies and vendor expenses related to preclinical research activities;
●
consultant expenses for services supporting our clinical, regulatory and manufacturing activities; and
●
facilities, depreciation and allocated overhead expenses.
We do not allocate our internal expenses to specific programs. Our employees and other internal resources are not directly tied to any one research program and are typically deployed across multiple projects. Internal research and development expenses are presented as one total.
We incur significant external costs for manufacturing our tablet vaccine candidates, and for CROs that conduct clinical trials on our behalf. We capture these expenses for each vaccine program. We do not allocate external costs incurred on preclinical research or process development to specific programs.
The following table shows our period-over-period research and development expenses, identifying external costs that were incurred in each of our vaccine programs and, separately, on preclinical research and process development (in thousands):
We expect that research and development expenses will increase in 2022 and beyond as we advance our tablet vaccine candidates into and through clinical trials, pursue regulatory approval of our tablet vaccine candidates and prepare for a possible commercial launch, all of which will also require a significant investment in manufacturing and inventory related costs. To the extent that we enter into licensing, partnering or collaboration agreements, a significant portion of such costs may be borne by third parties.
The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for our tablet vaccine candidates. The probability of successful commercialization of our tablet vaccine candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data obtained in future trials, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our tablet vaccine candidates.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit, accounting, public relations, market research and other consulting services. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Allocated expenses consist of rent, depreciation and other facilities related expenses.
Results of Operations
The following table presents period-over-period changes in selected items in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss (in thousands, except percentages):
Total Revenues
The following table summarizes the period-over-period changes in our revenues for years ended December 31 (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenue from Customer Service Contracts
We earned revenue from customer service contracts of $13,000, $198,000 and $406,000 in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This revenue was recognized from a fixed price contract executed in July 2019, as amended, for a total of $617,000, which we have now completed.
Revenue from Government Contract
We reversed previously-recognized revenue of $20,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2021, the cumulative revenue recorded from inception under the HHS BARDA contract represents $20,000 less than the maximum amount billable under the contract as presently modified. The active phase of the contract occurred in 2016 and 2017. In 2018 activities were wound down and completed and no future revenue is expected from this contract.
Royalty Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, royalty revenue decreased by $3.0 million, or 100%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which represented a decrease of $1.5 million, or 33%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Royalty revenue was earned on sales of Relenza and Inavir, both treatments for influenza, which were acquired in the Merger and is based on fixed percentages of net sales of these drugs in the period. Relenza revenue ceased in 2019 and all our 2020 Inavir royalty revenue was earned in the first quarter. We recognize royalty revenue from sales of Inavir only after the first $3 million net of 5% withholding tax in years ending on March 31 has been recognized as non-cash royalty revenue related to sale of future royalties. We recognized no royalty revenue in 2021 and do not expect our royalty revenue in the future, if any, will be significant.
Non-cash Royalty Revenue Related to Sale of Future Royalties
For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-cash royalty revenue related to sale of future royalties was $879,000, compared to $886,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash royalty revenue of up to $3.3 million may be earned in each year ending on March 31. In 2019, we recorded $1.7 million related to the year ended March 31, 2019, plus $3.3 million related to the year ended March 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized the $34,000 not recognized in 2019 for the year ended March 31, 2020, and $852,000 related to the year ended March 31, 2021. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized the $493,000 for the year ended March 31, 2021, and $386,000 related to the year ending March 31, 2022.
Total Operating Expenses
The following table summarizes the period-over-period changes in our operating expenses for years ended December 31 (in thousands, except percentages):
Research and Development
For 2021, research and development expenses increased by $28.9 million, or 145%, compared to 2020. The increase was principally due to preclinical, manufacturing and clinical expenses related to our COVID-19 and norovirus vaccine candidates and increased personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, and facilities allocation related to headcount increases.
For 2020, research and development expenses increased by $5.3 million, or 37%, compared to 2019. The increase was principally due to preclinical, manufacturing and clinical expenses related to our COVID-19 vaccine candidate, partially offset by lower costs of manufacturing and clinical trials for our norovirus vaccine candidate and lower depreciation and amortization expense.
We expect that research and development expenses will increase in 2022 as we will incur significant expenses for manufacturing and clinical trials related to our COVID-19 and norovirus vaccine candidates.
General and Administrative
For 2021, general and administrative expenses increased by $6.7 million, or 44%, compared to 2020. The principal reasons for the increase in 2021 are increased personnel costs, including the non-cash expense for modifying the terms of outstanding options awarded to our former Chairman of the Board, additional directors and officers liability insurance costs and higher legal fees and other professional costs.
For 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $9.0 million, or 146%, compared to 2019. The increase was principally due to increased legal fees, higher stock-based compensation costs, additional directors and officers liability insurance costs, severance expenses for our former Chief Executive Officer and increased costs incurred in upgrading our accounting systems in line with our corporate growth.
Impairment of Intangible Assets
Impairment of intangible assets of $3.0 million represents the partial impairment as of December 31, 2021, of developed technology related to royalty revenue receivable, for which we have lowered our projections, principally due to increased social distancing and mask wearing due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restructuring Charges (Reversals)
In 2019, in connection with our December restructuring, we accrued costs of $3.2 million representing the amount we were invoiced by Lonza Houston, Inc. (“Lonza”) after the suspension of our norovirus manufacturing work order, representing the maximum amount potentially payable to Lonza. We also accrued $425,000 for severance and legal expenses and impaired $1.3 million of property and equipment and right-of-use assets, mainly related to manufacturing assets. In 2020, we incurred further costs, principally legal fees, of $122,000 and we paid $2.3 million in full settlement with Lonza, enabling us to reverse $971,000 of the 2019 accrual. In 2021 there were no charges or reversals related to this restructuring and we do not expect any further adjustments in the future.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table summarizes the period-over-period changes in our non-operating income and expenses for years ended December 31 (in thousands, except percentages):
For 2021 we recorded net non-operating income of $2.4 million, compared to net non-operating expenses of $1.8 million in 2020 and $2.4 million in 2019.
The gain on revaluation of future royalty liability in 2021 arose due to the lowered projections of amounts payable to HCRP, as royalties have declined since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-cash interest expense related to sale of future royalties, which relates to accounting for sums that will become payable to HCRP for royalty revenue earned from Inavir as debt, was $1.5 million in 2021, down from the $1.9 million and $2.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as the outstanding balance due to HCRP has been paid down. We project a further reduction in 2022 following the revaluation of our liability to HCRP.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table summarizes the period-over-period changes in our provision for income taxes for years ended December 31 (in thousands, except percentages):
A significant portion of the provision for income taxes in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, represents withholding tax on royalty revenue earned on sales of Inavir in Japan, which is potentially recoverable as a foreign tax credit but expensed because we record a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. The amount of income tax expense recorded is directly proportional to Inavir royalties, including the portion that we pass through to HCRP, and has declined in line with reductions in royalty revenue. In addition, we incurred charges relating to interest on an intercompany loan from a foreign subsidiary and for state income taxes in the United States.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of financing is from the sale and issuance of common stock and common stock warrants in public offerings, along with proceeds from the exercise of warrants. In the past, we have also obtained funds from the issuance of secured debt and preferred stock and from collaboration agreements. In October 2020 we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement (the “October 2020 ATM”), under which we could sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $250 million. Having sold shares under the October 2020 ATM for aggregate gross proceeds of $133.4 million, we terminated the October 2020 ATM in September 2021 and entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement (the “September 2021 ATM”), under which we may offer and sell, from time to time through sales agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million. We will incur direct expenses and pay sales commissions of up to 3.0% of gross proceeds from the sale of shares under the September 2021 ATM.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $182.7 million of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Since then, we have received net proceeds of $1.0 million from the sale of common stock under the September 2021 ATM. There is approximately $95 million in net proceeds still available to us under the September 2021 ATM.
We believe our existing funds (including funds already received in 2022) are sufficient to fund us for at least one year from the date of issuance of this Annual Report. To continue operations thereafter, we expect that we will need to raise further capital, through the sale of additional securities or otherwise. Our operating needs include the planned costs to operate our business, including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, most notably our ability to successfully commercialize our products and services.
We may fund a significant portion of our ongoing operations through partnering and collaboration agreements which, while reducing our risks and extending our cash runway, will also reduce our share of eventual revenues, if any, from our vaccine product candidates. We may be able to fund certain activities with assistance from government programs. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. We may also fund our operations through debt financing, which would result in debt service obligations, and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on acceptable terms, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market vaccine candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. Any of these actions could harm our business, results of operations and prospects.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
●
the timing and costs of our planned preclinical studies for our product candidates;
●
the timing and costs of our planned clinical trials of our product candidates;
●
our manufacturing capabilities, including the availability of contract manufacturing organizations to supply our product candidates at reasonable cost;
●
the amount and timing of royalties received on sales of Inavir;
●
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
●
the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
●
revenue received from commercial sales of our future products, which will be subject to receipt of regulatory approval;
●
the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may enter into;
●
the amount and timing of any payments that may be required in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of any patents or patent applications or other intellectual property rights; and
●
the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
We experienced negative cash flow from operating activities in 2021, 2020 and 2019 in the amounts of $59.8 million, $23.8 million and $13.1 million, respectively. The cash used in operating activities in 2021 was due to cash used to fund a net loss of $70.5 million and an increase in working capital of $2.1 million, partially offset by adjustments for net non-cash income related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense related to sale of future royalties and non-cash revenue related to sale of future royalties totaling $12.8 million. The cash used in operating activities in 2020 was due to cash used to fund a net loss of $32.2 million, partially offset by adjustments for net non-cash income related to depreciation and amortization, accretion of premium on investments, impairment of intangible assets, stock-based compensation, gain on remeasurement of future royalty liability, non-cash interest expense related to sale of future royalties and non-cash revenue related to sale of future royalties totaling $5.6 million and a decrease in working capital of $2.8 million. The cash used in operating activities in 2019 was due to cash used to fund a net loss of $18.6 million, partially offset by net non-cash expenses related to depreciation and amortization, gain on sale of equipment, impairment charges, stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense, loss on debt extinguishment, non-cash interest expense related to sale of future royalties and non-cash revenue related to sale of future royalties totaling $4.2 million and a decrease in working capital of $1.3 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
In 2021, we used $4.8 million for a business acquisition and $39.1 million to purchase marketable securities, net of maturities. We used $5.2 million, $1.2 million and $850,000 in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, to purchase property and equipment. In 2020, we received cash of $3,000 for the sale of equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
In 2021, we received $122.2 million from the sale of common stock under the October 2020 ATM, $1.9 million from the exercise of common stock warrants and $1.7 million from the exercise of stock options. In 2020, we received $9.2 million from the sale of common stock and common stock warrants in a registered direct offering in March, $97.0 million from the sale of common stock under an at-the-market facility in July, $4.9 million from the sale of common stock under the October 2020 ATM, $26.0 million from the exercise of common stock warrants, $602,000 from the exercise of stock options and net proceeds of $652,000 from the disgorgement of related party short-swing profits. In 2019, we received $2.5 million from the sale of common stock in a registered direct offering in March, $8.1 million from the sale of common stock, pre-funded warrants and common stock warrants in an underwritten public offering in April, $7.8 million from the sale of common stock, pre-funded warrants and common stock warrants in an underwritten public offering in September, $1.2 million from the exercise of pre-funded warrants and $180,000 from the exercise of common stock warrants, partially offset by repayment of principal of $3.8 million on the secured promissory note payable to Oxford Finance.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
We have the following contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Long Term Debt, HCRP. Under an agreement executed in 2016, we are obligated to pay HCRP the first $3 million plus 15% of the next $1 million of royalty revenues that we earn for sales of Inavir in each year ending on March 31. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 for further details.
Operating leases. Operating lease amounts include future minimum lease payments under all our non-cancellable operating leases with an initial term in excess of one year, including a total of $14.9 million for one lease that has been executed but has not yet commenced. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 for further details.
Purchase obligations. These amounts include an estimate of all open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business, including commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers for which we have not received the goods or services. We consider all open purchase orders, which are generally enforceable and legally binding, to be commitments, although the terms may afford us the option to cancel based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials, and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided and include the costs incurred but not yet invoiced within other accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. These costs can be a significant component of our research and development expenses.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets acquired in the Merger were initially recorded at their estimated fair values of $20.3 million for developed technology related to Inavir which was, until it was revalued, being amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period of future royalties of 11.75 years and $1.8 million for the developed technology related to Relenza which was fully amortized over the remaining royalty period of 1.3 years. The developed technology related to Inavir was revalued at $10.6 million as of December 31, 2021, resulting in an impairment loss of $3.0 million being recorded. These valuations were prepared by an independent third party based on discounted cash flows of estimated future revenue streams, which are highly subjective. The fair value, as reassessed as of December 31, 2021, is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining period of future royalties of 7.9 years.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the fair value of all stock option awards to employees, non-executive directors and consultants on the grant date, and record the fair value of these awards, net of estimated forfeitures, as compensation expense over the service period. The fair value of options is estimated using the Black-Scholes valuation model and the expense recorded is affected by subjective assumptions regarding a number of variables, as follows:
Expected term - This represents the period that our stock-based awards granted are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (the arithmetic average of its original contractual term and its average vesting term). We have very limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock-based awards. Based on the weighted average applied to options awarded in 2021, a notional 10% decrease in expected term would have reduced the fair value and the related compensation expense by approximately 2.3%.
Expected volatility - This is a measure of the amount by which our common stock price has fluctuated or is expected to fluctuate. Since the beginning of 2020 we have measured volatility based on the historical volatility of our own stock over the retrospective period corresponding to the expected term of the options on the measurement date. Prior to 2020 we applied 51% weighting to our own historic volatility and 7% to the historical volatility of each of seven comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies, selected based on their similar size and stage of life cycle. Based on the weighted average applied to options awarded in 2021, a notional 10% decrease in expected volatility (from 125% to 113%) would have reduced the fair value and the related compensation expense by approximately 4.7%.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - This is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve on the measurement date corresponding with the expected term of the stock-based awards.
Expected Dividend - We have not made any dividend payments and do not plan to pay dividends in the foreseeable future. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Forfeiture Rate - This is a measure of the amount of awards that are expected to not vest and is reassessed quarterly. An increase in the estimated forfeiture rate will cause a small decrease the related compensation expense early in the service period, but since the final expense recorded for each award is the number of options vested times their grant date fair value, it has no impact on the total expense recorded.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See the “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 for information related to the issuance of new accounting standards in 2021, none of which have had, or are expected to have, a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.