ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Forward-Looking Statements and Associated Risks.
This Form 10-K contains certain statements that are forward-looking within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. For this purpose, any statements contained in this Form 10-K that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” or “continue,” or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements by their nature involve substantial risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially depending on a variety of factors, many of which are not within our control. These factors include but are not limited to economic conditions generally and in the industries in which we may participate; competition within our chosen industry, including competition from much larger competitors; technological advances and failure to successfully develop business relationships.
Based on our financial history since inception, our auditor has expressed substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit totaling $(35,693,207). This raises substantial doubts about our ability to continue as a going concern.
PLAN OF OPERATIONS
We have now been able to reconnect with event services business relationships as a result of the impact from COVID-19 lessening for the event services business. In addition, the Company further expects, as a result of Prime Time Live Inc.’s new distribution agreement with Insane Impact LLC as of November 13, (the “Agreement”), additional revenues from the sale of Screens to be generated during the year.
As such, and as part of the Agreement, we sold two Screens during the year and also entered into a new 12-month lease purchase arrangement in March with a third party to lease our refurbished 53’ semi-trailer at an annual rate of $119,000 whereby the lessee exercised their option in January and purchased such refurbished semi-trailer at an amount of $152,000. These transactions allowed us to generate needed cash flow to fund our operations.
Results of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, compared to the Year Ended December 31,
During the years ended December 31, and 2020, we recognized total revenues of $339,180 and $21,000, respectively.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, was $64,777 compared to $(57,763) gross profit loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit of $122,540 pertained primarily to the sale of two Screens as well as the rental of our refurbished semi-trailer.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $238,672 in operating expenses compared to $217,768 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change results primarily from an increase in consulting fees of $64,140 offset by a decrease in general and administrative expenses and professional fees of $43,236.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used cash flows from operational activities of $41,173 based upon a net loss of $249,355 which was adjusted for the non-cash items of $22,775 in depreciation, $69,443 in loss on disposition of assets and $77,500 in in the issuance of shares for services. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used cash flows from operational activities of $226,765 based upon a net loss of $275,782 which was adjusted for the non-cash items of $35,291 in deprecation and $12,500 in the issuance of shares for services.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased $115,790 in additional event screen equipment and received proceeds of $22,275 from the disposition of assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we purchased $42,427 in additional event screens.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we were provided cash flows from financing activities through loans, including related parties, net of repayments, in the amount of $65,000 as compared to during the year ended December 31, 2020, we were provided cash flows from financing activities through the sale of 2,095,999 shares of our common stock as part of a private placement in the amount of $262,000 and received loans from related parties, net of repayments, in the amount of $6,730.
Debt
On March 1, 2021, the Company borrowed $35,000 from an individual in exchange for an unsecured promissory note that included interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum on the unpaid principal balance with any accrued and unpaid interest due on or before March 1, 2022. At December 31, 2021, the Company owes $35,000 and incurred interest of $2,917 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On March 1, 2021, the Company borrowed $30,000 from a more than 5% shareholder in exchange for an unsecured promissory note that included interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum on the unpaid principal balance with any accrued and unpaid interest due on or before March 1, 2022. A December 31, 2021, the Company owes $30,000 and incurred interest of $2,700 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The promissory note was paid in full on January 7, 2022.
During February and March 2020, an affiliate of an officer of the Company loaned the Company $14,200 in exchange for an unsecured convertible promissory note that included interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum on the unpaid principal balance with any accrued and unpaid interest due on or before December 31, (the “Note”). The Note allowed for the note holder to convert, at their discretion, any accrued and unpaid interest and principal balance due on the Note in whole or in part into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $0.125 per share. On June 12, 2020, the note holder converted $10,000 of the Note into 80,000 shares of the Company’s common stock and on July 1, the Company repaid he remaining $4,200 in principal on the Note plus $251 in interest.
In order for us to continue as a going concern, we will need to obtain additional debt or equity financing and look for companies with cash flow positive operations that we can acquire. There can be no assurance that we will be able to secure additional debt or equity financing, that we will be able to acquire cash flow positive operations, or that, if we are successful in any of those actions, those actions will produce adequate cash flow to enable us to meet all our future obligations. Most of our existing financing arrangements are short-term. If we are unable to obtain additional debt or equity financing, we may be required to significantly reduce or cease operations.
Going Concern
We have approximately $55,000 in cash at March 14, and have incurred operating losses and limited cash flows from operations since inception. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $(35,693,207) and we will require additional working capital to fund operations through and beyond. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements included in this Form 10-K do not include any adjustments related to recoverability and classification of asset carrying amounts or the amount and classification of liabilities that might result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
In their report on the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, our independent registered public accounting firm has expressed substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. There is no assurance that any revenue will be realized in the future.
There can be no assurance that we will have adequate capital resources to fund planned operations or that any additional funds will be available to us when needed or at all, or, if available, will be available on favorable terms or in amounts required by us. If we are unable to obtain adequate capital resources to fund operations, we may be required to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our operations, which may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and ability to operate as a going concern.
Short Term
On a short-term basis, we have not generated revenues sufficient to cover our growth-oriented operations plan. Based on prior history, we may continue to incur losses until such a time that our revenues are sufficient to cover our operating expenses and growth-oriented operations plan. As a result, we may need additional capital in the form of equity or loans, none of which is committed as of this filing.
Capital Resources
We have only common stock as our capital resource, and our assets and cash.
Need for Additional Financing
We have limited funds, and such funds may not be adequate to carry out our business plan in the event production industry. Our ultimate success depends upon our ability to raise additional capital. We are investigating the availability, sources, and terms that might govern the acquisition of additional capital.
We have no commitment at this time for additional capital. If we need additional capital, we have no assurance that funds will be available from any source or, if available, that they can be obtained on terms acceptable to us. If not available, our operations will be limited to those that can be financed with our existing capital.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Bio Lab Naturals, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiary. All intercompany balances have been eliminated during consolidation.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all liquid investments purchased with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents include demand deposits carried at cost which approximates fair value. The Company maintains its cash in institutions insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”).
Concentration of Credit Risk
The Company offers its services to a small number of clients. This risk of non-payment by these clients is considered minimal and the Company does not generally obtain collateral for sales. The Company continually monitors the credit standing of its clients.
Accounts Receivable
The Company records accounts receivable at net realizable value. This value includes an appropriate allowance for uncollectible accounts to reflect any loss anticipated on the accounts receivable balances and is charged to other income (expense) in the statements of operations. Management calculates this allowance based on its history of write-offs, the level of past-due accounts based on the contractual terms of the receivables, and the Company’s relationships with, and the economic status of, its clients. At December 31, and 2020, there are no allowance for uncollectible accounts.
Equipment
Equipment is recorded at cost and consists of screen video and related equipment. Expenditures for major additions and improvements are capitalized and minor replacements, maintenance, and repairs are charged to expense as incurred. When equipment is retired or otherwise disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any resulting gain or loss is included in the results of operations for the respective period. Depreciation of equipment is over the estimated useful life of five to ten years using the straight-line method for consolidated financial statement purposes. At December 31, and 2020, there were capitalized costs of $75,423 and $211,413, respectively. Depreciation expense for the year ended December 31, and was $14,091 and $35,291, respectively.
Revenue recognition
The Company follows the provisions of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014 - 09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), using the full retrospective transition method. The Company’s adoption of ASU 2014 - 09 did not have a material impact on the amount and timing of revenue recognized in its consolidated financial statements.
Under ASU 2014 - 09, the Company recognizes revenue when control of the promised services is transferred to clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
The Company derives its revenues from the rendering of entertainment rental services. The Company applies the following five steps in order to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under each of its contracts:
Identify the contract with a client;
Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
Determine the transaction price;
Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
Recognize revenue as the performance obligation is satisfied.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with authoritative guidance on accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, as set forth in Topic of the ASC, the Company assesses the recoverability of the carrying value of its long-lived assets when events occur that indicate an impairment in value may exist. An impairment loss is indicated if the sum of the expected undiscounted future net cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the assets. If this occurs, an impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets.
Goodwill
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, goodwill cannot be amortized, however, it must be tested annually for impairment. This impairment test is calculated at the reporting unit level. The goodwill impairment test has two steps. The first identifies potential impairments by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill is not impaired and the second step is not necessary. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, the second step calculates the possible impairment loss by comparing the implied fair value of goodwill with the carrying amount. If the implied goodwill is less than the carrying amount, a write-down is recorded. Management tests goodwill each year for impairment, or when facts or circumstances indicate impairment has occurred.
Equity Based Payments
The Company recognizes compensation cost for equity-based awards based on estimated fair value of the award and records capitalized cost or compensation expense over the requisite service period.