Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
As used herein, the “Company” refers to Vyant Bio, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries: StemoniX, Inc. (“StemoniX”) and vivoPharm Pty Ltd (“vivoPharm”), except as expressly indicated or unless the context otherwise requires. The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help facilitate an understanding of the Company’s financial condition and its historical results of operations for the periods presented. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in this annual report on Form 10-K. This MD&A may contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. For a discussion on forward-looking statements, see the information set forth in the Introductory Note to this Annual Report under the caption “Forward Looking Statements”, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
Vyant Bio, Inc. (the “Company”, “Vyant Bio”, “VYNT” or “we”), is an innovative biotechnology company reinventing drug discovery for complex neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Our central nervous system (“CNS”) drug discovery platform combines human-derived organoid models of brain disease, scaled biology, and machine learning. Our platform is designed to: 1) elucidate disease pathophysiology; 2) formulate key therapeutic hypotheses; 3) identify and validate drug targets, cellular assays, and biomarkers to guide candidate molecule selection; and 4) guide clinical trial patient selection and trial design. Our current programs are focused on identifying repurposed and novel small molecule clinical candidates for rare CNS genetic disorders including Rett Syndrome (“Rett”), CDKL5 Deficiency Disorders (“CDD”) and familial Parkinson’s Disease (“PD”). The Company’s management believes that drug discovery needs to progressively shift as the widely used preclinical models for predicting safe and effective drugs have under-performed, as evidenced by the time and cost of bringing novel drugs to market. As a result, Vyant Bio is focused on combining sophisticated data science capabilities with highly functional human cell derived disease models. We leverage our ability to identify validated targets and molecular-based biomarkers to screen and test thousands of small molecule compounds in human diseased 3D brain organoids in order to create a unique approach to assimilating biological data that supports decision making iteratively throughout the discovery phase of drug development to identify both novel and repurposed drug candidates.
In December 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a plan to sell the vivoPharm Pty Ltd (“vivoPharm”) business to allow the Company to focus on the development of neurological developmental and degenerative disease therapeutics. We engaged an investment banker in December 2021 to sell the vivoPharm business during 2022.
Cancer Genetics, Inc. Merger
On March 30, 2021, Vyant Bio, Inc. (the “Company”, “Vyant Bio”, “VYNT” or “we”), formerly known as Cancer Genetics, Inc. (“CGI”), completed its business combination (the “Merger”) with StemoniX, Inc., a Minnesota corporation (“StemoniX”), in accordance with the Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of August 21, 2020 (the “Initial Merger Agreement”) by and among the Company, StemoniX and CGI Acquisition, Inc., a Minnesota corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), as amended by Amendment No. 1 thereto made and entered into as of February 8, 2021 (the “First Amendment”) and Amendment No. 2 thereto made and entered into as of February 26, 2021 (the “Second Amendment”) (the Initial Merger Agreement, as amended by the First Amendment and Second Amendment, the “Merger Agreement”), pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into StemoniX, with StemoniX surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
The Merger was accounted for as a reverse acquisition with StemoniX being the accounting acquirer of CGI using the acquisition method of accounting. Under acquisition accounting, the assets and liabilities (including executory contracts, commitments and other obligations) of CGI, as of March 30, 2021, the closing date of the Merger, were recorded at their respective fair values and added to those of StemoniX. Any excess of purchase price consideration over the fair values of the identifiable net assets is recorded as goodwill. The total consideration paid by StemoniX in the Merger amounted to $59.9 million, which represents the fair value of CGI’s 11,007,186 shares of Common Stock or $50.74 million, 2,157,686 Common Stock warrants or $9.04 million and 55,907 Common Stock options outstanding on the closing date of the Merger with a fair value of $139 thousand. In addition, at the effective time of the Merger, existing StemoniX shareholders received an additional 804,711 incremental shares in accordance with the conversion ratio set forth in the Merger Agreement.
Business Disposals - Discontinuing Operations
In December 2021, vivoPharm, met the criteria to be reported as discontinuing operations. Therefore, the related assets, liabilities, operating results and cash flows of the vivoPharm business are reported as discontinuing operations as of December 31, and for period from the Merger date of March 30, 2021 through December 31, 2021. See Note 3 Discontinuing operations, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 below for additional information.
Revenue from Continuing Operations
The Company’s primary revenue sources are microOrgan plate product sales and the performance of preclinical drug testing services using our microOrgan technology, referred to as Discovery as a Service, or DaaS. The Company plans to focus its resources on internal drug discovery development programs and will wind down substantially all customer revenue generation in the first half of 2022. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, 21% of revenue in each year was generated from customers located outside of the United States. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, three customers accounted for approximately 47% and two customers accounted for approximately 39%, respectively, of the consolidated revenue from continuing operations.
Cost of Goods from Continuing Operations
The Company separately reports cost of goods for product sales and service revenue. Product revenue costs include labor and product costs such as labware, plates and reagents required to develop iPSC’s into microOrgans as well as overhead, facility and equipment costs at the Company’s Maple Grove, Minnesota facility. As the facility was designed to accommodate the Company’s long-term growth, it has historically operated at less than 25% of capacity. The Company is converting the Maple Grove facility to a research and development facility in the first half of 2022 to focus its resources on internal drug discovery development programs. Cost of goods for service revenue includes internal labor, materials and allocated overhead costs to perform services for DaaS projects.
Operating Expenses from Continuing Operations
The Company classifies its operating expenses into three categories: research and development, selling, general and administrative as well as merger related costs. Operating expenses principally consist of personnel costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation, outside services, laboratory consumables, rent, overhead, development costs, and marketing program costs, legal and accounting fees.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses reflect the personnel related expenses, overhead and lab consumable costs to develop its microOrgan technology at its La Jolla, California facility as well as development activities undertaken at the Maple Grove, Minnesota facility. The Company intends to accelerate its drug discovery development activities in 2022 and beyond.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related expenses, professional fees, such as legal, accounting, occupancy costs and other general expenses as well as personnel and related overhead costs for its business development team and related support personnel, travel and entertainment expenses, other selling costs, and trade shows.
Merger Related Costs. Merger related costs are direct professional service and investor banker costs incurred by the Company in connection with the Merger.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. Many of the Company’s customers worldwide were impacted by COVID-19 and temporarily closed their facilities which impacted revenue in the first half of 2020. While the impact of the pandemic on our business has lessened in 2021, the global outbreak of COVID-19 continued in late 2021 with new variants and has impacted the way we operate our business, including remote working, including its impact on technology security risks and employee retention. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact the Company’s future business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as, the duration of the outbreak, travel restrictions and social distancing in the U.S. and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, and the effectiveness of actions taken in the U.S. and other countries to contain and treat the disease.
The Company is actively monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business, results of operations and financial condition. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition in the future is unknown at this time and will depend on future developments that are highly unpredictable.
As the Merger was consummated at the close of business on March 30, 2021, the Company’s consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes nine months and one day of operations associated with the historical CGI business. Further, as noted in Note 3 Discontinuing operations, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 below for additional information, the vivoPharm business has been classified as discontinuing operations as of December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the Company’s results from continuing operations for the periods shown (in thousands):
Revenue from Continuing Operations
Total revenue from continuing operations increased 32%, or $281 thousand, to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $867 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in service revenue was primarily due to increased sales after COVID slowdown in 2020. Product revenue increased by $204 thousand in 2021 as compared with 2020 as the result of increased sales volume of $147 thousand and average selling prices of $57 thousand.
Cost of Goods from Continuing Operations
Cost of goods sold - service aggregated $408 thousand and $384 thousand, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, resulting in a cost of goods sold of 61.4% and 65.3%, respectively, of service revenue. The 2020 period was impacted by two negative margin service contracts.
Cost of goods sold - product aggregated $1.4 million and $717 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulting in a gross margin deficit of $956 thousand and $438 thousand, respectively, resulting from StemoniX’s excess manufacturing capacity at its Maple Grove facility. The increase in the cost of goods sold and margin deficit in the 2021 period as compared with the 2020 period was the result of increased employee related costs due to increased headcount, as the 2020 period reflecting lower costs from the benefit of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness, which is reflected as a reimbursement of manufacturing and quality salaries, and additional production costs in 2021 due to increased sales volume.
Operating Expenses from Continuing Operations
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses from continuing operations increased 32%, or $1.0 million, to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 principally due to a $750 thousand increase in personnel costs resulting from additional headcount, including the hiring of a Chief Scientific Officer in October 2021 as well as a $315 thousand reduction in the 2020 research and development expense reimbursement from the Company’s PPP loan. In addition, the Company increased collaboration developmental expenses by $224 thousand as well as other lab and legal expenses by $401 thousand in 2021 as compared with 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses from continuing operations increased over 200%, or $5.7 million, to $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to post-Merger public company costs including increased headcount costs of $1.4 million, stock-based compensation of $855 thousand, professional fees of $1.7 million, insurance costs of $1.2 million and other Board of Director, software, franchise tax and investor relations costs aggregating $487 thousand.
Merger Related Costs. Merger related costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $2.3 million and $1.4 million, respectively. The increase in the 2021 merger related costs was primarily from investment banker fees related to the closing of the Merger.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The Company issued a warrant with multiple settlement terms in the first quarter of 2021 and as a result, this warrant was classified as liability. Upon the close of the Merger, the warrant’s settlement terms were finalized resulting in a final mark-to-market adjustment resulting in a non-cash gain of $214 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Share Settlement Obligation Derivative
The Company recorded $250 thousand and $503 thousand mark-to-market losses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for an embedded compound derivative from the 2020 Convertible Notes. Upon the close of the Merger the 2020 Convertible Notes were converted to equity.
Loss on Debt Conversion
The year ended December 31, 2021 included a $2.5 million loss on the conversion of the 2020 Convertible Notes to equity upon the closing of the Merger.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense from continuing operations decreased by $163 thousand, or 30%, to $372 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $535 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the conversion of the 2020 Convertible Notes to equity upon the closing of the Merger.
Discontinuing Operations
In connection with the Merger, the Company was deemed to be the accounting acquiror of the vivoPharm business on March 30, 2021. Therefore, the vivoPharm business is not reflected in the Company’s 2020 operating results. After the Merger, the vivoPharm business generated $4.0 million in revenue in 2021 and incurred a $22.3 million net loss. This net loss includes a goodwill impairment charge of $20.2 million, $713 thousand of amortization of intangible assets arising from the merger, $112 thousand of professional service costs related to accounting for the vivoPharm business and a $1.25 million operating loss. The 2021 operating loss was significantly impacted by lower than expected revenue resulting from turnover in the vivoPharm business development team and the delay in the commencement of two large customer contracts which were signed in the second and third quarter.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
The Company’s operating activities have been primarily funded with proceeds from the sale of convertible notes and preferred stock securities. Prior to the Merger, CGI’s primary sources of liquidity had been cash collections from its customers and funds generated from debt and equity financings. The Company is expected to generate minimal revenue from the StemoniX business during the first half of 2022 as it winds down its revenue producing operations to support its internal drug discovery programs. The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $20.6 million as of December 31, 2021. The Company’s management has projected that the Company’s cash on hand, together with the net proceeds from the planned sale of the vivoPharm business during 2022 and proceeds from sales of common stock pursuant to the Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital, LLC, will be adequate to fund the Company’s currently planned operations into the second quarter of 2023. Such estimate may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, and/or the capital resources that we are assuming will be present could fail to materialize at the amounts we project or at all.
The Company expects to continue to incur operating losses in the future, unless and until the Company’s drug discovery efforts or other revenue from collaborators are able to demonstrate a level of success that would lead to licensing potential. In addition, the Company will continue to incur the costs of being public, including legal and audit fees and director’s and officer’s liability insurance. These losses have had, and will continue to have, an adverse effect on the Company’s working capital, total assets and stockholders’ equity. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with drug discovery and development efforts and costs associated with being a public company, the Company is unable to predict when it will become profitable, and it may never become profitable. Even if the Company does achieve profitability, it may not be able to sustain or increase profitability on a quarterly or annual basis. The Company’s inability to achieve and then maintain profitability would negatively affect its business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
On March 28, 2022, the Company entered into a purchase agreement, or Purchase Agreement, with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), which, subject to the terms and conditions, provides that the Company has the right to sell to Lincoln Park and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to $15.0 million of its common shares. Additionally, on March 28, 2022, the Company entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which the Company agreed to file a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), covering the resale of shares of common stock issued to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement. In addition, under the Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to issue a commitment fee of 405,953 common shares, or the Commitment Shares, as consideration for Lincoln Park entering into the Purchase Agreement. The Company cannot sell any shares to Lincoln Park until the date that a registration statement covering the resale of shares of common stock that have been, and may in the future be, issued to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement is declared effective by the SEC and a final prospectus in connection therewith is filed and all of the other conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement are satisfied (such date, the “Commencement Date”). Under the Purchase Agreement, the Company may from time to time for 30 months following the Commencement Date, at its discretion, direct Lincoln Park to purchase on any single business day, or a Regular Purchase, up to (i) 50,000 common shares, (ii) 75,000 common shares if the closing sale price of its common shares is not below $1.50 per share on Nasdaq or (iii) 100,000 common shares if the closing sale price of its common shares is not below $2.50 per share on Nasdaq. In addition to Regular Purchases, the Company may also direct Lincoln Park to purchase other amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement. In any case, Lincoln Park’s commitment in any single Regular Purchase may not exceed $1.0 million absent a mutual agreement to increase such amount. The purchase price per share for each Regular Purchase will be based on prevailing market prices of the Common Stock immediately preceding the time of sale as computed in accordance with the terms set forth in the Purchase Agreement. There are no upper limits on the price per share that Lincoln Park must pay for shares of Common Stock under the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Agreement may be terminated by the Company at any time after the Commencement Date, at its sole discretion, without any cost or penalty, by giving one business day notice to Lincoln Park to terminate the Purchase Agreement.
During the next twelve months, the Company may take further steps to raise additional capital to meet our long-term liquidity needs including, but not limited to, one or more of the following: the licensing of drug candidates with existing or new collaborative partners, possible business combinations, issuance of debt, or the issuance of common stock or other securities via private placements or public offerings. Although the Company has been successful in raising capital in the past, there can be no assurance that additional financing will be available on acceptable terms, if at all, and its negotiating position in capital raising efforts may worsen as existing resources are used. There is also no assurance that the Company will be able to enter into collaborative relationships that will provide sources of liquidity. Additional equity financings may be dilutive to our stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve significant cash payment obligations and covenants that restrict the Company’s ability to operate as a business. Licensing or strategic collaborations may result in royalties or other terms which reduce our economic potential from products under development. If the Company is unable to raise the funds necessary to meet its long-term liquidity needs, the Company may have to delay or discontinue the development of one or more discovery programs, license out programs earlier than expected, raise funds at a significant discount or on other unfavorable terms, if at all, or sell all or a part of the business.
The Company’s forecast of the period of time through which its current financial resources will be adequate to support its operations and its expected operating expenses are forward-looking statements and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could vary materially and negatively as a result of a number of factors, including:
●
the expected benefits of, and potential value, including synergies, created by, the Merger for the stockholders of the Company;
● the Company’s ability to adapt its business for future developments in light of the global outbreak of COVID-19, which continues to rapidly evolve;
● the Company’s ability to internally identify and develop new iPSC disease models, drug candidates and intellectual property;
● the Company’s ability to negotiate strategic partnerships, where appropriate, for technology and research data, iPSC and human primary cell-based disease models or drug candidates;
● the Company’s ability to secure clinical co-development partnerships with pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies;
● the Company’s need for significant additional capital and the Company’s ability to satisfy its capital needs;
● the Company’s ability to complete required clinical trials of its products and obtain approval from the FDA or other regulatory agencies in different jurisdictions;
● the Company’s ability to execute on its marketing and sales strategy for its preclinical research services and gain acceptance of its services in the market;
● the Company’s ability to keep pace with rapidly advancing market and scientific developments;
● the Company’s ability to satisfy U.S. (including the FDA) and international regulatory requirements with respect to its services;
● the Company’s ability to maintain its present customer base and obtain new customers;
● the Company’s ability to maintain the Company’s clinical and research collaborations and enter into new collaboration agreements with highly regarded organizations so that, among other things, the Company has access to thought leaders in advanced preclinical and translational science;
● the Company’s potential product liability or intellectual property infringement claims;
● the Company’s ability to maintain or protect the validity of its patents and other intellectual property;
● the Company’s dependency on third-party manufacturers to supply it with instruments and specialized supplies;
● the Company’s ability to attract and retain a sufficient number of scientists, clinicians, sales personnel and other key personnel with extensive relevant experience, who are in short supply;
● the Company’s ability to effectively manage its international businesses in Australia and Europe, including the expansion of its customer base and volume of new contracts in these markets;
● the Company’s dependency on the intellectual property licensed to the Company or possessed by third parties; and
● the Company’s ability to adequately support future growth.
Cash Flows from Continuing Operations
The Company’s net cash flow from operating, investing and financing activities from continuing operations for the periods below were as follows (in thousands):
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $20.6 million and $792 thousand as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash Used in Operating Activities from Continuing Operations
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was $16.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of a net loss from continuing operations of $18.6 million, decreased for net non-cash adjustments of $4.8 million. The non-cash adjustments include (i) stock-based compensation of $1.0 million, (ii) depreciation and amortization expense of $1.1 million, and (iii) a net loss related to the pre-merger StemoniX capital structure and related debt conversions of $2.7 million. Operating assets and liabilities used net cash of $2.7 million including Merger related costs in 2021. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, also includes $2.3 million of Merger related costs.
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of a loss of $8.7 million, increased for net non-cash adjustments of $1.5 million, which includes a reduction of $740 thousand in operating expenses from the PPP loan. Operating assets and liabilities provided $1.3 million of cash from the $740 thousand funding of the Company’s PPP loan, an increase of $878 thousand in accounts payable principally resulting from accrued merger related professional service costs, offset by $485 thousand in cash utilized for operating lease payments.
Cash Provided by Investing Activities from Continuing Operations
Net cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations was $29.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, principally from CGI cash balances at the close of the Merger of $30.2 million, offset by $535 thousand of equipment purchases. Investing activity cash flows from continuing operations were not significant for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities from Continuing Operations
Net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations was $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to $5.0 million from the issuance of 2020 Convertible Notes and $1.8 million from the issuance of Series Preferred C shares. The net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations of $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was principally from the issuance of $4.9 million of 2020 Convertible Notes and $1.3 million of Series Preferred B shares.
Income Taxes
Over the past several years the Company has generated operating losses in all jurisdictions in which it may be subject to income taxes. As a result, the Company has accumulated significant net operating losses and other deferred tax assets. Because of the Company’s history of losses and the uncertainty as to the realization of those deferred tax assets, a full valuation allowance has been recognized. The Company does not expect to report a benefit related to the deferred tax assets until it has a history of earnings, if ever, that would support the realization of its deferred tax assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgment and Estimates
The Company’s management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on its financial statements and condensed consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates based on historical experience and makes various assumptions, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, and which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 4 to our December 31, 2021 and 2020 consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere herein, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue recognition. Prior to the Merger, the Company’s primary sources of revenue were product sales from the sale of microOrgan plates and the performance of preclinical drug testing services using the microOrgan technology. Subsequent to the Merger, the Company’s revenue includes vivoPharm’s discovery services, consisting primarily of contract research services focused primarily on unique specialized studies to guide drug discovery. As noted herein, the vivoPharm business has been classified as discontinuing operations as of December 31, 2021 and revenue earned from that business are included therein.
The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies performance obligations under the terms of its contracts, and transfers control of the product to its customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive from its customers in exchange for those products. This process involves identifying the customer contract, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it (a) provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and (b) is separately identified in the contract. The Company considers a performance obligation satisfied once it has transferred control of a product to a customer, which is generally upon shipment as the customer has the ability to direct the use and obtain the benefit of the product.
For product contracts, revenue is recognized at a point-in-time upon delivery to the customer. Product contracts with customers generally state the terms of the sale, including the quantity and price of each product purchased. Payment terms and conditions may vary by contract, although terms generally include a requirement of payment within a range of 30 to 90 days after the performance obligation has been satisfied. As a result, the contracts do not include a significant financing component. In addition, contacts typically do not contain variable consideration as the contracts include stated prices. The Company provides assurance-type warranties on all of its products, which are not separate performance obligations.
For service contracts, revenue is recognized over time and is generally defined pursuant to an enforceable right to payment for performance completed on service projects for which the Company’s has no alternative use as customer furnished compounds are added to Company plates for testing. The Company does not obtain control of the customer furnished compounds as the Company does not have the ability to direct the use. Revenue is measured by the costs incurred to date relative to the estimated total direct costs to fulfill each contract (cost-to-cost method). Incurred costs represent work performed, which corresponds with, and thereby best depicts, the transfer of control to the customer. Contract costs include labor, materials and overhead.
Some contracts offer price discounts after a specified volume has been purchased. The Company evaluates these options to determine whether they provide a material right to the customer, representing a separate performance obligation. If the option provides a material right to the customer, revenue is allocated to these rights and deferred; subsequently the revenue is recognized when those future goods or services are transferred, or when the option expires.
Contract assets primarily represent revenue earnings over time that are not yet billable based on the terms of the contracts. Contract liabilities consist of fees invoiced or paid by Vyant Bio’s customers for which the associated performance obligations have not been satisfied and revenue has not been recognized based on Vyant Bio’s revenue recognition criteria described above.
Derivative Instruments. Prior to the closing of the Merger on March 30, 2021 the Company had a number of the financial instruments that were classified as derivatives. Upon the closing of the Merger, these instruments were converted to Company common stock at which time final mark-to-market adjustments were recorded by the Company.
The Company recognized all derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets at their respective fair values. The Company evaluated its debt and equity issuances to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives requiring separate recognition in its financial statements. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of embedded derivatives was revalued as of each reporting date and recorded as a liability, and the change in fair value during the reporting period is recorded in other income (expense) in the statements of operations. In circumstances where the embedded conversion option in a convertible instrument was required to be bifurcated and there are also other embedded derivative instruments in the convertible instrument that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments were accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, was reassessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the consolidated balance sheets as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is expected within twelve months of the balance sheet date.
The 2020 Convertible Notes contained a share settled redemption feature that required conversion to equity at the lesser of specified discounts from qualified financing price per share or the fair value of the common stock at the time of conversion. The discount changed based on the passage of time between issuance of the convertible note and the conversion event. This feature was considered a derivative that required bifurcation because it provide a specified premium to the holder of the note upon conversion. We measured the share-settlement derivative obligation at fair value based on significant inputs that are not observable in the market and require significant judgement. This instrument was settled upon the closing of the Merger.
The Company issued a warrant during the first quarter of 2021 that contained an indexation feature not indexed to the Company’s stock resulting in this warrant to be accounted for as a derivative. As a result, this warrant was accounted for as a liability and marked to market from its issuance date in February 2021 through the Merger date, at which time the warrant’s indexation features were finalized.
Business Combinations. Accounting for acquisitions requires extensive use of estimates and judgment to measure the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Additionally, we must determine whether an acquired entity is considered a business or a set of net assets because the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired can only be recognized as goodwill in a business combination. We accounted for the Merger with CGI as a business combination under the acquisition method of accounting. Consideration transferred to acquire CGI was measured at fair value. The determination of the $59.9 million purchase price consideration for the Merger was based on the closing stock price of the CGI common stock on the Merger date as well as the fair value of CGI common stock warrants and options outstanding on the Merger date using the Black Scholes Mertons option pricing model. We allocated the purchase price to the acquired tangible and intangible assets and assumed liabilities of CGI based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Significant judgement is required to value and allocate the purchase price, especially for identified intangible assets. The allocation of the purchase price resulted in recognition of intangible assets related to tradename, customer relationships aggregating $9.5 million and goodwill of $22.4 million.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and identified intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated at least annually for impairment or when a change in facts and circumstances indicate that the fair value of the goodwill may be below the carrying value. The Company did not record Goodwill prior to the March 30, 2021 Merger. As a result of the Merger, the Company recorded $22.4 million of goodwill attributed to the vivoPharm business.
As a described in Note 3 to the Company’s financial statements, the Company changed the classification of the vivoPharm business to a held for sale asset in the fourth quarter of 2021. Upon change in classification of this asset from held for use to held for sale, the Company was required to perform an analysis of the carrying value of the vivoPharm business as compared with its estimated fair market value assuming the business would be sold. The Company determined the carrying value of the vivoPharm business equally weighting public company revenue multiples and comparable transaction revenue multiples, which are classified as Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. As described in Note 11 to the Company’s financial statements, the Company valued the vivoPharm business at $11 million as of December 31, 2021. This value, less estimated transaction costs and the Company’s currency translation adjustment, which is solely related to the vivoPharm business, were compared with the carrying value of the vivoPharm business, and resulted in a $20.2 million goodwill impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Intangible assets subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group be tested for possible impairment, the Company first compares undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds its fair value. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company determined that there were no indicators of impairment and did not recognize any fixed asset impairment. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and appraisals, as considered necessary.