Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. VIZIO, Inc. (California VIZIO) is the predecessor of the issuer, VIZIO Holding Corp. for financial reporting purposes, and its consolidated financial statements are our consolidated financial statements. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following
discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including but not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors,” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
VIZIO is driving the future of televisions through our integrated platform of cutting-edge Smart TVs and powerful SmartCast operating system. Every VIZIO Smart TV enables consumers to search, discover and access a broad array of content. In addition to watching cable TV, viewers can use our platform to stream a movie or show from their favorite OTT service, watch hundreds of free channels through our platform, including on our WatchFree+ offering, enjoy an enhanced immersive experience catered to gaming or access a variety of other content options. Our platform gives content providers more ways to distribute their content and advertisers more tools to target and dynamically serve ads to a growing audience that is increasingly transitioning away from linear TV.
We currently offer:
•a broad range of high-performance Smart TVs that encompass a variety of price points, technologies, features and screen sizes, each designed to address specific consumer preferences;
• a portfolio of innovative sound bars that deliver immersive audio experiences; and
•a proprietary Smart TV operating system, SmartCast, which enhances the functionality and monetization opportunities of our devices.
Financial and operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the corresponding period of last year included:
•Net revenue increased 4% to $2.1 billion
•Platform+ net revenue grew 110% to $308.7 million
•Gross profit increased 10% to $326.3 million
•Platform+ gross profit grew 88% to $210.6 million
•SmartCast Hours increased 26% to 14.6 billion
•SmartCast Active Accounts grew 24% to 15.1 million
•Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) grew 67% to $21.68
On March 29, 2021, we closed our initial public offering (IPO) of 12,250,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a public offering price of $21.00 per share. We issued and sold 7,560,000 shares of Class A common stock, and certain stockholders sold an aggregate of 4,690,000 shares of Class A common stock. We received net proceeds of approximately $144.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $10.7 million and offering expenses of $3.1 million. On March 31, 2021, certain stockholders sold an additional 1,709,274 shares of Class A common stock at $21.00 per share pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares by the selling stockholders. Additionally, in connection with the IPO, all outstanding shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock were converted into an aggregate of 30,315,600 shares of Class A common stock.
Our Business Model
We generate revenue primarily from (1) selling our Smart TVs, sound bars and remote controls and (2) monetizing our digital platform. While the substantial majority of our current total net revenue comes from the sales of our devices, our Platform+ business, including our advertising services, is growing at a rapid pace. Given the
growing number of use cases for Smart TVs, we expect to increase our revenue from connected TV advertising, SVOD services and other monetizable transactions made on our platform that extend beyond traditional entertainment content.
Device
We offer a range of high-performance Smart TVs designed to address specific consumer preferences, as well as a portfolio of sound bars that deliver immersive audio experiences. We generate revenue from the shipment of these devices to retailers and distributors across the United States, as well as directly to consumers through our website, VIZIO.com.
Platform+
Our state-of-the-art Smart TV operating system, SmartCast, delivers a vast amount of content and applications through an elegant and easy-to-use interface. SmartCast supports most leading streaming content apps such as Amazon Prime Video, Apple TV+, discovery+, Disney+, HBO Max, Hulu, Netflix, Paramount+, Peacock and YouTube TV, and hosts our own free, ad-supported app, WatchFree+.
Our Inscape technology is able to identify the content displayed on the screen of our Smart TVs, providing first-hand data, regardless of input source. We aggregate this data to increase transparency and enhance targeting abilities for our advertisers, while adhering to our strict consumer privacy policies. This first-hand data allows us to monetize our own ad inventory and provides the potential for a better user experience through more relevant advertisements. We also license a portion of this data to advertising agencies, networks and ad tech companies.
We monetize these capabilities through:
•Advertising
•Video advertising: Ad inventory on services such as WatchFree+, and certain third-party AVOD services. In exchange for distributing their content, we gain a portion of the advertising inventory to sell ourselves, or in some cases we sell all of the ad inventory and share a portion of the revenue with the content providers
•Home screen: Ad placements on our SmartCast home screen by streaming services, studios and other consumer brands
•Partner marketing: Branding opportunities through our large, in-store presence where our Smart TV cartons provide a highly-visible, physical space to showcase our partners’ content images and streaming service logos
•Data licensing
•Inscape: Fees from ad tech companies, advertising agencies and networks to license data generated from our Inscape technology to inform their ad buying decisions
•Content distribution, transactions and promotion
•Branded buttons on remote controls: Partners who want to place a button for their service on our VIZIO remote controls so that consumers can have quick access to their service
•SVOD and vMVPD: Revenue shared by SVOD and vMVPD services on new user subscriptions activated or reactivated through our platform
•PVOD and TVOD: Revenue shared by PVOD and TVOD services for purchases initiated on our platform
•As the Smart TV evolves to take on a more prominent role in the connected home, we believe new monetization opportunities will develop. For example, we expect:
•A growing user base will lead to higher advertising revenue, especially as our user base increasingly includes audiences no longer reachable through linear TV
•The vast amount of data obtained through our platform will improve the effectiveness of advertisement, generating higher returns for advertisers and potentially increasing ad rates for us
•That data will be used to create more personalized content recommendations and drive higher user engagement
•Additionally, interactive ads and improved subscription billing can increase the number of purchases made on our platform, including subscriptions, content rentals, ecommerce, food delivery and other micro transactions, for which we will receive a portion of the sales
Overview of our supply chain
We design our products in-house in California and we work closely with our ODMs, panel suppliers and chipset suppliers for product design and technical specifications. Through this collaborative process, we leverage the manufacturing scale of these partners, as well as their research and development functions in the development of new product introductions. Our ODM partners provide shipping and logistics support to move finished products from their manufacturing facilities to the United States. The title of the finished goods transfers from the ODM to us once we ship the product to a retailer. We believe that our asset-light business model fosters efficient operations with a low fixed-cost structure; coupled with careful management of marketing, selling, general and administrative expenses, which has enabled us to manage our working capital effectively and improve operating leverage. Through these efficiencies, we are able to offer consumers high quality products at affordable prices. Since the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the responses to it have impacted our business. During much of 2020 and early 2021 we experienced increased demand for our products due to the combined impact of stay at home orders and fiscal stimulus. Due to the surge in demand and supply chain and logistical partners operating at limited capacity we encountered reduced channel inventory levels at several retailers. This contributed to Smart TV shipments declining year-over-year.
Our sales and marketing approach
Retailers
We have maintained long-standing relationships with many of the leading retailers. Our sales and marketing team works closely with these retailers to develop marketing and promotion plans, manage inventory, deploy go-to-market strategies, educate their salesforce and optimize the effectiveness of retail space for our devices.
Consumers
Our marketing team is focused on building our brand reputation and awareness to drive consumer demand for our products. Our marketing approach is to emphasize value, which is to deliver quality products with leading technology at affordable prices, which enhance the entertainment experience. Our products and value proposition have earned numerous awards and accolades from popular press.
Advertisers
We offer an attractive value proposition for advertisers to reach consumers who are increasingly “cutting the cord.” As we continue to build out our Platform+ advertising sales force, we intend to significantly increase our presence and recognition among advertising agencies, advertisers and content providers through the television advertising ecosystem. In addition, we expect our audience size and data capabilities to continue to resonate with ad buyers looking to increase their connected TV ad spend.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key operational and financial metrics and non-GAAP financial measure to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Operational metrics
Smart TV Shipments
We define Smart TV Shipments as the number of Smart TV units shipped to retailers or direct to consumers in a given period. Smart TV Shipments drive the majority of our revenue currently, and provide the foundation for increased adoption of our SmartCast operating system and the growth of our Platform+ revenue. The growth rate between Smart TV units shipped and Device net revenue is not directly correlated because our Device net revenue can be impacted by other variables, such as the series and sizes of Smart TVs sold during the period, the introduction of new products as well as the number of sound bars shipped. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we shipped 5.5 million Smart TVs, a 22% year-over-year decrease. We expect Smart TV shipments will fluctuate from period to period in the future as consumer demand fluctuates.
SmartCast Active Accounts
We define SmartCast Active Accounts as the number of VIZIO Smart TVs where a user has activated the SmartCast operating system through an internet connection at least once in the past 30 days. We believe that the number of SmartCast Active Accounts is an important metric to measure the size of our engaged user base, the attractiveness and usability of our operating system, and subsequent monetization opportunities to increase our Platform+ net revenue. At December 31, 2021, SmartCast Active Accounts were 15.1 million, representing a 24% increase year-over-year. This metric excludes approximately 4.3 million televisions connected to the internet through our legacy operating system, VIZIO V.I.A. Plus, which we no longer ship. As we continue to improve and market our SmartCast service combined with the secular shift to OTT, we expect the number of SmartCast Active Accounts will grow as our platform becomes the place where consumers access all of the features of their Smart TV rather than connecting a cable box, satellite or other external device, though we expect the rate of growth will decline over time.
Total VIZIO Hours
We define Total VIZIO Hours as the aggregate amount of time users spend utilizing our Smart TVs in any capacity. We believe this usage metric is critical to understanding our total potential monetization opportunities. Total VIZIO Hours for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 29.3 billion hours, representing a 26% year-over-year increase.
SmartCast Hours
We define SmartCast Hours as the aggregate amount of time viewers engage with our SmartCast platform to stream content or access other applications. This metric reflects the size of the audience engaged with our operating system as well as indicates the growth and awareness of our platform. It is also a measure of the success of our offerings in addressing increased user demand for OTT streaming. Greater user engagement translates into increased revenue opportunities as we earn a significant portion of our Platform+ net revenue through advertising, which is influenced by the amount of time users spend on our platform. SmartCast Hours for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 14.6 billion, representing a 26% year-over-year increase.
SmartCast ARPU
We define SmartCast ARPU as total Platform+ net revenue, less revenue attributable to legacy VIZIO V.I.A. Plus units, during the preceding four quarters divided by the average of (i) the number of SmartCast Active Accounts at the end of the current period; and (ii) the number of SmartCast Active Accounts at the end of the corresponding prior year period. SmartCast ARPU indicates the level at which we are monetizing our SmartCast Active Account user base. Growth in SmartCast ARPU is driven significantly by our ability to add users to our
platform and our ability to monetize those users. SmartCast ARPU at December 31, 2021 was $21.68, representing a 67% year-over-year increase.
The following table presents these key operational metrics for 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Our key financial metrics are gross profit and Adjusted EBITDA. We bifurcate gross profit by business activity due to the differing margin profiles of the Device and Platform+ businesses. In addition, we manage each business, from a financial reporting perspective separately down to the gross profit level. Though both Device and Platform+ are meaningful contributors to gross profit today we expect Platform+ to exhibit significantly higher growth, and combined with its higher margins, drive the majority of gross profit growth in the future.
Device gross profit
We define Device gross profit as Device net revenue less Device cost of goods sold in a given period. Device gross profit is directly influenced by consumer demand, device offerings, and our ability to maintain a cost-efficient supply chain. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Device gross profit decreased 37% year-over-year primarily due to higher cost of component parts and freight.
Platform+ gross profit
We define Platform+ gross profit as Platform+ net revenue less Platform+ cost of goods sold in a given period. As we continue to grow and scale our business, we expect Platform+ gross profit to increase over the long term. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Platform+ gross profit increased 88% year-over-year.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial metric, as total net (loss) income before interest income, net, other income, net provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization and share-based compensation. We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be an important metric to assess our operating performance and help us to manage our working capital needs. Utilizing Adjusted EBITDA, we can identify and evaluate trends in our business as well as provide investors with consistency and comparability to facilitate period-to-period comparisons of our business. We expect Adjusted EBITDA to fluctuate in absolute dollars and as a percentage of net revenue in the near term and increase in the long term as we scale our business and realize greater operating leverage. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net (loss) income decreased 138% year-over-year, and Adjusted EBITDA decreased 23% year-over-year. While we believe that this non-GAAP financial metric is useful in evaluating our business, this information should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP financial measure
We use Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with net (loss) income as part of our overall assessment of our operating performance and the management of our working capital needs. Our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the definition used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish Adjusted EBITDA or similar metrics. Furthermore, Adjusted EBITDA has certain limitations in that it does not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statement
of operations that are necessary to run our business. Thus, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, including net (loss) income.
We compensate for these limitations by providing a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net (loss) income. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with net (loss) income.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA:
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy increased significantly as the year progressed. In response to COVID-19, national and local governments around the world instituted certain measures, including travel bans, prohibitions on group events and gatherings, shutdowns of certain businesses, curfews, shelter-in-place orders and recommendations to practice social distancing.
Since the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the responses to it have impacted our business. During much of 2020 and early 2021 we experienced increased demand for our products due to the combined impact of stay at home orders and fiscal stimulus. Due to the surge in demand and supply chain and logistical partners operating at limited capacity we encountered reduced channel inventory levels at several retailers. This contributed to Smart TV shipments declining year-over-year.
At the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020, we implemented modest staff reductions and hiring delays, which resulted in lower selling, general and administrative expenses in the first half of 2020. Starting in the second half of 2020, our selling, general, and administrative expenses began to normalize as we began our rehiring process to continue to grow the business.
Factors Affecting Performance
Device
Ability to sell more devices
Selling more devices is integral to our strategy of growing SmartCast Active Accounts, increasing engagement, and expanding advertising monetization opportunities, all of which we believe will ultimately lead to higher SmartCast ARPU. There are a variety of factors that drive the sales of our devices, including our sales and
marketing efforts, the quality of our products, new product introductions, effective supply chain management and relationships with retailers. For example:
•We have, to date, introduced several new products that have had a favorable impact on our revenue and operating results, such as the introduction of our new line in 2021 for Smart TVs. We expect that introducing products that both stimulate demand and resonate with consumers will drive our sales growth and expand our market share.
•We actively diversify our supply chain in order to mitigate potential risks.
•With respect to our relationships with retailers, our ability to anticipate and quickly respond to consumer preferences has influenced retailers’ willingness to market and promote our products over those of our competitors. Historically, we have cultivated strong relationships with our retailers, including Amazon, Best Buy, Costco, Sam’s Club, Target and Walmart.
Seasonality
Historically, we have experienced the highest levels of our sales in the fourth quarter of the calendar year, coinciding with the holiday shopping season in the United States. Given the significant seasonality of our revenue, timely and effective product introductions and forecasting are critical to our operations, and fourth quarter sales are critical to our annual results.
Product mix
Our Device business encompasses a variety of Smart TVs and sound bars with different price points and features. Changes to our product mix may cause fluctuations in our gross profit as they reflect a range of margin profiles.
Platform+
Ability to grow SmartCast Active Accounts
The more SmartCast Active Accounts we have, the more attractive our platform will be to third-party content providers and advertisers looking to reach this audience. Our platform may suffer if we fail to secure popular apps and related content on SmartCast, which may lead users to purchase a television from a competitor.
Ability to increase engagement and monetize SmartCast Active Accounts
Our business is dependent on our continued ability to grow and sustain user engagement on SmartCast and, specifically, WatchFree+. User engagement on our platform is an essential revenue driver since it directly influences our attractiveness to advertisers, the largest near-term monetization opportunity. Therefore, our ability to attract compelling content viewers want to consume on WatchFree+ is critical to our monetization. Increasing engagement on our platform can result in greater attractiveness to advertisers and other monetization opportunities. The more time consumers spend on our platform, the more data we can collect, enabling us to create a more personalized and dynamic experience for users, while also allowing us to provide more targeted reach for advertisers.
Demand for a more connected home
The proliferation of the connected home ecosystem will power the long-term growth of our business. A Smart TV centered connected home will drive user engagement and expand our monetization opportunities into new domains. In addition to boosting demand for our hardware products, a connected home will require new interactive features that we are well-positioned to help deliver, such as personal communications, commerce, gaming, fitness and wellness, and dynamic entertainment experiences. Coupled with our passion for innovation and technical expertise, we can offer differentiated experiences for consumers. As we believe our Smart TVs will evolve to have a more pivotal role in the connected home, we must continue to find ways to monetize the use cases enabled on our platform.
Other
Ability to continue to invest
The future performance of our business will be affected by our investments in both our Device and Platform+ businesses. We intend to continue to invest in the capabilities of our products and services to deliver better value for our consumers and partners and address new market opportunities.
Competition
We believe the principal competitive factors impacting the market for our devices are brand, price, features, quality, design, consumer service, time-to-market and availability. We believe that we compete favorably in these areas. The consumer electronics market in which we operate is highly competitive and includes large, well-established companies. Many of our competitors have greater financial, distribution, marketing and other resources, longer operating histories, better brand recognition and greater economies of scale.
Our Platform+ business competes both to be the entertainment hub of consumers’ homes and to attract advertising spend. We expect advertising spend to continue to shift from linear TV to connected TV, and as such we expect new competition to continue to intensify for viewership and for advertising spend. In this respect, we compete against other television brands with Smart TV offerings, connected devices and traditional cable operators seeking to integrate streaming media into their existing offerings. We also compete with OTT streaming services, as such services are able to monetize across a variety of devices and consumers may engage with their content through devices other than our Smart TVs. We compete with these devices and services in part on the basis of user experience and content availability, including the availability of free content. In addition, we compete to attract advertising spending on the basis of the size of our audience and our ability to effectively target advertising.
Components of Our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Net revenue
Device net revenue
We generate Device net revenue primarily through sales of our Smart TVs and sound bars to retailers, including wholesale clubs, in the United States, as well as directly to consumers through our website. We recognize Device revenue when title of the goods is transferred to retailers or distributors, or upon the date the goods are delivered to consumers from a sale through our website. Our reported revenue is net of reserves for price protection, rebates, sales returns and other retailer allowances including some cooperative advertising arrangements. The prices charged for our Smart TVs and other devices are determined through negotiation with our retailers and are fixed or determinable upon shipment.
Platform+ net revenue
We generate Platform+ net revenue through sales of advertising and related services, data licensing, sales of branded buttons on our remote controls and content distribution. Our digital ad inventory consists of inventory on WatchFree+ and our home screen along with ad inventory we obtain through agreements with content providers and other third-party application agreements. We also re-sell video inventory that we purchase from content providers and directly sell third-party inventory on a revenue share.
Cost of goods sold
Device cost of goods sold
Device cost of goods sold primarily represents the prices for finished goods that we negotiate and pay to manufacturers and logistics providers for Smart TVs and other devices. The costs for finished goods paid to manufacturers include raw materials, manufacturing, overhead and labor costs, third-party logistics costs, shipping costs, customs and duties, license fees and royalties paid to third parties, recycling fees, insurance and other costs. Device cost of goods sold will vary with volume and is based on the cost of underlying product components and negotiated prices with the manufacturers. Shipping costs fluctuate with volume as well as with the method of
shipping chosen in order to meet consumer demand. Other costs of revenue include outbound freight incurred while we take title of finished goods and employ third party logistic companies to expedite delivery to retailers, as well as after sales support.
Device cost of goods sold may be partially offset by payments we receive under certain manufacturer reimbursement and incentive arrangements in accordance with product supply agreements. These arrangements can be conditioned on the purchase of devices but are typically not a part of minimum purchase commitments with manufacturers. Accordingly, we treat these arrangements and related payments as reductions to the prices we pay to manufacturers for devices.
Platform+ cost of goods sold
Platform+ cost of goods sold includes advertising inventory costs, including revenue share as well as targeting and measurement services, third-party cloud services, allocated engineering costs and other technology expenses, and content or programming licensing fees, and amortization of internally developed technology.
Gross profit
Device gross profit
Our Device gross profit represents Device net revenue less Device cost of goods sold, and Device gross margin is Device gross profit expressed as a percentage of Device net revenue. Our Device gross profit may fluctuate from period to period as Device net revenue fluctuates and has been and will continue to be influenced by several factors including supplier prices, retailer margin and device mix. We expect Device gross margin to fluctuate over time based on our ability to manage pricing through our supply chain and retailer network.
Platform+ gross profit
Our Platform+ gross profit represents Platform+ net revenue less Platform+ cost of goods sold, and Platform+ gross margin is Platform+ gross profit expressed as a percentage of Platform+ net revenue. Our Platform+ gross profit has been and will continue to be affected by costs and availability of advertising inventory, costs of data services associated with delivering advertising campaigns, costs to acquire content from content providers and the timing of our third-party cloud services and other technology expenses, and we expect our Platform+ gross margins to fluctuate from period to period depending on the factors discussed above.
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expenses into three categories:
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for employees, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation, as well as consulting expenses, fees for professional services, facilities and information technology. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows. We have and expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of costs associated with being a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and fees for professional services. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to fluctuate as a percentage of net revenue from period to period in the near term as we continue to invest in growing our business, but decline over the long term as we achieve greater scale over time.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising and marketing promotions of our brand and products, including media advertisement costs, merchandising and display costs, trade show and event costs, and sponsorship costs. We expect our marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to promote our products and brand, particularly in the fourth quarter when we have historically experienced higher marketing expenses in
connection with seasonally higher Device net revenue. We expect marketing expenses to fluctuate as a percentage of net revenue from period to period.
Research and development
Research and development expense consists primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries and bonuses, share-based compensation expense, and employee benefits costs, third-party contractor costs, and related allocated overhead costs. In certain cases, costs are incurred to purchase materials and equipment for future use in research and development efforts. These costs are capitalized and expensed.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation covers declines in value of fixed assets such as buildings and equipment. Amortization expense relates to our intangible assets.
Non-operating income
Non-operating income consists of interest income including interest earned on our financial institution deposits and interest expense on our credit facility and other income, net relating to activities not related to recurring operations. For example, in 2021 we received $2.9 million in net proceeds from the settlement of a dispute with a former insurance carrier regarding claims we made in connection with the 2015 Cognitive Media Network litigation.
Income tax expense
Our income tax expense consists of income taxes in the United States and related state jurisdictions in which we do business. Our effective tax rate will generally approximate the U.S. statutory income tax rate plus the apportionment of state income taxes based on the portion of taxable income allocable to each state. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from the examination of our tax returns by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities to determine the adequacy of our income tax reserves and expense.
Should actual events or results differ from our current expectations, charges or credits to our income tax expense may become necessary.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations for each of the periods presented:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of net revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Net revenue
Device
Device net revenue decreased $80.0 million, or 4%, from $1.9 billion in 2020 to $1.8 billion in 2021. The decrease in Device net revenue was primarily due to a 16% decrease in total device units shipped partially offset by a 13% increase in our total device average unit price. Shipments of Smart TVs decreased while sound bars increased during 2021 compared to 2020. Average unit price for both Smart TVs and sound bars increased during the year.
Device net revenue increased $121.7 million, or 7%, from $1.8 billion in 2019 to $1.9 billion in 2020. The increase in Device net revenue was primarily due to a 18% increase in total device units shipped partially offset by a 9% decline in our total device average unit price. The increase in units shipped was due to growth in the number of Smart TVs shipped primarily due to the implementation of stay-at-home orders in response to COVID-19. Average unit price declined due to a lower average unit price on Smart TVs shipped, in part as a result of the mix of Smart TVs shipped, partially offset by a higher average unit price on sound bars.
Platform+
Platform+ net revenue increased $161.5 million, or 110%, from $147.2 million in 2020 to $308.7 million in 2021. The increase in Platform+ net revenue was primarily due to an increase in advertising revenue of $159.0 million, or 222% from $72 million in 2020.
Platform+ net revenue increased $84.0 million, or 133%, from $63.2 million in 2019 to $147.2 million in 2020. The increase in Platform+ net revenue was primarily due to an increase in SmartCast Active Accounts of 61% from 7.6 million in 2019 to 12.2 million in 2020, as well as the expansion of our advertising services.
Cost of goods sold, gross profit and gross profit margin
Device
Device cost of goods sold decreased $11.2 million, or 1% and was $1.7 billion in both 2020 and 2021. Device gross margin decreased from 10% in 2020 to 6% in 2021 as lower Smart TV margins were partially offset by higher margins on sound bars.
Device cost of goods sold increased $62.2 million, or 4%, from $1.7 billion in 2019 to $1.7 billion in 2020. Device gross margin increased from 7% in 2019 to 10% in 2020, primarily as a result of increased demand for our products.
Platform+
Platform+ cost of goods sold increased $62.8 million, or 178%, from $35.3 million in 2020 to $98.1 million in 2021. The increase in Platform+ cost of goods sold was primarily due to increases in advertising inventory costs, third-party cloud services and engineering costs. Platform+ gross margin decreased from 76% in 2020 to 68% in 2021.
Platform+ cost of goods sold increased $12.3 million, or 53%, from $23.0 million in 2019 to $35.3 million in 2020. The increase in Platform+ cost of goods sold was primarily due to increases in engineering costs, third-party cloud services and advertising inventory costs.
Operating expenses
Selling, general and administrative increased $170.3 million, or 147%, from $115.8 million in 2020 to $286.1 million in 2021. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a $126.8 million increase of share-based compensation expense to $131.6 million, an increase in personnel costs as we grow our Platform+ business and higher public company costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $17.1 million, or 17%, from $98.7 million in 2019 to $115.8 million in 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs due to headcount growth as well as an increase in consulting expenses relating to additional sales and engineering staff as we grow our platform business.
Marketing expenses increased $1.5 million, or 5%, from $31.3 million in 2020 to $32.8 million in 2021. The increase is primarily due to increased merchandising costs for our Smart TVs and sound bars.
Marketing expenses increased $8.6 million, or 38%, from $22.7 million in 2019 to $31.3 million in 2020.
Research and development costs increased $19.1 million or 126%, from $15.1 million in 2020 to $34.2 million in 2021 due to increased investment in the development of Platform+ and is primarily due to increased personnel costs.
Research and development costs increased $4.8 million, or 47%, from $10.3 million in 2019 to $15.1 million in 2020. The increase is due to our investment in Platform+.
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $0.5 million, or 22%, from $2.3 million in 2020 to $2.8 million in 2021 primarily due to increases in computer and software assets placed in service in 2021.
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $1.8 million, or 44%, from $4.1 million in 2019 to $2.3 million in 2020 primarily due to certain assets being fully depreciated for 2020 as compared to 2019.
Non-operating income
Interest income, net increased $0.3 million in 2021 compared to $12 thousand in 2020.
Interest income, net decreased $1.2 million or 99% in 2020, from $1.2 million in 2019 to approximately $12,000 in 2020. The decrease was due to a $0.4 million decrease in interest income, net relating to our financial institution deposit balances and a $0.3 million decrease in interest income, net relating to a note receivable in 2020.
Other income, net increased $2.5 million from $0.5 million in 2020 to $3.3 million in 2021. Other income, net is primarily composed of $2.9 million in net proceeds from the settlement of a dispute with a former insurance carrier regarding claims we made in connection with the 2015 Cognitive Media Network litigation.
Other income, net increased $0.3 million, or 126%, from $0.2 million in 2019 to $0.5 million in 2020. Other income, net is primarily composed of rental income of $0.4 million in 2020.
Provision for income taxes
Provision for income taxes decreased $16.8 million from $29.9 million in 2020 to $13.1 million in 2021. Our effective tax rate in 2021 was (50.0)% compared to 22.6% in 2020. The effective rate for 2021 became negative since VIZIO had a taxable income with permanent book versus tax differences, including the share-based compensation expense and the compensation deduction limitation on certain executive officers as a publicly held corporation, while the Company had a pretax book loss.
Provision for income taxes increased $22.2 million from $7.7 million in 2019 to $30.0 million in 2020. Our effective tax rate in 2019 was 25.1% compared to 22.6% in 2020. The effective rate for 2020 was lower primarily due to an increase in tax credits and a decrease in permanent book versus tax differences.
Backlog
We do not believe that our backlog of orders is meaningful as of any particular date or indicative of future sales, as our retailers can change or cancel orders with little or no penalty and limited advance notice prior to shipment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, our primary cash needs have been for working capital purposes and to a lesser extent, capital expenditures, acquisitions and cash dividends. We have historically funded our business through cash flows generated from operations, the issuance of common stock and our revolving credit facility, as described below. We have grown rapidly over the past two years. As we continue to grow our business and invest in the development of our Platform+ business, we may need higher levels of working capital.
In March 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $144.9 million upon the completion of our IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 we had cash and cash equivalents of $331.6 million and $207.7 million, respectively. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash from operations will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our future capital requirements may vary materially from our current expectations and will depend on many factors, including the growth of our business, the timing and extent of spending on various business initiatives, including investment in our Platform+ offerings, the timing of new product introductions, market acceptance of our products and overall economic conditions, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and
requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to obtain such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. To the extent that we issue equity or convertible debt securities in the future, there will be further dilution to investors participating in this offering. Further, any debt financing obtained by us in the future could involve restrictive covenants relating to our capital raising activities and other financial and operational matters, which may make it more difficult for us to obtain additional capital and to pursue business opportunities, including potential acquisitions.
We are party to a credit agreement with Bank of America, N.A., which currently provides for a revolving credit line of up to $50.0 million with an original maturity date of April 13, 2021. Any indebtedness under this credit agreement is collateralized by substantially all of our assets and bears interest at a variable rate based either on LIBOR, the federal funds rate or the prime rate. The credit agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants.
On April 13, 2021, we entered into a Second Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement (“Second Amendment”) with Bank of America N.A., to include among other things, (i) an update to provide for use of a LIBOR successor rate, (ii) to amend the definition of Availability Reserve and Borrowing Base, and (iii) to extend the termination date to April 13, 2024. In connection with the Second Amendment, we paid a fee of $0.1 million in the second quarter of 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any amounts outstanding under this line of credit. Further, we were in compliance with all required financial covenants as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively.
The following table sets forth the major components of our consolidated statements of cash flows data for the periods presented:
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of net (loss) income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, share-based compensation expense and other non-cash related items as well as the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
In 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $41.9 million, consisting of net loss of $39.4 million adjusted for non-cash expenses of $133.5 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities represented a $52.2 million use of cash, primarily driven by changes in working capital, including increases in income taxes receivable and accrued expenses and decreases in accounts receivable and accounts payable.
In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $32.3 million, consisting of net income of $102.5 million adjusted for non-cash expenses of $9.0 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities represented a $79.2 million use of cash, primarily driven by changes in working capital, including an increase in accounts receivable and other current assets, and a decrease in accounts payable to related parties.
In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $79.9 million, consisting of net income of $23.1 million adjusted for non-cash expenses of $9.5 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities represented a $47.3
million source of cash, primarily driven by changes in working capital, including a decrease in accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable and accounts payable to related parties.
Cash flows from investing activities
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, our net cash used in investing activities was $4.6 million, $1.8 million and $0.8 million respectively. In each of these periods, our primary investing activities consisted of the purchase of property and equipment to support our increased employee headcount and increased investments into internally developed software to support the overall growth in our business.
We expect that we will make capital expenditures and investments in the future, primarily on leasehold improvements, potential build-out of our corporate offices, as well as additional IT infrastructure, all of which will be done to support our future growth.
Cash flows from financing activities
Our net cash provided by financing activities was $87.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and is primarily due to the net proceeds of approximately $144.9 million from our IPO and $14.1 million from the exercise of stock options and purchases made under our ESPP, offset by cash payments of $71.0 million for tax payments related to employee stock based awards withheld upon vesting and of $0.6 million for accumulated dividends on our Series A convertible preferred stock.
In 2020 and 2019, our net cash provided by financing activities was $0.2 million and $0.2 million, respectively, was due to proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations
Royalties
We are engaged in, and in certain cases have settled, various claims and suits alleging the infringement of patents related to certain television technology that were initiated by television manufacturers and other nonmanufacturers. In connection with the disposition of some of these claims and suits, we entered into, or may enter into, license arrangements, which may include royalty payments to be made for historical and/or prospective sales of our products. Certain of these settlements have included cross-licenses, covenants not to sue, and litigation holds.
In connection with these existing license agreements as well as existing or potential settlement arrangements, we recorded an aggregate accrual of $26.3 million for all historical product sales as of December 31, 2021. To the extent that we are indemnified under product supply agreements with manufacturers, we have offset intellectual property expenses and recorded amounts as other receivable balances included in other current assets. Historically, we have been contractually indemnified and reimbursed by our manufacturers for most intellectual property royalty obligations and commitments. We will make future payments for the licensed technologies with funding received from the manufacturers, either through direct reimbursement from the manufacturers or payment of the net purchase price, as these royalty payments become due. In certain circumstances, we have the contractual ability to renegotiate the annual license fee in future years if certain unit sales volumes are not met in a given year.
Operating Lease Agreements
We have various non-cancelable operating leases for our corporate and satellite offices primarily in the United States. These leases expire at various times through 2026 and have total annual payments of less than $3.0 million each year.
We do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. We do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not included in our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we do not have an interest in, or relationships with, any special-purpose entities.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
We are exposed to market risks in the ordinary course of our business. These risks primarily include foreign currency and interest rate risks as follows:
Foreign currency risk
To date, substantially all of our product sales and inventory purchases have been denominated in U.S. dollars. We therefore have not had any material foreign currency risk associated with these two activities. The functional currency of most of the foreign subsidiaries is the U.S. dollar.
Although we primarily procure and sell our products in U.S. dollars, our manufacturers incur many costs, including labor costs, in other currencies. To the extent that exchange rates move unfavorably for our manufacturers, they may seek to pass these additional costs on to us, which could have a material impact on our future prices and unit costs.
Interest rate risk
We had cash and cash equivalents totaling $331.6 million as of December 31, 2021. Our cash and cash equivalents consist of cash in bank accounts as well as restricted certificates of deposits. Our cash and cash equivalents are held for working capital purposes. We do not enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes.
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt outstanding under our credit facility. Our credit facility bears interest at a variable rate equal to LIBOR (or successor rate) plus 0.50% per annum. A hypothetical 10% relative increase or decrease in interest rates during any of the periods presented would not have had a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, net sales, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
On March 15, 2021, we amended our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to effect a nine-for-one forward stock split of our Class A common stock (the Forward Stock Split). The number of authorized shares of Class A common stock was proportionally increased in accordance with the Forward Stock Split, and the par value of the Class A common stock was not adjusted as a result of the Forward Stock Split. As a result of the Forward Stock Split and a prior 25-for-one forward stock split of our Class A common stock, each share of our Series A preferred stock is convertible into 225 shares of Class A common stock. All Class A common stock, stock options, RSUs and per share information presented within this prospectus, the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto have been adjusted to reflect the Forward Stock Split on a retroactive basis for all periods presented.
Revenue recognition
We derive our revenue primarily from the sale of televisions and sound bars, advertising and data services. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our retailers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We apply a five-step approach as defined in Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), in determining the amount and timing of revenue to be recognized: (1) identifying the contract with a customer; (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determining the transaction
price; (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognizing revenue when the corresponding performance obligation is satisfied.
We sell products to certain retailers under terms that allow them to receive price protection on future price reductions and may provide for limited rights of return, discounts and advertising credits.
Device net revenue
Each distinct promise to transfer products is considered to be an identified performance obligation for which revenue is recognized at a point in time upon transfer of control of the products to the retailer. Transfer of control occurs upon shipment or delivery to the retailer. Point in time recognition is determined as products to be sold represent an asset with an alternative use. Warranty returns have not been material, and warranty-related services are not considered a separate performance obligation.
Pricing adjustments and estimates of returns are treated as variable consideration for purposes of determining the transaction price. Sales returns are generally accepted at our discretion. Variable consideration is estimated using the most likely amount considering all reasonably available information, including our historical experience and current expectations, and is reflected in the transaction price when sales are recorded. Revenue recorded excludes taxes collected on sales to retailers.
Accounts receivable represents the unconditional right to receive consideration from retailers. Substantially all payments are collected within our standard terms, which do not include a significant financing component. To date, there have been no material impairment losses on accounts receivable. There have been no material contract assets or contract liabilities recorded on the consolidated balance sheet in any of the periods presented.
All of our products are directly shipped from manufacturers to third-party logistics and distribution centers in the United States. Generally, we ship the product to our retailers with freight carriers contracted by us. Shipping terms on sales of products are generally FOB destination but may vary depending upon the related contractual arrangement with the retailer. Amounts billed to retailers for shipping and handling costs are included in net sales.
Platform+ net revenue
We generate Platform+ net revenue through sales of advertising and related services, content distribution, subscription and transaction revenue shares, promotions, sales of branded buttons on remote controls and data licensing agreements. Our digital ad inventory consists of inventory on WatchFree+ and our home screen along with ad inventory we obtain through our content provider and other third-party application agreements. We also re-sell video inventory that we purchase from content providers and directly sell third-party inventory on a revenue share or cost-per-thousand (CPM) basis.
Revenue for advertising and related services is primarily generated by the sale of video and display advertising. Advertising is generally sold directly on a CPM basis and is evidenced by an Insertion Order (IO). We recognize revenue as the number of impressions is measured and delivered, up to the amount identified in the IO. An IO may include multiple performance obligations to the extent it contains distinct advertising products or services. Advertising inventory may also be sold programmatically by which net revenue generated by our supply-side platforms are recognized. We recognize revenue for advertising and related services on either a gross or net basis based on our determination as to whether we are acting as the principal in the revenue generation process or as an agent. Advertising revenue is recognized on a time elapsed basis, as the services are delivered over the contractual distribution term.
Subscription and transaction revenue is generated through revenue share agreements with content providers. These revenue share agreements generally apply to new subscriptions for accounts that sign up for new services or to purchases or rentals through our SmartCast operating system. We recognize revenue on a net basis as we are deemed to be the agent between content providers and consumers.
We sell content providers placements of buttons on our remote controls that provide one-touch access to a third-party applications’ content. We typically receive a fixed fee per button for each device or individually packaged
remote unit sold over a defined distribution period. Revenue is recognized on a time elapsed basis, by day, over the distribution term.
On revenue from data licensing agreements with retailers, each promise to transfer an individual data license in the contract also is separately identifiable; the individual data licenses do not, together, constitute a single overall promise to the retailer. Each distinct license of data has substantial standalone functionality at the point in time they are transferred to the retailer because the data can be utilized and processed in accordance with the rights provided in the contract without any further participation by us. Therefore, each distinct data license is a right to use our functional intellectual property. Revenue is recognized at the point in time in which control is transferred to the retailer. Control of each distinct data license transfers when it is uploaded or delivered to the retailer. The transaction price for data services revenue includes both fixed and variable consideration. The fixed consideration within the retailer contract is allocated to each performance obligation as the performance obligations are satisfied. Variable consideration is recorded when it is earned in accordance with the sales or usage-based royalty exception. We record revenue gross as we control the goods before they are transferred to the retailer, are the primary obligor, negotiate pricing with our retailers, and assume the risk of bad debt.
Retailer allowances and cooperative advertising arrangements
We periodically grant certain sales discounts and incentives to retailers, such as rebates and price protection, which are treated as variable consideration for purposes of determining the transaction price. In certain instances, we will, in turn, negotiate with our manufacturers for reimbursement of a portion of the incentives so that the manufacturers are responsible for absorbing some of the rebates and price protection. Our procedures for estimating amounts accrued as retailer allowances are based upon historical experience and management judgment. Retailer allowances are accrued for when the related product sale is recognized. The accrued retailer allowances are presented on the consolidated balance sheets in accrued expenses and recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as a reduction of net revenue. The allowance for price protection was $64.9 million, $61.3 million and $91.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Additionally, we maintain cooperative advertising arrangements with several of our retailers, which provide for television commercials, newspaper advertisements, and banner advertisements on the retailers’ websites. These advertising arrangements are recorded as accrued liabilities or a reduction of accounts receivable depending on the nature of the agreement. All retailer-specific cooperative advertising arrangements are presented on the consolidated balance sheets as a reduction of accounts receivable and recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as a reduction of net sales. Cooperative advertising arrangements recorded as a reduction of net sales totaled $3.1 million, $6.6 million and $14.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts
Accounts receivable consist of amounts due to us from sales arrangements executed under normal business activities and are recorded at invoiced amounts. We present the aggregate accounts receivable balance net of an allowance for doubtful accounts and extend credit to our retailers and mitigate a portion of our credit risk through credit insurance. Generally, collateral or other security is not required for outstanding accounts receivable. Credit losses, if any, are recognized based on management’s evaluation of the aging of accounts receivable, assessment of collectibility, retailer-specific financial conditions as well as an evaluation of current industry trends and general economic conditions. Past-due balances are assessed by management on a monthly basis and balances are written off when the retailer’s financial condition no longer warrants pursuit of collections. Although we expect to collect amounts due, actual collections may differ from estimated amounts.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested at least annually for impairment as of the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist during the fiscal year. Events or circumstances which could trigger an impairment review include a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate, loss of key retailers, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated
competition, a loss of key personnel, significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, significant negative industry or economic trends, or significant underperformance relative to expected historical or projected future results of operations. We assess our conclusion regarding segments and reporting units in conjunction with our annual goodwill impairment test and have determined that we have one reporting unit for the purposes of allocating and testing goodwill.
When testing goodwill for impairment, we first perform a qualitative assessment. If we determine it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than the carrying amount, then a one-step impairment test is required. If we determine it is not more likely than not a reporting unit’s fair value is less than the carrying amount, then no further analysis is necessary. To identify whether impairment exists, we compare the estimated fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying amount, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill is not considered to be impaired. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then such balance would be recorded as an impairment loss. Any impairment loss is limited to the carrying amount of goodwill within the entity. There has been no impairment of goodwill for any periods presented.
Acquired intangible assets with definite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining estimated economic life of the underlying products and technologies. Long-lived assets to be held and used, including intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. These events or changes in circumstances may include a significant deterioration of operating results, changes in business plans, or changes in anticipated future cash flows. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. If the assets are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined by estimates of discounted cash flows. The discount rate used in any estimate of discounted cash flows would be the rate required for a similar investment of like risk. There has been no impairment of long-lived assets for any periods presented.
Patent litigation matters
We operate in an industry where there may be certain claims made against us related to patent infringement matters. We accrue for these claims whenever we determine that an unfavorable outcome is probable, and the liability is reasonably estimable. The amount of the accrual is estimated based on our review of each individual claim, including the type and facts of the claim and our assessment of the merits of the claim. Since these patent infringement matters can be very complex and require significant judgment, we often utilize external legal counsel and other subject matter experts to assist us in defending against such claims. These accruals are reviewed at least on a quarterly basis and adjusted to reflect the impact of recent negotiations, settlements, court rulings, advice from legal counsel and other subject matter experts and any other events pertaining to the case. Although we take considerable measures to mitigate our exposure in these matters, including indemnification agreements with our manufacturers, litigation is inherently unpredictable. However, we believe that we have valid defenses and adequate indemnifications with respect to our pending legal matters against us as well as adequate provisions for any probable and estimable losses. While the outcome of these proceedings and claims cannot be predicted with certainty, we do not believe that the outcome of any pending legal matter will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Income taxes
We use the asset and liability method when accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained upon examination. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. Valuation allowances are recorded against tax assets when it is determined that it is
more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Interest related to income taxes is recorded in other income, net and penalties are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense.
We make estimates, assumptions and judgments to determine our provision for income taxes and also for deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowances recorded against our deferred tax assets. Actual future operating results and the underlying amount and type of income could differ materially from our estimates, assumptions and judgments thereby impacting our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Share-based compensation
Our share-based compensation expense has resulted from grants of employee stock options and restricted stock awards and is recognized in our consolidated financial statements based on the respective grant date fair values of the awards. Stock option and warrant grant date fair values are estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. The benefits of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation cost are reported as a financing cash flow. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
We estimate the value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date under this model requires judgment, including estimating our fair market value per share of common stock, volatility, expected term, dividend yield and risk-free rate. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. The assumptions we use in the valuation model are based on subjective future expectations combined with management judgment. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes-Merton model change significantly, share-based compensation for future awards may differ materially from the awards granted previously.
The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield of those maturities that are consistent with the expected term of the stock option in effect on the grant date of the award. Dividend yield is based upon historical dividend trends and expected future dividend payments and is calculated by dividing the dollar value of the historical average of dividends paid in a given year per share by the dollar value of the assumed per share price. As we do not have significant historical experience of similar awards, the average expected life of our stock options was determined according to the “SEC simplified method” as described in SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 14, “Share-Based Payment,” which is the midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. Because our stock is not publicly traded and we have no historical data on the volatility of our stock, our expected volatility is estimated by analyzing the historical volatility of comparable public companies.
The amount of share-based compensation we recognize during a period is based on the portion of the awards that are ultimately expected to vest.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions, share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining share-based compensation expense and the actual factors which become known over time, we may change the input factors used in determining share-based compensation costs for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact our results of operations in the period such changes are made. We expect to continue to grant stock options in the future and to the extent that we do our actual share-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
Significant factors used in determining fair value of our common stock
Prior to the completion of our IPO, the fair value of our Class A common stock was determined by the board of directors. Given the absence of a public trading market for our Class A common stock prior to our IPO, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide: Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our Class A common stock, including:
•the prices at which we sold Class A common stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•an independent third-party valuation of our Class A common stock;
•our results of operations, financial position, and capital resources;
•industry outlook;
•the lack of marketability of our Class A common stock;
•the fact that the option grants involve illiquid securities in a private company;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of the Company, given prevailing market conditions;
•the history and nature of our business, industry trends and competitive environment; and
•general economic outlook including economic growth, inflation and unemployment, interest rate environment, and global economic trends, including the impact of COVID-19.
Following our IPO, we rely on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant to determine the fair value of our Class A common stock, as shares of our Class A common stock are traded in the public market.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued guidance, ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, to reduce complexity in accounting standard. The guidance simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740 (“ASC 740”) as well as by improving consistent application of the topic by clarifying and amending existing guidance. This standard is effective for us for the year ending December 31, 2021. The adoption of this standard did not result in a material impact to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.