Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion is designed to provide insight on the financial condition and results of operations of Western Alliance Bancorporation and its subsidiaries and should be read in conjunction with “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risk, uncertainties, and assumptions. Certain risks, uncertainties, and other factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of Part I of this Form 10-K and those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading "Risk Factors," may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements.
For a comparison of the 2020 results to the 2019 results and other 2019 information not included herein, refer to the "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Recent Developments
Closing of AmeriHome Acquisition
On April 7, 2021, the Company completed its acquisition of Aris, the parent company of AmeriHome, pursuant to which, Aris merged with and into an indirect subsidiary of WAB. Based on AmeriHome's final closing balance sheet and a $275 million cash premium, total cash consideration was approximately $1.2 billion. As a result of the Merger, AmeriHome is now a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of the Company and will continue to operate as AmeriHome Mortgage, a Western Alliance Bank company. AmeriHome is a leading national business-to-business mortgage acquirer and servicer. The acquisition of AmeriHome complements the Company’s national commercial businesses with a mortgage franchise that allows the Company to expand mortgage-related offerings to existing clients and diversifies the Company’s revenue profile by expanding sources of non-interest income.
AmeriHome's results of operations have been included in the Company's results beginning April 7, 2021.
Acquisition of Digital Disbursements
On January 25, 2022, the Company completed its acquisition of Digital Settlement Technologies LLC, doing business as Digital Disbursements, a digital payments platform for the class action legal industry. The Digital Disbursements' proprietary platform enables claimants to select their payment method, including direct-to-bank account options and popular digital wallets. This provides the Company with the internal capability to significantly increase efficacy, reduce distribution costs and improve potential fraud detection for the legal class action market. The acquisition is expected to grow the Company's deposit base and continue to extend the suite of legal banking services offered while serving adjacent sectors that will benefit from digital payments technology.
COVID-19 and the CARES Act
The COVID-19 pandemic and certain provisions of the CARES Act and other recent legislative and regulatory relief efforts have had and are expected to continue to have a material impact on the Company's operations, as further discussed below.
Financial position and results of operations
The Company recorded a recovery of credit losses of $21.4 million during year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision for credit losses of $123.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the provision for credit losses compared to the same period in the prior year is attributable to the continued improved outlook for the overall economy. While the Company has not to date experienced significant write-offs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company is continuing to closely monitor its loans with borrowers in COVID-19 impacted industries.
The below table details the Company's exposure to borrowers in industries generally considered to be the most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic:
(1)Balances capture credit exposures in the business segments that manage the significant majority of industry relationships.
(2)Consists of real estate secured loan amounts that have significant retail dependency.
Although the Company has not experienced disproportionate impacts among its business segments to date, borrowers in the industries detailed in the table above could have greater sensitivity to the economic downturn with potentially longer recovery periods than other business lines.
Lending operations and accommodations to borrowers
The original PPP terminated on August 8, 2020, but was reopened in January 2021, with $284 billion in additional funding. As part of the resumption of the program, significant clarifications and modifications were made related to the scope of businesses eligible, expansion of the scope of expenses eligible for forgiveness, and simplification of forgiveness mechanisms for loans of $150,000 or less. Eligible businesses were able to apply for and receive PPP loans through May 31, 2021 and certain small businesses that previously received a loan under the original program were eligible to obtain an additional loan. These loans have a five-year term and earn interest at a rate of 1%. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company funded $602.5 million in loans under the second round of the PPP and received $1.4 billion and $215.8 million in loan payoffs on the first and second rounds of PPP loans, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of loans originated under the first and second round of the PPP totaled $411.9 million.
The CARES Act permitted financial institutions to suspend requirements under GAAP for loan modifications to borrowers affected by COVID-19 and provided interpretive guidance as to conditions that would constitute a short-term modification that would not meet the definition of a TDR. This included the following (i) the loan modification was made between March 1, 2020 and December 31, 2020, and (ii) the applicable loan was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 extended these provisions through January 1, 2022. The Company is applying this guidance to qualifying loan modifications. The types of loan modifications granted to borrowers included extensions of loan maturity dates, covenant waivers, interest only payments for a specified period of time, and loan payment deferrals. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has outstanding modifications on HFI commercial loans that met these conditions with a net balance of $152.8 million, none of which, involve loan payment deferrals. Further, residential HFI mortgage loans in forbearance have a net balance of $22.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
Financial Overview and Highlights
WAL is a bank holding company headquartered in Phoenix, Arizona, incorporated under the laws of the state of Delaware. WAL provides a full spectrum of customized loan, deposit and treasury management capabilities, including blockchain-based offerings through its wholly-owned banking subsidiary, WAB.
WAB operates the following full-service banking divisions: ABA, BON and FIB, Bridge, and TPB. The Company also provides an array of specialized financial services to its business customers across the country and has added to these capabilities with the acquisition of AmeriHome on April 7, 2021, which provides mortgage banking services.
Financial Results Highlights of 2021
•Net income available to common stockholders of $895.7 million for 2021, compared to $506.6 million for 2020
•Diluted earnings per share of $8.67 for 2021, compared to $5.04 per share for 2020
•Net revenue of $2.0 billion, constituting year-over-year growth of 57.8%, or $715.3 million, compared to an increase in non-interest expenses of 73.2%, or $359.8 million
•PPNR1 increased $376.7 million to $1.1 billion, compared to $746.1 million in 2020
•Income tax expense increased $107.9 million to $223.8 million, compared to $115.9 million in 2020
•Total HFI loans of $39.1 billion, up $12.0 billion from December 31, 2020
•Total deposits of $47.6 billion, up $15.7 billion from December 31, 2020
•Stockholders' equity of $5.0 billion, an increase of $1.5 billion from December 31, 2020
•Nonperforming assets (nonaccrual loans and repossessed assets) decreased to 0.15% of total assets, from 0.32% at December 31, 2020
•Net loan charge-offs to average loans outstanding of 0.02% for 2021, compared to 0.06% for 2020
•Net interest margin of 3.41% in 2021, compared to 3.97% in 2020
•Return on average assets of 1.83% for 2021, compared to 1.61% for 2020
•Tangible common equity ratio1 of 7.3%, compared to 8.6% at December 31, 2020
•Tangible book value per share, net of tax1, of $37.84, an increase of 22.5% from $30.90 at December 31, 2020
•Efficiency ratio1 of 41.8% in 2021, compared to 38.8% in 2020
The impact to the Company from these items, and others of both a positive and negative nature, are discussed in more detail below as they pertain to the Company’s overall comparative performance for the year ended December 31, 2021.
1 See Non-GAAP Financial Measures section beginning on page 36.
As a bank holding company, management focuses on key ratios in evaluating the Company's financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
A summary of the Company's results of operations, financial condition, and selected metrics are included in the following tables:
(1) See Non-GAAP Financial Measures section beginning on page 36.
(1) See Non-GAAP Financial Measures section beginning on page 36.
Asset Quality
For all banks and bank holding companies, asset quality plays a significant role in the overall financial condition of the institution and results of operations. The Company measures asset quality in terms of nonaccrual loans as a percentage of gross loans and net charge-offs as a percentage of average loans. Net charge-offs are calculated as the difference between charged-off loans and recovery payments received on previously charged-off loans. The following table summarizes the Company's key asset quality metrics for HFI loans:
Asset and Deposit Growth
The Company’s assets and liabilities are comprised primarily of loans and deposits. Therefore, the ability to originate new loans and attract new deposits is fundamental to the Company’s growth.
Total assets increased to $56.0 billion at December 31, 2021 from $36.5 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets of $19.5 billion, or 53.5%, was driven by continued organic loan and deposit growth and the acquisition of AmeriHome. HFI loans increased by $12.0 billion, or 44.4%, to $39.1 billion as of December 31, 2021, compared to $27.1 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase in HFI loans from December 31, 2020 was driven by increases in residential real estate and commercial and industrial loans of $6.8 billion and $4.0 billion, respectively. CRE, non-owner occupied and construction and land development loans also increased $871.7 million and $591.4 million, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in CRE, owner occupied loans of $258.7 million. Additionally, HFS loans totaled $5.6 billion as of December 31, 2021.
Total deposits increased $15.7 billion, or 49.1%, to $47.6 billion as of December 31, 2021 from $31.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase in deposits from December 31, 2020 was driven by increases of $7.9 billion in non-interest bearing demand deposits, $4.9 billion in savings and money market accounts, and interest bearing demand deposits of $2.5 billion.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth a summary financial overview for the comparable periods:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following discussion and analysis contains financial information determined by methods other than those prescribed by GAAP. The Company's management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in their analysis of the Company's performance. Management believes presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures provides useful supplemental information that is essential to a complete understanding of the operating results of the Company. Since the presentation of these non-GAAP performance measures and their impact differ between companies, these non-GAAP disclosures should not be viewed as a substitute for operating results determined in accordance with GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other companies.
Pre-Provision Net Revenue
Banking regulations define PPNR as the sum of net interest income and non-interest income less expenses before adjusting for loss provisions. Management believes that this is an important metric as it illustrates the underlying performance of the Company, it enables investors and others to assess the Company's ability to generate capital to cover credit losses through the credit cycle, and provides consistent reporting with a key metric used by bank regulatory agencies.
The following table shows the components of PPNR for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Tangible Common Equity
The following table presents financial measures related to tangible common equity. Tangible common equity represents total stockholders' equity, less identifiable intangible assets and goodwill. Management believes that tangible common equity financial measures are useful in evaluating the Company's capital strength, financial condition, and ability to manage potential losses. In addition, management believes that these measures improve comparability to other institutions that have not engaged in acquisitions that resulted in recorded goodwill and other intangible assets.
Efficiency Ratio
The following table shows the components used in the calculation of the efficiency ratio, which management uses as a metric for assessing cost efficiency:
Regulatory Capital
The following table presents certain financial measures related to regulatory capital under Basel III, which includes common equity tier 1 and total capital. The FRB and other banking regulators use CET1 and total capital as a basis for assessing a bank's capital adequacy; therefore, management believes it is useful to assess financial condition and capital adequacy using this same basis. Specifically, the total capital ratio takes into consideration the risk levels of assets and off-balance sheet financial instruments. In addition, management believes that the classified assets to CET1 plus allowance measure is an important regulatory metric for assessing asset quality.
As permitted by the regulatory capital rules, the Company elected to delay the estimated impact of CECL on its regulatory capital over a five-year transition period ending December 31, 2024. As a result, capital ratios and amounts as of December 31, 2021 exclude the impact of the increased allowance for credit losses related to the adoption of ASC 326.
Net Interest Margin
The net interest margin is reported on a TEB. A tax equivalent adjustment is added to reflect interest earned on certain securities and loans that are exempt from federal and state income tax. The following tables set forth the average balances, interest income, interest expense, and average yield (on a fully TEB) for the periods indicated:
(1)Yields on loans and securities have been adjusted to a TEB. The taxable-equivalent adjustment was $33.3 million and $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Included in the yield computation are net loan fees of $131.7 million and $94.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(3)Includes non-accrual loans.
(4)Net interest margin is computed by dividing net interest income by total average earning assets.
(1)Changes due to both volume and rate have been allocated to volume changes.
Comparison of interest income, interest expense and net interest margin
The Company's primary source of revenue is interest income. For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest income was $1.7 billion, an increase of $396.9 million, or 31.5%, compared to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was the result of interest income from HFS loans of $174.4 million, coupled with a $170.4 million increase in interest income from HFI loans that was driven by a $6.6 billion increase in the average HFI loan balance for the year ended December 31, 2021. Interest income from investment securities also increased by $52.3 million for the comparable period due to an increase in the average investment balance of $3.0 billion. Average yield on interest earning assets decreased to 3.65% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 4.29% in 2020, which was primarily the result of a lower rate environment.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense was $109.9 million, compared to $94.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense on deposits decreased $22.9 million for the same period while average interest-bearing deposits increased $6.9 billion, which due to the lower rate environment, reduced the average cost of interest-bearing deposits by 24 basis points. Interest expense across all debt types increased $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of an increase of $1.8 billion in average total debt. The increase in average total debt during the year ended December 31, 2021 is attributable to increases in overnight borrowings and AmeriHome warehouse facilities, issuances of $600.0 million in subordinated debt and $469.6 million in credit linked notes, as well as $300.0 million in AmeriHome senior notes.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net interest income was $1.5 billion, compared to $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net interest income reflects a $16.3 billion increase in average interest earning assets, offset by an increase of $8.7 billion in average interest-bearing liabilities. The decrease in net interest margin of 56 basis points compared to 2020 is the result of a decrease in loan and investment security yields due to a lower rate environment and higher funding costs on borrowings during 2021. These decreases to net interest margin were offset in part by lower deposit costs compared to 2020.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses in each period is reflected as a reduction in earnings for that period and includes amounts related to funded loans, unfunded loan commitments, and investment securities. The provision is equal to the amount required to maintain the allowance for credit losses at a level that is adequate to absorb estimated lifetime credit losses inherent in the loan and investment securities portfolios at the time that the loan is originated or the security is purchased. The Company's CECL models incorporate historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts in measuring expected credit losses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a recovery of credit losses of $21.4 million, compared to a provision for credit losses of $123.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in provision from the prior year is primarily related to the current improved economic outlook.
Non-interest Income
The following table presents a summary of non-interest income for the periods presented:
Total non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 increased by $333.4 million. The increase in non-interest income is primarily attributable to mortgage banking income resulting from the acquisition of AmeriHome. Net gain on loan origination and sale activities totaled $326.2 million, partially offset by net loan servicing expense of $16.3 million for the period from the acquisition date through December 31, 2021. In addition, income from equity investments increased $9.4 million over the prior year due to an increase in warrant activity for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company also recognized gains from sale of investment securities of $8.3 million and a recovery from credit guarantees of $7.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the onset of the pandemic in 2020, the Company increased its investments in tax-exempt municipal securities to take advantage of dislocations in the municipal market as credit spreads widened. As performance of these securities significantly improved during the year and as part of the Company's interest rate management actions, a portion of these municipal securities was sold to realize this appreciation in value. The recovery from credit guarantees is attributable to credit protection provided by the credit linked note transactions entered into during the year ended December 31, 2021. The amount of the gain is equal to the allowance for credit losses recorded on the aggregate $6.4 billion reference pools.
Non-interest Expense
The following table presents a summary of non-interest expense for the periods presented:
Total non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $359.8 million compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in non-interest expense was driven by the AmeriHome acquisition, which contributed to the increase in salaries and employee benefits of $163.1 million from the addition of approximately 1,000 employees along with new expense categories related to mortgage banking activities, including loan servicing expenses of $53.5 million and loan acquisition and origination expenses of $28.8 million. In addition, the Company incurred acquisition and restructure expenses of $15.3 million, which include acquisition costs and costs related to repurchase of EBO loans for purposes of optimizing the Company's combined balance sheet.
Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 the Company's effective tax rate was 19.9%, 18.6% and 17.4%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate from 2020 to 2021 is primarily due to increases in pretax book income and state taxes associated with the AmeriHome acquisition which were not fully offset by growth in permanent tax benefit items for the year. The increase in the effective tax rate from 2019 to 2020 is primarily due to tax expense associated with the surrender of bank owned life insurance, no valuation allowance release in 2020 and return to provision adjustments.
Business Segment Results
The Company's reportable segments are aggregated with a focus on products and services offered and consist of three reportable segments:
•Commercial segment: provides commercial banking and treasury management products and services to small and middle-market businesses, specialized banking services to sophisticated commercial institutions and investors within niche industries, as well as financial services to the real estate industry.
•Consumer Related segment: offers consumer banking services, such as residential mortgage banking, and commercial banking services to enterprises in consumer-related sectors.
•Corporate & Other segment: consists of the Company's investment portfolio, Corporate borrowings and other related items, income and expense items not allocated to our other reportable segments, and inter-segment eliminations.
The following tables present selected operating segment information for the periods presented:
BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS
Total assets increased to $56.0 billion at December 31, 2021 from $36.5 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets of $19.5 billion, or 53.5%, was driven by continued organic loan and deposit growth and the acquisition of AmeriHome. HFI loans increased by $12.0 billion, or 44.4%, to $39.1 billion as of December 31, 2021, compared to $27.1 billion as of December 31, 2020. The increase in HFI loans from December 31, 2020 was driven by increases in residential real estate and commercial and industrial loans of $6.8 billion and $4.0 billion, respectively. CRE, non-owner occupied and construction and land development loans also increased $871.7 million and $591.4 million, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in CRE, owner occupied loans of $258.7 million. Additionally, HFS loans totaled $5.6 billion as of December 31, 2021.
Total liabilities increased $18.0 billion, or 54.4%, to $51.0 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $33.0 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in liabilities is due primarily to an increase in total deposits. Total deposits increased $15.7 billion, or 49.1%, to $47.6 billion at December 31, 2021. The increase in deposits from December 31, 2020 was driven by an increase in non-interest-bearing demand deposits of $7.9 billion, savings and money market deposits of $4.9 billion, interest-bearing demand deposits of $2.5 billion, and certificates of deposit of $398.6 million. Other borrowings also increased $1.5 billion due to an increase in overnight borrowings, AmeriHome senior notes, and issuance of credit linked notes. Qualified debt also increased $347.1 million primarily related to issuance of $600.0 million in subordinated debt in June 2021, partially offset by redemptions of $250.0 million in subordinated debt during the year.
Total stockholders’ equity increased by $1.5 billion, or 45.4%, to $5.0 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $3.4 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in stockholders' equity is primarily a function of net income and net proceeds of $834.8 million from issuances of common and preferred stock during the year, partially offset by quarterly dividends to shareholders and unrealized losses on AFS securities.
Investment securities
Debt securities are classified at the time of acquisition as either HTM, AFS, or trading based upon various factors, including asset/liability management strategies, liquidity and profitability objectives, and regulatory requirements. HTM securities are carried at amortized cost, adjusted for amortization of premiums or accretion of discounts. AFS securities are securities that may be sold prior to maturity based upon asset/liability management decisions. Investment securities classified as AFS are carried at fair value with unrealized gains or losses on these securities recorded as part of AOCI in stockholders’ equity, net of tax. Amortization of premiums or accretion of discounts on MBS is periodically adjusted for estimated prepayments. Trading securities are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses on these securities included in current period earnings.
The Company's investment securities portfolio is utilized as collateral for borrowings, required collateral for public deposits and customer repurchase agreements, and to manage liquidity, capital, and interest rate risk.
The following table summarizes the carrying value of the investment securities portfolio for each of the periods below:
Debt securities increased $2.0 billion, or 38.3%, from December 31, 2020. The increase in investment securities is largely attributable to deployment of excess liquidity with purchases of CLOs, residential MBS issued by GSEs, tax-exempt municipal securities, and private label residential MBS. The Company continued to increase its investment in CLOs during the year as these variable rate securities generate yields that are higher than those for MBS and will benefit from future increases in interest rates. The Company's CLO portfolio consists of second or third credit tranche bonds of structured transactions, rated AA to A.
The Company has variable rate securities, which consist primarily of CLOs. The rates on these securities will convert to a SOFR index when LIBOR is discontinued in June 2023.
Weighted average yield on investment securities is calculated by dividing income within each maturity range by the outstanding amount of the related investment. For purposes of calculating the weighted average yield, AFS securities are carried at amortized cost in the table below and tax-exempt obligations have not been tax-effected. The maturity distribution and weighted average yield of the Company's investment security portfolios at December 31, 2021 are summarized in the table below:
(1)MBS are comprised of pools of loans with varying maturities, the majority of which are due after 10 years.
The Company does not hold any subprime MBS in its investment portfolio. Approximately 55% of its MBS are GSE issued. The MBS that are not GSE issued consist primarily of investment grade securities, including $1.4 billion rated AAA and $87.4 million rated AA.
Gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2021 relate primarily to changes in interest rates and other market conditions that are not considered to be credit-related issues. The Company has reviewed its securities on which there is an unrealized loss in accordance with its allowance for credit losses policy described in "Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein. Based on the analysis performed, management determined that an allowance for credit losses on the Company's AFS securities was not necessary at December 31, 2021.
The credit loss model under ASC 326-20, applicable to HTM securities, requires recognition of lifetime expected credit losses through an allowance account at the time the security is purchased. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a recovery of credit losses on HTM securities of $1.6 million, compared to a provision for credit losses of $4.1 million for the same period in 2020, resulting in a total allowance of $5.2 million and $6.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans HFS
The Company acquired loans held for sale initially as part of the AmeriHome acquisition and, as part of its ongoing mortgage banking business, the Company continues to purchase residential mortgage loans with the intention to sell these loans at a later date. The following is a summary of these loans by type:
(1) EBO loans are delinquent loans repurchased under the terms of the GNMA MBS program that can be resold when loans are brought current.
The Company had no loans HFS as of December 31, 2020.
Loans HFI
The table below summarizes the distribution of the Company’s held for investment loan portfolio:
Loans classified as HFI are stated at the amount of unpaid principal, adjusted for net deferred fees and costs, premiums and discounts on acquired and purchased loans, and an allowance for credit losses. Net deferred loan fees of $85.7 million and $75.4 million reduced the carrying value of loans as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net unamortized purchase premiums on acquired and purchased loans of $184.8 million and $26.0 million increased the carrying value of loans as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table sets forth the amount of loans outstanding by type of loan as of December 31, 2021 that were contractually due in one year or less, more than one year and less than five years, and more than five years based on remaining scheduled repayments of principal. Lines of credit or other loans having no stated final maturity and no stated schedule of repayments are reported as due in one year or less. The table also presents an analysis of the rate structure for loans within the same maturity time periods. Actual cash flows from these loans may differ materially from contractual maturities due to prepayment, refinancing, or other factors.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately $18.3 billion, or 74.3%, of total variable rate loans were subject to rate floors with a weighted average interest rate of 4.0%. At December 31, 2020, approximately $13.7 billion, or 75.3% of total variable rate loans were subject to rate floors with a weighted average interest rate of 4.4%. At December 31, 2021, total loans consisted of 63.0% with variable rates and 37.0% with fixed rates, compared to 67.5% with variable rates and 32.5% with fixed rates at December 31, 2020.
The Company began offering three alternative rate indices (including SOFR, Ameribor, and BSBY) on its lending products to its customers in the second half of 2021. Existing variable rate loan contracts contain LIBOR replacement language, which allow for conversion to a different rate index and spread adjustment, if necessary.
Concentrations of Lending Activities
The Company monitors concentrations of lending activities at the product and borrower relationship level. The Company’s loan portfolio includes significant credit exposure to the CRE market. Commercial and industrial loans made up 47% and 53% of the Company's HFI loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, CRE related loans accounted for approximately 29% and 38% of total loans, at December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively. Substantially all of these CRE loans are secured by first liens with an initial loan to value ratio of generally not more than 75%. Approximately 23% and 28% of these CRE loans, excluding construction and land loans, were owner-occupied at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. No borrower relationships at both the commitment and funded loan level exceeded 5% of total HFI loans as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Non-performing Assets
Total non-performing loans decreased by $72.8 million at December 31, 2021 to $75.6 million from $148.4 million at December 31, 2020.
(1)Includes non-accrual TDR loans of $17.8 million and $28.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest income that would have been recorded under the original terms of nonaccrual loans was $5.3 million, $5.0 million, and $2.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
The composition of nonaccrual HFI loans by loan portfolio segment were as follows:
Troubled Debt Restructured Loans
A TDR loan is a loan on which the Company, for reasons related to a borrower’s financial difficulties, grants a concession to the borrower that the Company would not otherwise consider. The loan terms that have been modified or restructured due to a borrower’s financial situation include, but are not limited to, a reduction in the stated interest rate, an extension of the maturity or renewal of the loan at an interest rate below current market, a reduction in the face amount of the debt, a reduction in the accrued interest, or deferral of interest payments. The majority of the Company's modifications are extensions in terms or deferral of payments which result in no lost principal or interest followed by reductions in interest rates or accrued interest. Consistent with regulatory guidance, a TDR loan that is subsequently modified in another restructuring agreement but has shown sustained performance and classification as a TDR, will be removed from TDR status provided that the modified terms were market-based at the time of modification.
The following table presents TDR loans:
The Company had an allowance for credit losses on these loans of zero and $2.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There were no commitments outstanding on TDR loans as of December 31, 2021, compared to $0.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
Allowance for Credit Losses on HFI Loans
The allowance for credit losses consists of the allowance for credit losses on loans and an allowance for credit losses on unfunded loan commitments. The allowance for credit losses on HTM securities is estimated separately from loans and is discussed within the Investment Securities section.
The following table summarizes the allocation of the allowance for credit losses on HFI loans by loan portfolio segment:
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net loan charge-offs to average loans outstanding was 0.02% and 0.06%, respectively.
In addition to the allowance for credit losses on funded HFI loans, the Company maintains a separate allowance for credit losses related to off-balance sheet credit exposures, including unfunded loan commitments. This allowance balance totaled $37.6 million and $37.0 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and is included in Other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Problem Loans
The Company classifies loans consistent with federal banking regulations using a nine category grading system. These loan grades are described in further detail in "Item 1. Business” of this Form 10-K. The following table presents information regarding potential and actual problem loans, consisting of loans graded as Special Mention, Substandard, Doubtful, and Loss, but which are still performing:
Mortgage Servicing Rights
As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the Company's MSRs related to residential mortgage loans totaled $698.0 million.
The following is a summary of the UPB of loans underlying the Company's MSR portfolio by type:
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess consideration paid for net assets acquired in a business combination over their fair value. Goodwill and other intangible assets acquired in a business combination that are determined to have an indefinite useful life are not subject to amortization, but are subsequently evaluated for impairment at least annually. The Company has goodwill totaling $491.3 million as of December 31, 2021. The increase from $289.9 million at December 31, 2020 is attributable to the AmeriHome acquisition in April 2021. See "Note 2. Mergers, Acquisitions and Dispositions" for further discussion of the acquisition.
The Company performs its annual goodwill and intangibles impairment tests as of October 1 each year, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Based on the Company's annual goodwill and intangibles impairment tests as of October 1 during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, it was determined that goodwill and intangible assets were not impaired.
The following is a summary of acquired intangible assets:
Deferred Tax Assets
As of December 31, 2021, the net DTA balance totaled $20.9 million, a decrease of $10.4 million from $31.3 million as of December 31, 2020. The overall decrease in net deferred tax assets was due to an increase in deferred tax liabilities, not fully offset by an increase in deferred tax assets. The increase in deferred tax liabilities from December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to an increase in mortgage servicing rights from AmeriHome operations and a decrease in deferred insurance premiums related to the Company’s insurance captive, which was in a deferred tax asset position in the prior year. These increases were offset in part by a decrease in deferred tax liabilities related to a decrease in the fair market value of AFS securities. The increase in deferred tax assets from December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to a change in tax planning strategy pertaining to the depreciation election on premises and equipment, which was in a deferred tax liability position in the prior year.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has no deferred tax valuation allowance.
Deposits
Deposits are the primary source for funding the Company's asset growth. Total deposits increased to $47.6 billion at December 31, 2021, from $31.9 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $15.7 billion, or 49.1%. By deposit type, the increase in deposits is attributable to increases in non-interest-bearing demand deposits of $7.9 billion, savings and money market accounts of $4.9 billion, interest-bearing demand deposits of $2.5 billion, and certificates of deposit of $398.6 million from December 31, 2020.
WAB is a participant in the Promontory Interfinancial Network, a network that offers deposit placement services such as CDARS and ICS, which offer products that qualify large deposits for FDIC insurance. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $729.2 million of CDARS deposits and $1.8 billion of ICS deposits, compared to $496.4 million of CDARS deposits and $1.3 billion of ICS deposits at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company also had wholesale brokered deposits of $1.8 billion and $554.8 million, respectively.
In addition, deposits for which the Company provides account holders with earnings credits or referral fees totaled $10.8 billion and $5.9 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company incurred $27.4 million and $17.0 million in deposit related costs on these deposits during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These costs are reported in Deposit costs as part of non-interest expense. The increase in these costs from the prior year is due to an increase in deposit balances eligible for earnings credits or referral fees.
The average balances and weighted average rates paid on deposits are presented below:
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had total uninsured deposits of $26.9 billion and $18.2 billion, respectively. Total U.S. time deposits in excess of the FDIC insurance limit were $465.5 million and $569.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The table below discloses the remaining maturity for estimated uninsured time deposits:
Uninsured deposit information presented herein is estimated using the same methodologies utilized for regulatory reporting, where applicable. Specific to uninsured time deposits, the Company made certain assumptions to estimate uninsured amounts by maturity. At the account level, deposit insurance was assumed to apply first to non-time deposits, then any remaining insurance amounts were applied to maturity groupings on a pro-rata basis, based on the depositor's total amount of time deposits.
Other Borrowings
Short-Term Borrowings
The Company utilizes short-term borrowed funds to support short-term liquidity needs generally created by increased loan demand. The majority of these short-term borrowed funds consist of advances from the FHLB, federal funds purchased from correspondent banks or the FHLB, and customer repurchase agreements. The Company’s borrowing capacity with the FHLB is determined based on collateral pledged, generally consisting of securities and loans. In addition, the Company has borrowing capacity from other sources, collateralized by securities, including securities sold under agreements to repurchase, which are reflected at the amount of cash received in connection with the transaction, and may require additional collateral based on the fair value of the underlying securities. At December 31, 2021, total short-term borrowed funds consisted of federal funds purchased of $675.0 million, secured borrowings of $35.3 million, and customer repurchase agreements of $16.6 million. At December 31, 2020, total short-term borrowed funds consisted of customer repurchase agreements of $16.0 million and FHLB advances of $5.0 million.
Long-Term Borrowings
The Company's long-term borrowings consist of AmeriHome senior notes from the acquisition on April 7, 2021 and credit linked notes issued during the year ended December 31, 2021, inclusive of issuance costs and fair market value adjustments. At December 31, 2021, the carrying value of long-term borrowings totaled $775.0 million. The Company did not have long-term borrowings as of December 31, 2020.
Qualifying Debt
Qualifying debt consists of subordinated debt and junior subordinated debt, inclusive of issuance costs and fair market value adjustments. At December 31, 2021, the carrying value of qualifying debt was $895.8 million, compared to $548.7 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in qualifying debt from December 31, 2020 is primarily related to issuance of $600.0 million of subordinated debt in June 2021, recorded net of issue costs of $8.1 million. This issuance was partially offset by redemptions of subordinated debt totaling $250.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The junior subordinated debt has contractual balances and maturity dates as follows:
(1)The purchase accounting adjustment is being amortized over the remaining life of the trusts, pursuant to accounting guidance.
The weighted average interest rate of all junior subordinated debt as of December 31, 2021 was 2.55%, which is three-month LIBOR plus the contractual spread of 2.34%, compared to a weighted average interest rate of 2.58% at December 31, 2020. Subsequent to June 30, 2023, interest rates on the Company's junior subordinated debt will be based on SOFR.
Capital Resources
The Company and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements could trigger certain mandatory or discretionary actions that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the Company’s business and financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of their assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items (discussed in "Note 18. Commitments and Contingencies" to the Consolidated Financial Statements) as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
In connection with its adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the Company elected the five-year CECL transition option that delays the estimated impact on regulatory capital resulting from the adoption of CECL. As a result of this election, the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital relative to regulatory capital determined under the prior incurred loss methodology has been delayed for two years, followed by a three-year transition period to phase out the aggregate amount of capital benefit provided during the initial two-year delay. As a result, capital ratios and amounts as of December 31, 2021 exclude the impact of the increased allowance for credit losses related to the adoption of ASC 326.
As a result of the Company's continued commercial loan growth and the acquisition of AmeriHome, the Company undertook various capital actions during the year to ensure that its capital levels remained strong, which included offerings of common and preferred stock as well as issuances of subordinated debt and credit linked notes. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company and the Bank exceeded the capital levels necessary to be classified as well-capitalized, as defined by the various banking agencies. The actual capital amounts and ratios for the Company and the Bank are presented in the following tables as of the periods indicated:
With the acquisition of AmeriHome, the Company is also required to maintain specified levels of capital to remain in good standing with certain federal government agencies, including FNMA, FHLMC, GNMA, and HUD. These capital requirements are generally tied to the unpaid balances of loans included in the Company's servicing portfolio or loan production volume. Noncompliance with these capital requirements can result in various remedial actions up to, and including, removing the Company's ability to sell loans to and service loans on behalf of the respective agency. The Company believes that it is in compliance with these requirements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contain a discussion of the Company's significant accounting policies, including information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements, adoption of such policies, and the related impact of their adoption. The Company believes that certain of these policies, along with various estimates that it is required to make in recording its financial transactions, are important to have a complete understanding of the Company's financial position. In addition, these estimates require management to make complex and subjective judgments, many of which include matters with a high degree of uncertainty. The following is a summary of these critical accounting policies and significant estimates.
Allowance for credit losses
The ACL guidance requires that an organization measure all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date, including off-balance sheet credit exposures, based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Determining the appropriateness of the allowance is complex and requires judgment by management about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. In future periods, evaluations of the overall loan portfolio, in light of the factors and forecasts then prevailing, may result in significant changes in the allowance for credit losses and credit loss expense in those future periods. The allowance level is influenced by loan volumes, loan asset quality ratings, delinquency status, historical credit loss experience, loan performance characteristics, and other conditions influencing loss expectations, such as reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the allowance level was most impacted by the improvement in economic forecasts, which resulted in recognition of a recovery of credit losses of $21.4 million. Changes to the assumptions in the model in future periods could have a material impact on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. See "Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" for a detailed discussion of the Company's methodologies for estimating expected credit losses.
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company uses fair value measurements to recognize certain financial instruments at fair value. In connection with the AmeriHome acquisition, the Company acquired financial instruments, including loans HFS, MSRs, and derivative instruments, that are recorded at fair value and require management to make significant judgments in estimating the fair value of these financial instruments. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are actively traded and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgment may be necessary to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments. The fair value of MSRs is determined using a discounted cash flow model based on unobservable inputs, as MSRs are not traded in active markets. Assumptions used to value the Company’s MSRs represent management’s best estimate of assumptions that market participants would use to value this asset and may require significant judgement. The primary risk of material changes to the value of the MSRs resides in the potential volatility and judgment in the assumptions used, specifically prepayment speeds, option adjusted spreads, and discount rates. Hypothetical changes in the value of MSRs based on assumed immediate changes in certain inputs are disclosed in “Note 6. Mortgage Servicing Rights.”
Income taxes
The Company’s income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States. Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating the Company's ability to recover its deferred tax assets in the jurisdictions from which they arise, all available positive and negative evidence is considered, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, tax planning strategies, projected future taxable income, and recent operating results. The assumptions about future taxable income require the use of significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates used to manage the underlying business.
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ongoing ability to accommodate liability maturities and deposit withdrawals, fund asset growth and business operations, and meet contractual obligations through unconstrained access to funding at reasonable market rates. Liquidity management involves forecasting funding requirements and maintaining sufficient capacity to meet the needs and accommodate fluctuations in asset and liability levels due to changes in the Company's business operations or unanticipated events, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
The ability to have readily available funds sufficient to repay fully maturing liabilities is of primary importance to depositors, creditors, and regulators. The Company's liquidity, represented by cash and amounts due from banks, federal funds sold, HFS mortgages, and non-pledged marketable securities, is a result of the Company's operating, investing, and financing activities and related cash flows. In order to ensure funds are available when necessary, on at least a quarterly basis, the Company projects the amount of funds that will be required over a twelve-month period and it also strives to maintain relationships with a diversified customer base. Liquidity requirements can also be met through short-term borrowings or the disposition of short-term assets.
The following table presents the available and outstanding balances on the Company's lines of credit:
In addition to lines of credit, the Company has borrowing capacity with the FHLB and FRB from pledged loans and securities. The Company also has warehouse borrowing lines of credit assumed as part of the AmeriHome acquisition. The borrowing capacity, outstanding borrowings, and available credit as of December 31, 2021 are presented in the following table:
The Company also has a separate PPP lending facility with the FRB that allows the Company to pledge loans originated under the PPP in return for dollar for dollar funding from the FRB, which would provide up to approximately $416 million in additional credit. The amount of available credit under the PPP lending facility will continue to decline each period as these loans are paid down.
Cash requirements of the Company include contracts for services in the ordinary course of business that may require payment for services to be provided in the future and may contain penalty clauses for early termination of the contracts. Additionally, to meet the financing needs of customers, the Company has financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, including commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit.
The following table sets forth the Company's significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Purchase obligations primarily relate to contracts for software licensing, maintenance, and outsourced service providers.
Off-balance sheet commitments associated with outstanding letters of credit, commitments to extend credit, and credit card guarantees as of December 31, 2021 are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding short-term borrowings as of December 31, 2021 and the respective prior year-end balances:
The Company has also committed to irrevocably and unconditionally guarantee the payments or distributions with respect to the holders of preferred securities of the Company's eight statutory business trusts to the extent that the trusts have not made such payments or distributions, including: 1) accrued and unpaid distributions; 2) the redemption price; and 3) upon a dissolution or termination of the trust, the lesser of the liquidation amount and all accrued and unpaid distributions and the
amount of assets of the trust remaining available for distribution. The Company does not believe that these off-balance sheet arrangements have or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources. However, there can be no assurance that such arrangements will not have a future effect.
The Company has a formal liquidity policy and, in the opinion of management, its liquid assets are considered adequate to meet cash flow needs for loan funding and deposit cash withdrawals for the next 90-120 days. At December 31, 2021, there was $8.7 billion in liquid assets, comprised of $516.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, $4.0 billion in HFS loans, and $4.2 billion in unpledged marketable securities. At December 31, 2020, the Company maintained $6.6 billion in liquid assets, comprised of $2.7 billion of cash and cash equivalents and $3.9 billion of unpledged marketable securities.
The Parent maintains liquidity that would be sufficient to fund its operations and certain non-bank affiliate operations for an extended period should funding from normal sources be disrupted. Since deposits are taken by WAB and not by the Parent, Parent liquidity is not dependent on the Bank's deposit balances. In the Company's analysis of Parent liquidity, it is assumed that the Parent is unable to generate funds from additional debt or equity issuances, receives no dividend income from subsidiaries and does not pay dividends to stockholders, while continuing to make non-discretionary payments needed to maintain operations and repayment of contractual principal and interest payments owed by the Parent and affiliated companies. Under this scenario, the amount of time the Parent and its non-bank subsidiary can operate and meet all obligations before the current liquid assets are exhausted is considered as part of the Parent liquidity analysis. Management believes the Parent maintains adequate liquidity capacity to operate without additional funding from new sources for over twelve months.
WAB maintains sufficient funding capacity to address large increases in funding requirements, such as deposit outflows. This capacity is comprised of liquidity derived from a reduction in asset levels and various secured funding sources. On a long-term basis, the Company’s liquidity will be met by changing the relative distribution of its asset portfolios (for example, by reducing investment or loan volumes, or selling or encumbering assets). Further, the Company can increase liquidity by soliciting higher levels of deposit accounts through promotional activities and/or borrowing from correspondent banks, the FHLB of San Francisco, and the FRB. At December 31, 2021, the Company's long-term liquidity needs primarily relate to funds required to support loan originations, commitments, and deposit withdrawals, which can be met by cash flows from investment payments and maturities, and investment sales, if necessary.
The Company’s liquidity is comprised of three primary classifications: 1) cash flows provided by operating activities; 2) cash flows used in investing activities; and 3) cash flows provided by financing activities. Net cash provided by or used in operating activities consists primarily of net income, adjusted for changes in certain other asset and liability accounts and certain non-cash income and expense items, such as the provision for credit losses, investment and other amortization and depreciation. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, net cash (used in) provided by operating activities was $(2.7) billion, $670.2 million, and $717.8 million, respectively.
The Company's primary investing activities are the origination of real estate and commercial loans, the collection of repayments of these loans, and the purchase and sale of securities. The Company's net cash provided by and used in investing activities has been primarily influenced by its loan and securities activities. The Company's cash balance during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, was reduced by $12.7 billion, $5.9 billion, and $3.4 billion, respectively, as a result of a net increase in loans as well as a net increase in investment securities of $2.0 billion, $1.5 billion, and $109.5 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities has been impacted significantly by increased deposit levels. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, net deposits increased $15.7 billion, $9.1 billion, and $3.6 billion, respectively.
Fluctuations in core deposit levels may increase the Company's need for liquidity as certificates of deposit mature or are withdrawn before maturity, and as non-maturity deposits, such as checking and savings account balances, are withdrawn. Additionally, the Company is exposed to the risk that customers with large deposit balances will withdraw all or a portion of such deposits, due in part to the FDIC limitations on the amount of insurance coverage provided to depositors. To mitigate the uninsured deposit risk, the Company participates in the CDARS and ICS programs, which allow an individual customer to invest up to $50.0 million and $150.0 million, respectively, through one participating financial institution or, a combined total of $200.0 million per individual customer, with the entire amount being covered by FDIC insurance. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $729.2 million of CDARS and $1.8 billion of ICS deposits.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $1.8 billion of wholesale brokered deposits outstanding. Brokered deposits are generally considered to be deposits that have been received from a third party who is engaged in the business of placing deposits on behalf of others. A traditional deposit broker will direct deposits to the banking institution offering the highest interest rate available. Federal banking laws and regulations place restrictions on depository institutions regarding brokered deposits because of the general concern that these deposits are not relationship based and are at a greater risk of being
withdrawn and placed on deposit at another institution offering a higher interest rate, thus posing liquidity risk for institutions that gather brokered deposits in significant amounts.
Federal and state banking regulations place certain restrictions on dividends paid. The total amount of dividends which may be paid at any date is generally limited to the retained earnings of the bank. Dividends paid by WAB to the Parent would be prohibited if the effect thereof would cause the Bank’s capital to be reduced below applicable minimum capital requirements. During the year ended December 31, 2021, WAB paid dividends to the Parent of $50.0 million.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See "Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for information on recent and recently adopted accounting pronouncements and their expected impact, if any, on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements.
SUPERVISION AND REGULATION
WAL, WAB, and certain of its non-banking subsidiaries are subject to comprehensive regulation under federal and state laws. The regulatory framework applicable to bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks is intended to protect depositors, the DIF, and the U.S. banking system as a whole. This system is not designed to protect equity investors in bank holding companies such as WAL.
Set forth below is a summary of the significant laws and regulations applicable to WAL and its subsidiaries. The description that follows is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the statutes, regulations, and policies that are described. Such statutes, regulations, and policies are subject to ongoing review by Congress and state legislatures and federal and state regulatory agencies. A change in any of the statutes, regulations, or regulatory policies applicable to WAL and its subsidiaries could have a material effect on the results of the Company.
Overview
WAL is a separate and distinct legal entity from WAB and its other subsidiaries. As a registered bank holding company, WAL is subject to inspection, examination, and supervision by the FRB, and is regulated under the BHCA. WAL is also under the jurisdiction of the SEC and is subject to the disclosure and other regulatory requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the Exchange Act, as administered by the SEC. The Company’s common stock is listed on the NYSE under the trading symbol “WAL” and the Company is subject to the rules of the NYSE for listed companies. The Company is a financial institution holding company within the meaning of Arizona law. WAL provides a full spectrum of deposit, lending, treasury management, and online banking products and services through WAB, its wholly-owned banking subsidiary. WAB is an Arizona chartered bank and a member of the Federal Reserve System. WAB operates the following full-service banking divisions: ABA, BON, Bridge, FIB, and TPB. WAB is subject to the supervision of, and to regular examination by, the Arizona Department of Financial Institutions, the FRB as its primary federal regulator, and the FDIC as its deposit insurer. WAB's deposits are insured by the FDIC up to the applicable deposit insurance limits in accordance with FDIC laws and regulations. The Company also serves business customers through a national platform of specialized financial services providers.
WAL and WAB are also supervised by the CFPB for compliance with federal consumer financial protection laws. The Company’s non-bank subsidiaries are subject to federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of the FRB.
The Dodd-Frank Act significantly changed the financial regulatory regime in the United States. Since the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, U.S. banks and financial services firms have been subject to enhanced regulation and oversight. Several provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act are subject to further rulemaking, guidance, and interpretation by the federal banking agencies.
Enacted in 2018, the EGRRCPA, among other things, amended certain provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. The EGRRCPA provides limited regulatory relief to certain financial institutions while preserving the existing framework under which U.S. financial institutions are regulated. The EGRRCPA relieves bank holding companies with less than $100 billion in assets, such as the Company, from the enhanced prudential standards imposed under Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act (including, but not limited to, resolution planning and enhanced liquidity and risk management requirements). In addition to amending the Dodd-Frank Act, the EGRRCPA also includes certain additional banking-related provisions, consumer protection provisions and securities law-related provisions. While many of the EGRRCPA’s changes have been implemented through rules adopted by federal agencies, the Company expects to continue to evaluate the potential impact of the EGRRCPA as it is further implemented.
Supervision, Regulation and Licensing of AmeriHome
AmeriHome is a residential mortgage producer and servicer that operates in a heavily regulated industry. In addition to supervision by the federal banking agencies with primary jurisdiction over the Company and WAB, AmeriHome is subject to the rules, regulations and oversight of certain federal, state and local governmental authorities, including the CFPB, HUD, and government-sponsored enterprises in the mortgage industry such as FHLMC, FNMA, and GNMA.
Further, AmeriHome must comply with a large number of federal consumer protection laws and regulations including, among others:
•the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act and Regulation X, which require lenders, mortgage brokers, or servicers to provide borrowers with pertinent and timely disclosures regarding the nature and costs of the settlement process and prohibit specific practices related thereto;
•the Truth In Lending Act and Regulation Z, which require disclosures and timely information on the nature and costs of the residential mortgages and the real estate settlement process;
•the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act, which applies to businesses and individuals engaging in the residential mortgage loan business;
•the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, the Federal Trade Commission Act, and the rules and regulations of the FTC and CFPB that prohibit unfair, abusive or deceptive acts or practices;
•the Fair Credit Reporting Act (as amended by the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act) and Regulation V, which address the accuracy, fairness, and privacy of information in the files of consumer reporting agencies; and
•the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and Regulation B, the Fair Housing Act, the Homeowners Protection Act, and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act and Regulation C, which generally disallow discrimination on a prohibited basis, provide applicants and borrowers rights with respect to credit decisioning and the residential mortgage process, and require disclosures and impose obligations on financial businesses conducting residential lending and mortgage servicing.
The CFPB as well as the FTC have rulemaking authority with respect to many of the federal consumer protection laws applicable to mortgage lenders and servicers, and their rulemaking and regulatory agendas relating to the residential mortgage industry continues to evolve. In particular, as part of its enforcement authority, the CFPB can order, among other things, rescission or reformation of contracts, the refund of moneys or the return of real property, restitution, disgorgement or compensation for unjust enrichment, the payment of damages or other monetary relief, public notifications regarding violations, remediation of practices, external compliance monitoring and civil money penalties.
AmeriHome is also subject to state and local laws, rules and regulations and oversight by various state agencies that license and oversee consumer protection, loan servicing, origination and collection activities of mortgage industry participants. Despite the fact that AmeriHome is the operating subsidiary of a depository institution, it must comply with regulatory and licensing requirements in certain states in order to conduct its business, and does (and will continue to) incur significant costs to comply with these requirements. These laws, rules and regulations may change as statutes and regulations are enacted, promulgated, amended, interpreted and enforced.
CARES Act
The CARES Act was enacted in March 2020 to provide economic relief in response to the public health and economic impacts of COVID-19. Many of the CARES Act’s programs are, and remain, dependent upon the direct involvement of U.S. financial institutions like the Company and the Bank. These programs have been implemented through rules and guidance adopted by federal departments and agencies, including the U.S. Department of Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the "Federal Reserve"), and other federal banking agencies, including those with direct supervisory jurisdiction over the Company and the Bank. Furthermore, as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, federal regulatory authorities continue to issue additional guidance and regulations with respect to the implementation, lifecycle, and eligibility requirements for the various CARES Act programs as well as industry-specific recovery procedures for COVID-19.
The Company continues to assess the impact of the CARES Act, the potential impact of new COVID-19 legislation, and other statutes, regulations, and supervisory guidance related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The CARES Act amended the SBA’s loan program, in which the Bank participates, to create a guaranteed, unsecured loan program, the PPP, to fund operational costs of eligible businesses, organizations and self-employed persons during COVID-19. In December 2020, Congress revived the PPP and allocated additional PPP funds for 2021 and in March 2021, Congress
extended the deadline for PPP applications to May 31, 2021, with a further extension of the Congressional PPP authorization through June 30, 2021.
On May 14, 2021, the Federal Reserve announced a third extension of its rule to bolster the effectiveness of the PPP, which applies to PPP loans made since March 31, 2021 and allowed banks to continue to make PPP loans to a broad range of small businesses within their communities. The rule extension applied to PPP loans made from March 31 through June 30, 2021 and sunsets on March 31, 2022 unless the PPP is again extended by Congress. As a participating PPP lender, the Bank continues to monitor legislative, regulatory, and supervisory developments related thereto.
Bank Holding Company Regulation
WAL is a bank holding company as defined under the BHCA. The BHCA generally limits the business of bank holding companies to banking, managing or controlling banks, and other activities that the FRB has determined to be so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto. Business activities that have been determined to be related to banking, and therefore appropriate for bank holding companies and their affiliates to engage in, include securities brokerage services, investment advisory services, fiduciary services, and certain management advisory and data processing services, among others. Bank holding companies that have elected to become financial holding companies may engage in any activity, or acquire and retain the shares of a company engaged in any activity that is either: (i) financial in nature or incidental to such financial activity (as determined by the FRB in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury) or (ii) complementary to a financial activity, and that does not pose a substantial risk to the safety and soundness of depository institutions or the financial system generally (as solely determined by the FRB). Activities that are financial in nature include securities underwriting and dealing, insurance underwriting, and making merchant banking investments.
Mergers and Acquisitions
The BHCA, the Bank Merger Act, and other federal and state statutes regulate the direct and indirect acquisition of depository institutions. The BHCA requires prior FRB approval for a bank holding company to acquire, directly or indirectly, 5% or more of any class of voting securities of a commercial bank or its parent holding company and for a company, other than a bank holding company, to acquire 25% or more of any class of voting securities of a bank or bank holding company. In April 2020, the Federal Reserve adopted a final rule codifying the presumptions used in determinations of whether a company has the ability to exercise a controlling influence over another company for purposes of the BHCA, and providing greater transparency on the types of relationships that the Federal Reserve generally views as supporting a determination of control. Under the Change in Bank Control Act, any person, including a company, may not acquire, directly or indirectly, control of a bank without providing 60 days’ prior notice and receiving a non-objection from the appropriate federal banking agency.
Under the Bank Merger Act, the prior approval of the appropriate federal banking agency is required for insured depository institutions to merge or enter into purchase and assumption transactions. In reviewing applications seeking approval of merger and purchase and assumption transactions, the federal banking agencies will consider, among other things, the competitive effects and public benefits of the transactions, the capital position of the combined banking organization, the applicant's performance record under the CRA, and the effectiveness of the subject organizations in combating money laundering activities. For further information relating to the CRA, see the section titled “Community Reinvestment Act and Fair Lending Laws.”
Under Section 6-142 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, no person may acquire control of a company that controls an Arizona bank without the prior approval of the Arizona Superintendent of Financial Institutions, or Arizona Superintendent. A person who has the power to vote 15% or more of the voting stock of a controlling company is presumed to control the company.
Enhanced Prudential Standards
Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act imposes enhanced prudential standards on larger banking organizations, with certain of these standards applicable to banking organizations over $10 billion, including WAL and WAB, as of the quarter ending June 30, 2014. In October 2012, the FDIC, the OCC, and the FRB issued separate but similar rules requiring covered banks and bank holding companies with $10 billion to $50 billion in total consolidated assets to conduct an annual company-run stress test. WAL and WAB conducted a company-run capital stress test as required by the Dodd-Frank Act in 2017 and provided the results to the FRB. WAL found the Company would have sufficient capital to maintain regulatory capital levels throughout an economic downturn.
As a result of passage of the EGRRCPA, bank holding companies with less than $100 billion in assets, such as the Company, are exempt from the enhanced prudential standards imposed under Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act (including, but not limited to, the resolution planning and enhanced liquidity and risk management requirements therein). Notwithstanding these changes, the capital planning and risk management practices of the Company and the Bank will continue to be reviewed through the regular supervisory processes of the FRB. Further, in connection with the FRB’s rules implementing the enhanced prudential standards required by Dodd-Frank (and as subsequently modified by application of the EGRRCPA’s higher consolidated asset thresholds for bank holding companies), the Company has established a risk committee of the BOD to manage enterprise-wide risk and has retained its separate risk committee of independent directors.
Further, in connection with the FRB’s rules implementing the enhanced prudential standards required by Dodd-Frank (and as subsequently modified by application of the EGRRCPA’s higher consolidated asset thresholds for bank holding companies), the Company has established a risk committee of the BOD to manage enterprise-wide risk and has retained its separate risk committee of independent directors.
Volcker Rule
Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act, commonly known as the Volcker Rule, restricts the ability of banking entities, such as the Company and WAB, from: (i) engaging in “proprietary trading” and (ii) investing in or sponsoring certain covered funds, subject to certain limited exceptions. Under the Volcker Rule, the term "covered funds" is defined as any issuer that would be an investment company under the Investment Company Act but for the exemption in Section 3(c)(1) or 3(c)(7) of that Act, which includes CLO and CDO securities. There are also several exemptions from the definition of covered fund, including, among other things, loan securitizations, joint ventures, certain types of foreign funds, entities issuing asset-backed commercial paper, and registered investment companies. Further, the final rules permit banking entities, subject to certain conditions and limitations, to invest in or sponsor a covered fund in connection with: (1) organizing and offering the covered fund; (2) certain risk-mitigating hedging activities; and (3) de minimis investments in covered funds. Compliance with the Volcker Rule was required by July 21, 2017.
The EGRRCPA and subsequent promulgation of inter-agency final rules have aimed at simplifying and tailoring requirements related to the Volcker Rule, including by eliminating collection of certain metrics and reducing the compliance burdens associated with other metrics for banks with less than $20 billion in average trading assets and liabilities. In June 2020, the Federal Reserve - along with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, FDIC, the OCC, and the SEC - issued a final rule modifying the Volcker Rule’s prohibition on banking entities investing in or sponsoring hedge funds or private equity funds (“covered funds”). The Volcker Rule generally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading and from acquiring or retaining ownership interests in, sponsoring or having certain relationships with a hedge fund or private equity fund. The final rule modifies three areas of the Volcker Rule by: (1) streamlining the covered funds portion of the rule; (2) addressing the extraterritorial treatment of certain foreign funds; and (3) permitting banking entities to offer financial services and engage in other activities that do not raise concerns that the Volcker Rule was intended to address. The new rule became effective October 1, 2020. The Company believes it is fully compliant with the Volcker Rule, including as modified by the new rule.
Dividends
The Company has paid regular quarterly dividends since the third quarter of 2019. Whether the Company continues to pay quarterly dividends and the amount of any such dividends will be at the discretion of WAL's BOD and will depend on the Company’s earnings, financial condition, results of operations, business prospects, capital requirements, regulatory restrictions, contractual restrictions, and other factors that the BOD may deem relevant.
The Company’s ability to pay dividends is subject to the regulatory authority of the FRB. The supervisory concern of the FRB focuses on a bank holding company’s capital position, its ability to meet its financial obligations as they come due, and its capacity to act as a source of financial strength to its insured depository institution subsidiaries. In addition, FRB policy discourages the payment of dividends by a bank holding company that is not supported by current operating earnings.
As a Delaware corporation, the Company is also subject to limitations under Delaware law on the payment of dividends. Under the Delaware General Corporation Law, dividends may only be paid out of surplus or out of net profits for the year in which the dividend is declared or the preceding year, and no dividends may be paid on common stock at any time during which the capital of outstanding preferred stock or preference stock exceeds the Company's net assets.
From time to time, the Company may become a party to financing agreements and other contractual obligations that have the effect of limiting or prohibiting the declaration or payment of dividends under certain circumstances. Holding company expenses and obligations with respect to its outstanding trust preferred securities and corresponding subordinated debt also may limit or impair the Company’s ability to declare and pay dividends.
Since the Company has no significant assets other than the voting stock of its subsidiaries, it currently depends on dividends from WAB and, to a lesser extent, its non-bank subsidiaries, for a substantial portion of its revenue and as the primary sources of its cash flow. The ability of a state member bank, such as WAB, to pay cash dividends is restricted by the FRB and the State of Arizona. The FRB’s Regulation H states that a member bank may not declare or pay a dividend if the total of all dividends declared during that calendar year exceed the bank’s net income during that calendar year and the retained net income of the prior two years. Further, without receiving prior approval from both the FRB and two-thirds of its shareholders, a bank cannot declare or pay a dividend that would exceed its undivided profits or withdraw any portion of its permanent capital.
Under Section 6-187 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, WAB may pay dividends on the same basis as any other Arizona corporation, except that cash dividends paid out of capital surplus require the prior approval of the Arizona Superintendent. Under Section 10-640 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a corporation may not make a distribution to stockholders if to do so would render the corporation insolvent or unable to pay its debts as they become due. However, an Arizona bank may not declare a non-stock dividend out of capital surplus without the approval of the Arizona Superintendent.
Federal Reserve System
As a member of the Federal Reserve System, WAB has historically been required by law to maintain reserves against its transaction deposits, which were to be held in cash or with the FRB. In response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve reduced the reserve requirement ratios to zero percent effective on March 26, 2020.
Additionally, on June 4, 2021, the Federal Reserve adopted amendments to Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions, 12 C.F.R. Part 204) to eliminate references to an “interest on required reserves” rate and to an “interest on excess reserves” rate and replace them with a reference to a single “interest on reserve balances” rate. The amendments also simplified the formula used to calculate the amount of interest paid on balances maintained by or on behalf of eligible institutions in master accounts at Federal Reserve Banks, and to made other conforming amendments. The rule became effective on July 29, 2021.
Source of Strength Doctrine
FRB policy requires bank holding companies to act as a source of financial and managerial strength to their subsidiary banks. Section 616 of the Dodd-Frank Act codified the requirement that bank holding companies act as a source of financial strength. As a result, the Company is expected to commit resources to support WAB, including at times when the Company may not be in a financial position to provide such resources. Any capital loans by a bank holding company to any of its subsidiary banks are subordinate in right of payment to deposits and to certain other indebtedness of such subsidiary banks. The U.S. Bankruptcy Code provides that, in the event of a bank holding company's bankruptcy, any commitment by the bank holding company to a federal banking agency to maintain the capital of a subsidiary bank will be assumed by the bankruptcy trustee and entitled to priority of payment.
Capital Adequacy
The Capital Rules established a comprehensive capital framework for U.S. banking organizations. The Capital Rules generally implement the Basel Committee's Basel III final capital framework for strengthening international capital standards. The Capital Rules revise the definitions and the components of regulatory capital, as well as address other issues affecting the numerator in banking institutions’ regulatory capital ratios. The Capital Rules also address asset risk weights and other matters affecting the denominator in banking institutions’ regulatory capital ratios and replaced the existing general risk-weighting approach with a more risk-sensitive approach.
The Capital Rules: (i) include CET1 and the related regulatory capital ratio of CET1 to risk-weighted assets; (ii) specify that Tier 1 capital consists of CET1 and “Additional Tier 1 capital” instruments meeting certain revised requirements; (iii) mandate that most deductions/adjustments to regulatory capital measures be made to CET1 and not to the other components of capital; and (iv) expand the scope of the deductions from and adjustments to capital as compared to existing regulations. Under the Capital Rules, for most banking organizations, the most common form of Additional Tier 1 capital is non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, and the most common forms of Tier 2 capital are subordinated notes and a portion of the allocation for loan and lease losses, in each case, subject to the Capital Rules’ specific requirements.
Pursuant to the Capital Rules, the minimum capital ratios are as follows:
•4.5% CET1 to risk-weighted assets;
•6.0% Tier 1 capital (that is, CET1 plus Additional Tier 1 capital) to risk-weighted assets;
•8.0% Total capital (that is, Tier 1 capital plus Tier 2 capital) to risk-weighted assets; and
•4.0% Tier 1 capital to average consolidated assets as reported on consolidated financial statements (called “leverage ratio”).
The Capital Rules also include a “capital conservation buffer,” composed entirely of CET1, in addition to these minimum risk-weighted asset ratios. The capital conservation buffer is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress. Banking institutions with a ratio of CET1 to risk-weighted assets above the minimum but below the capital conservation buffer will face constraints on dividends, equity, and other capital instrument repurchases and compensation based on the amount of the shortfall. The Capital Rules became fully phased-in on January 1, 2019. Thus, the capital standards applicable to the Company include an additional capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of CET1, effectively resulting in minimum ratios inclusive of the capital conservation buffer of (i) CET1 to risk-weighted assets of at least 7%, (ii) Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 8.5%, and (iii) Total capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 10.5%.
The Capital Rules provide for a number of deductions from and adjustments to CET1. These include, for example, the requirement that mortgage servicing assets, deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences that could not be realized through net operating loss carrybacks, and significant investments in non-consolidated financial entities be deducted from CET1 to the extent that any one such category exceeds 10% of CET1 or all such items, in the aggregate, exceed 15% of CET1. The Capital Rules further prescribe that the effects of accumulated other comprehensive income or loss items reported as a component of stockholders’ equity be included in CET1 capital; however, non-advanced approaches banking organizations may make a one-time permanent election to exclude these items. The Company, as a non-advanced approaches institution, has made this one-time election.
The Capital Rules also preclude certain hybrid securities, such as trust preferred securities, issued on or after May 19, 2010 from inclusion in bank holding companies’ Tier 1 capital. The Company has used trust preferred securities in the past as a tool for raising additional Tier 1 capital and otherwise improving its regulatory capital ratios. Although the Company may continue to include its existing trust preferred securities as Tier 1 capital, the prohibition on the use of these securities as Tier 1 capital going forward may limit the Company’s ability to raise capital in the future.
The risk-weighting categories in the Capital Rules are standardized and include a risk-sensitive number of categories, depending on the nature of the assets, generally ranging from 0% for U.S. government and agency securities, to 600% for certain equity exposures, and resulting in higher risk weights for a variety of asset classes.
As of April 1, 2020, final rules became effective simplifying the capital treatment for mortgage servicing assets, certain deferred tax assets, investments in the capital instruments of unconsolidated financial institutions, and minority interest. Management believes the Company is in compliance, and will continue to be in compliance, with the targeted capital ratios.
Concurrent with enactment of the CARES Act, the federal bank regulatory authorities issued an interim final rule in late March 2020 that delayed the estimated impact on regulatory capital resulting from the adoption of CECL. Subsequently, on August 26, 2020, the federal banking agencies issued a final rule that allows institutions that adopt the CECL accounting standard in 2020 to mitigate CECL’s estimated effects on regulatory capital for two years. The CECL final rule is substantially similar to the interim final rule issued in March 2020 in connection with other CARES Act related regulatory relief. The final rule gives eligible institutions the option to mitigate the estimated capital effects of CECL for two years, followed by a three-year transition period. The Company has elected this capital relief option.
Prompt Corrective Action and Safety and Soundness
Pursuant to Section 38 of the FDIA, federal banking agencies are required to take “prompt corrective action” should a depository institution fail to meet certain capital adequacy standards. At each successive lower capital category, an insured depository institution is subject to more restrictions and prohibitions, including restrictions on growth, restrictions on interest rates paid on deposits, restrictions or prohibitions on payment of dividends and restrictions on the acceptance of brokered deposits. Furthermore, if an insured depository institution is classified in one of the undercapitalized categories, it is required to submit a capital restoration plan to the appropriate federal banking agency, and the holding company must guarantee the performance of that plan. Based upon its capital levels, a bank that is classified as well-capitalized, adequately capitalized, or undercapitalized may be treated as though it were in the next lower capital category if the appropriate federal banking agency, after notice and opportunity for hearing, determines that an unsafe or unsound condition, or an unsafe or unsound practice, warrants such treatment.
For purposes of prompt corrective action, to be: (i) well-capitalized, a bank must have a total risk based capital ratio of at least 10%, a Tier 1 risk based capital ratio of at least 8%, a CET1 risk based capital ratio of at least 6.5%, and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of at least 5%; (ii) adequately capitalized, a bank must have a total risk based capital ratio of at least 8%, a Tier 1 risk based capital ratio of at least 6%, a CET1 risk based capital ratio of at least 4.5%, and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of at least 4%; (iii) undercapitalized, a bank would have a total risk based capital ratio of less than 8%, a Tier 1 risk based capital ratio of less than 6%, a CET1 risk based capital ratio of less than 4.5%, and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of less than 4%; (iv) significantly undercapitalized, a bank would have a total risk based capital ratio of less than 6%, a Tier 1 risk based capital ratio of less than 4%, a CET1 risk based capital ratio of less than 3%, and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of less than 3%; (v) critically undercapitalized, a bank would have a ratio of tangible equity to total assets that is less than or equal to 2%.
Bank holding companies and insured banks also may be subject to potential enforcement actions of varying levels of severity by the federal banking agencies for unsafe or unsound practices in conducting their business, or for violation of any law, rule, regulation, condition imposed in writing by the agency or term of a written agreement with the agency. In more serious cases, enforcement actions may include: (i) the issuance of directives to increase capital; (ii) the issuance of formal and informal agreements; (iii) the imposition of civil monetary penalties; (iv) the issuance of a cease and desist order that can be judicially enforced; (v) the issuance of removal and prohibition orders against officers, directors, and other institution-affiliated parties; (vi) the termination of the bank’s deposit insurance; (vii) the appointment of a conservator or receiver for the bank; and (viii) the enforcement of such actions through injunctions or restraining orders based upon a judicial determination that the agency would be harmed if such equitable relief was not granted.
Transactions with Affiliates and Insiders
Under federal law, transactions between insured depository institutions and their affiliates are governed by Sections 23A and 23B of the FRA and implementing Regulation W. In a bank holding company context, at a minimum, the parent holding company of a bank, and any companies which are controlled by such parent holding company, are affiliates of the bank. Generally, Sections 23A and 23B of the FRA are intended to protect insured depository institutions from losses arising from transactions with non-insured affiliates by limiting the extent to which a bank or its subsidiaries may engage in covered transactions with any one affiliate and with all affiliates of the bank in the aggregate, and requiring that such transactions be on terms consistent with safe and sound banking practices.
Further, Section 22(h) of the FRA and its implementing Regulation O restricts loans to directors, executive officers, and principal stockholders (“insiders”). Under Section 22(h), loans to insiders and their related interests may not exceed, together with all other outstanding loans to such persons and affiliated entities, the institution's total capital and surplus. Loans to insiders above specified amounts must receive the prior approval of the BOD. Further, under Section 22(h) of the FRA, loans to directors, executive officers, and principal stockholders must be made on terms substantially the same as offered in comparable transactions to other persons, except that such insiders may receive preferential loans made under a benefit or compensation program that is widely available to the bank's employees and does not give preference to the insider over the employees. Section 22(g) of the FRA places additional limitations on loans to executive officers.
Lending Limits
In addition to the requirements set forth above, state banking law generally limits the amount of funds that a state-chartered bank may lend to a single borrower. Under Section 6-352 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, the obligations of one borrower to a bank may not exceed 20% of the bank’s capital, plus an additional 10% of its capital if the additional amounts are fully secured by readily marketable collateral.
Brokered Deposits
Section 29 of the FDIA and FDIC regulations generally limit the ability of any bank to accept, renew or roll over any brokered deposit unless it is “well capitalized” or, with the FDIC’s approval, “adequately capitalized.” However, as a result of the EGRRCPA, the FDIC has undertaken a comprehensive review of its regulatory approach to brokered deposits, including reciprocal deposits, and interest rate caps applicable to banks that are less than "well capitalized." On December 15, 2020, the FDIC issued final rules that amend the FDIC's methodology for calculating interest rate caps, provide a new process for banks that seek FDIC approval to offer a competitive rate on deposits when the prevailing rate in the bank's local market exceeds the national rate cap, and provides specific exemptions and streamlined application and notice procedures for certain deposit-placement arrangements that are not subject to brokered deposit restrictions. These final rules became effective on April 1, 2021. To date, there has been no material impact to either the Company or the Bank from the rules.
Consumer Protection and CFPB Supervision
The Dodd-Frank Act centralized responsibility for consumer financial protection by creating the CFPB, an independent agency charged with responsibility for implementing, enforcing, and examining compliance with federal consumer financial protection laws. The Company is subject to a number of federal and state laws designed to protect borrowers and promote lending to various sectors of the economy and population. These laws include the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Fair Credit Reporting Act, the Fair Debt Collection Procedures Act, the Truth in Lending Act, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the Real Estate Settlement Practices Act, various state law counterparts, and the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 2010, which is part of the Dodd-Frank Act. The Dodd-Frank Act does not prevent states from adopting stricter consumer protection standards. State regulation of financial products and potential enforcement actions could also adversely affect the Company’s business, financial condition, or operations.
Depositor Preference
The FDIA provides that, in the event of the “liquidation or other resolution” of an insured depository institution, the claims of depositors of the institution, including the claims of the FDIC as subrogee of insured depositors, and certain claims for administrative expenses of the FDIC as a receiver, will have priority over other general unsecured claims against the institution. If an insured depository institution fails, insured and uninsured depositors, along with the FDIC, will have priority in payment ahead of unsecured, non-deposit creditors, including the parent bank holding company, with respect to any extensions of credit they have made to such insured depository institution.
Federal Deposit Insurance
Substantially all of the deposits of WAB are insured up to applicable limits by the FDIC’s DIF. The basic limit on FDIC deposit insurance is $250,000 per depositor. WAB is subject to deposit insurance assessments to maintain the DIF.
The FDIC uses a risk-based assessment system that imposes insurance premiums based upon a risk matrix that takes into account a bank's CAMELS rating. The risk matrix utilizes different risk categories distinguished by capital levels and supervisory ratings. As a result of the Dodd-Frank Act, the base for insurance assessments is now consolidated average assets less average tangible equity. Assessment rates are calculated using formulas that take into account the risk of the institution being assessed. WAB is classified as, and subject to the scorecard for, a large and highly complex institution to determine its total base assessment rate.
Under the FDIA, the FDIC may terminate deposit insurance upon a finding that the institution has engaged in unsafe and unsound practices, is in an unsafe or unsound condition to continue operations, or has violated any applicable law, regulation, rule, order or condition imposed by the FDIC. The Company’s management is not aware of any practice, condition, or violation that might lead to the termination of its deposit insurance.
Financial Privacy and Data Security
The Company is subject to federal laws, including the GLBA, and certain state laws containing consumer privacy protection provisions. These provisions limit the ability of banks and other financial institutions to disclose non-public information about consumers to affiliated and non-affiliated third parties and limit the reuse of certain consumer information received from non-affiliated institutions. These provisions require notice of privacy policies to consumers and, in some circumstances, allow consumers to prevent disclosure of certain personal information to affiliates or non-affiliated third parties by means of “opt out” or “opt in” authorizations.
For example, in August 2018, the CFPB published its final rule to update Regulation P pursuant to the amended GLBA. Under this rule, certain qualifying financial institutions are not required to provide annual privacy notices to customers. To qualify, a financial institution must not share nonpublic personal information about customers except as described in certain statutory exceptions that do not trigger a customer’s statutory opt-out right. In addition, the financial institution must not have changed its disclosure policies and practices from those disclosed in its most recent privacy notice. The rule sets forth timing requirements for delivery of annual privacy notices in the event that a financial institution that qualified for the annual notice exemption later changes its policies or practices in such a way that it no longer qualifies for the exemption.
The GLBA also requires that financial institutions implement comprehensive written information security programs that include administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to protect consumer information. Further, pursuant to interpretive guidance issued under the GLBA and certain state laws, financial institutions are required to notify customers of security breaches that result in unauthorized access to their nonpublic personal information.
For example, under California law, every business that owns or licenses personal information about a California resident must maintain reasonable security procedures and policies to protect that information and comply with specific requirements relating to the destruction of records containing personal information and disclosure of breaches to customers, and restrictions on the use of customer information unless the customer "opts in." Other states, including Arizona and Nevada where WAB has branches, may also have applicable laws requiring businesses that retain consumer personal information to develop reasonable security policies and procedures, notify consumers of a security breach, or provide disclosures about the use and sharing of consumer personal information.
The federal banking agencies, including the FRB, through the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, have adopted guidelines to encourage financial institutions to address cybersecurity risks and identify, assess, and mitigate these risks, both internally and at critical third-party services providers. In October 2016, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued proposed rules on enhanced cybersecurity risk management and resilience standards that would apply to very large financial institutions and to services provided by third parties to these institutions. The comment period for these proposed rules has closed and a final rule has not been published.
On November 18, 2021, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued final rule to improve the sharing of information about cyber incidents that may affect the U.S. banking system. The rule requires a banking organization to notify its primary federal regulator of any significant computer-security incident as soon as possible and no later than 36 hours after the banking organization determines that a cyber incident has occurred. Notification is required for incidents that have materially affected-or are reasonably likely to materially affect-the viability of a banking organization’s operations, its ability to deliver banking products and services, or the stability of the financial sector. In addition, the rule requires a bank service provider to notify affected banking organization customers as soon as possible when the provider determines that it has experienced a computer-security incident that has materially affected or is reasonably likely to materially affect banking organization customers for four or more hours. Compliance with the final rule is required by May 1, 2022. WAL and WAB are currently assessing the impact of this rule, but do not anticipate any material impact to their respective operations at this time.
These laws and regulations impose compliance costs and create obligations and, in some cases, reporting obligations, and compliance with these laws, regulations, and obligations require significant resources of WAL and WAB.
Community Reinvestment Act and Fair Lending Laws
WAB has a responsibility under the CRA to help meet the credit needs of its communities, including low and moderate income neighborhoods. The CRA does not establish specific lending requirements or programs for financial institutions nor does it limit an institution's discretion to develop the types of products and services that it believes are best suited to its particular community, consistent with the CRA. In addition, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act prohibit discrimination in lending practices on the basis of characteristics specified in those statutes. WAB’s failure to comply with the provisions of the CRA could, at a minimum, result in regulatory restrictions on its activities and the activities of the Company. WAB’s failure to comply with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act could result in enforcement actions. WAB received a rating of “Satisfactory” in its most recent CRA examination, in January 2019.
Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco
WAB is a member of the FHLB of San Francisco, which is one of 12 regional FHLBs that provide funding to their members to support residential lending, as well as affordable housing and community development loans. Each FHLB serves as a reserve, or central bank, for the members within its assigned region. Each FHLB makes loans to its members in accordance with policies and procedures established by the board of directors of the FHLB. As a member, WAB must purchase and maintain stock in the FHLB of San Francisco. At December 31, 2021, WAB’s total investment in FHLB stock was $17.3 million.
Incentive Compensation
The Dodd-Frank Act requires the federal banking agencies and the SEC to establish joint regulations or guidelines prohibiting incentive-based payment arrangements at specified regulated entities, including the Company and WAB, with at least $1 billion in total consolidated assets, that encourage inappropriate risks by providing an executive officer, employee, director, or principal shareholder with excessive compensation, fees, or benefits that could lead to material financial loss to the entity. The federal banking agencies and the SEC most recently proposed such regulations in 2016, but the regulations have not yet been finalized. If the regulations are adopted in the form initially proposed, they will restrict the manner in which executive compensation is structured.
The Dodd-Frank Act also requires publicly traded companies to give stockholders a non-binding vote on executive compensation at least every three years and on so-called “golden parachute” payments in connection with approvals of mergers and acquisitions. WAL gives stockholders a non-binding vote on executive compensation annually.
Preventing Suspicious Activity
Under Title III of the USA PATRIOT Act, all financial institutions are required to take certain measures to identify their customers, prevent money laundering, monitor customer transactions, and report suspicious activity to U.S. law enforcement agencies. Financial institutions also are required to respond to requests for information from federal banking agencies and law enforcement agencies. Information sharing among financial institutions for the above purposes is encouraged by an exemption granted to complying financial institutions from the privacy provisions of the GLBA and other privacy laws. Financial institutions that hold correspondent accounts for foreign banks or provide private banking services to foreign individuals are required to take measures to avoid dealing with certain foreign individuals or entities, including foreign banks with profiles that raise money laundering concerns, and are prohibited from dealing with foreign “shell banks” and persons from jurisdictions of particular concern. The primary federal banking agencies and the Secretary of the Treasury have adopted regulations to implement several of these provisions. The new Customer Due Diligence Rule, that was effective beginning May 11, 2018, clarified and strengthened the existing obligations for identifying new and existing customers and explicitly included risk-based procedures for conducting ongoing customer due diligence. All financial institutions also are required to establish internal anti-money laundering programs. The effectiveness of a financial institution in combating money laundering activities is a factor to be considered in any application submitted by the financial institution under the Bank Merger Act. The Company has a Bank Secrecy Act and USA PATRIOT Act Board-approved compliance program and engages in relatively few transactions with foreign financial institutions or foreign persons.
The FCRA’s Red Flags Rule requires financial institutions with covered accounts (e.g., consumer bank accounts and loans) to develop, implement, and administer an identity theft prevention program. This program must include reasonable policies and procedures to detect suspicious patterns or practices that indicate the possibility of identity theft, such as inconsistencies in personal information or changes in account activity.
Office of Foreign Assets Control Regulation
The United States has imposed economic sanctions that affect transactions with designated foreign countries, nationals, and others. These are typically known as the OFAC rules based on their administration by the OFAC. The OFAC-administered sanctions targeting countries take many different forms. Generally, they contain one or more of the following elements: (i) restrictions on trade with or investment in a sanctioned country, including prohibitions against direct or indirect imports from and exports to a sanctioned country and prohibitions on “U.S. persons” engaging in financial transactions relating to making investments in, or providing investment-related advice or assistance to, a sanctioned country; and (ii) a blocking of assets in which the government or specially designated nationals of the sanctioned country have an interest, by prohibiting transfers of property subject to U.S. jurisdiction (including property in the possession or control of U.S. persons). Blocked assets (property and bank deposits) cannot be paid out, withdrawn, set off, or transferred in any manner without a license from OFAC. Failure to comply with these sanctions could have serious legal and reputational consequences.
Future Legislative Initiatives
Federal and state legislatures may introduce legislation that will impact the financial services industry. In addition, federal banking agencies may introduce regulatory initiatives that are likely to impact the financial services industry, generally. However it is not clear whether such changes will be enacted or, if enacted, what their effect on the Company will be. New legislation could change banking statutes and the operating environment of the Company in substantial and unpredictable ways. If enacted, such legislation could increase or decrease the cost of doing business, limit or expand permissible activities, or affect the competitive balance among banks, savings associations, credit unions, and other financial institutions. The Company cannot predict whether any such legislation will be enacted, and, if enacted, the effect that it or any implementing regulations would have on the financial condition or results of operations of the Company. A change in statutes, regulations, or regulatory policies applicable to WAL or any of its subsidiaries could have a material effect on the business of the Company.