Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References in this report (the “Annual Report”) to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to Waldencast Acquisition Corp. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, and references to the “Sponsor” refer to Waldencast Long-Term Capital LLC. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of our final prospectus for its Initial Public Offering filed with the SEC. Our securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, we disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on December 8, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination. We intend to effectuate a Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments - Obagi and Milk Business Combinations
Obagi Merger Agreement and Related Agreements
On November 15, 2021, the Company entered into the Obagi Merger Agreement, by and among the Company, Merger Sub and Obagi.
The Obagi Merger Agreement provides that, among other things and upon the terms and subject to the conditions thereof, the following transactions will occur:
(i) at the Obagi Closing, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Obagi Merger Agreement and in accordance with the Cayman Act, Merger Sub will merge with and into Obagi, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub will cease and Obagi will be the surviving company and an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company;
(ii) as a result of the Merger, among other things, each share of common stock of Obagi that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger (other than in respect of Excluded Shares (as defined in the Obagi Merger Agreement)) will be cancelled and converted into the right to receive (i) an amount in cash equal to (A) the Obagi Cash Consideration (as defined in the Obagi Merger Agreement), subject to substitution for Obagi Stock Consideration (as defined in the Obagi Merger Agreement) based on the amount of cash available to the Company at the Closing, taking into account, among other things, the level of shareholder redemptions, divided by (B) the number of Aggregate Fully Diluted Company Common Shares (as defined in the Obagi Merger Agreement), and (ii) a number of shares of Waldencast Common Stock equal to (A) the Obagi Stock Consideration divided by (B) the number of Aggregate Fully Diluted Company Common Shares; and
(iii) upon the effective time of the Domestication, the Company will immediately be renamed “Waldencast plc”.
The Company’s board of directors has unanimously (i) approved and declared advisable the Obagi Merger Agreement, the Obagi Transaction and the other transactions contemplated thereby and (ii) resolved to recommend approval of the Obagi Merger Agreement and related matters by the shareholders of the Company.
Milk Equity Purchase Agreement
On November 15, 2021, the Company entered into the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, Holdco Purchaser, Waldencast LP, Milk, the Milk Members and the Equityholder Representative.
The Milk Equity Purchase Agreement provides that, among other things and upon the terms and subject to the conditions thereof, the following transactions will occur:
(i) at the Milk Closing, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement, the Purchasers will acquire from the Milk Members and the Milk Members will sell to the Purchasers all of the issued and outstanding membership units of Milk in exchange for the Milk Cash Consideration (as defined in the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement), and the Milk Equity Consideration (as defined in the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement), which consist of partnership units of Waldencast LP exchangeable for Waldencast Common Stock, and the Domesticated Acquiror Non-Economic Common Stock (as defined in the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement);
(ii) as a result of the Milk Transaction, among other things, (i) Holdco Purchaser will purchase from the Milk Members a percentage of the outstanding membership units in exchange for the Milk Cash Consideration and the Domesticated Acquiror Non-Economic Common Stock equal to the Milk Equity Consideration and (ii) Waldencast LP will purchase from the Milk Members the remainder of the outstanding membership units in exchange for the Milk Equity Consideration; and
(iii) upon the effective time of the Domestication, the Company will immediately be renamed “Waldencast plc.”
Immediately following consummation of the Milk Transaction, (i) Holdco Purchaser will contribute its equity interest in (a) Milk to Waldencast LP in exchange for limited partnership units in Waldencast LP and (b) Holdco 2 in exchange for limited partnership units in Waldencast LP. The combined company will be organized in an “Up-C” structure, in which the equity interests of Obagi and Milk will be held by Waldencast LP. The Company will in turn hold its interests in Obagi and Milk through Waldencast LP and Holdco Purchaser.
The Board has unanimously (i) approved and declared advisable the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement, the Milk Transaction and the other transactions contemplated thereby and (ii) resolved to recommend approval of the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement and related matters by the shareholders of the Company.
Prior to the Closing, subject to the approval of the Company’s shareholders, and in accordance with the Cayman Act, the Jersey Companies Law and the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association, the Company will effect a deregistration under the Cayman Act and a domestication under Part 18C of the Jersey Companies Law (by means of filing a memorandum and articles of association with the Registrar of Companies in Jersey), pursuant to which the Company’s jurisdiction of incorporation will be changed from the Cayman Islands to Jersey.
In connection with the Domestication, (i) each of the then issued and outstanding Class A ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of the Company, will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, Waldencast Common Stock (following its Domestication), (ii) each of the then issued and outstanding Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of the Company, will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of Waldencast Common Stock, (iii) each then issued and outstanding warrant of the Company will convert automatically into a Domesticated Waldencast Warrant, pursuant to the Warrant Agreement, dated March 15, 2021, between the Company and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as warrant agent, and (iv) each then issued and outstanding unit of the Company shall be cancelled and will entitle the holder thereof to one share of Waldencast Common Stock and one-third of one Domesticated Waldencast Warrant.
On November 15, 2021, the Company entered into the Obagi Sponsor Support Agreement, by and among the Sponsor, Obagi, the Company and the Sponsor Persons, pursuant to which the Sponsor and the Sponsor Persons agreed to, among other things, vote in favor of the Obagi Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, in each case, subject to the terms and conditions contemplated by the Obagi Sponsor Support Agreement.
On November 15, 2021, the Company entered the Milk Sponsor Support Agreement, by and among the Sponsor, the Equityholder Representative, the Company and the Sponsor Persons, pursuant to which the Sponsor and the Sponsor Persons agreed to, among other things, vote in favor of the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, in each case, subject to the terms and conditions contemplated by the Milk Sponsor Support Agreement.
On November 15, 2021, the Company also entered into the Stockholder Support Agreement, by and among the Company, Obagi and Cedarwalk. Pursuant to the Stockholder Support Agreement, Cedarwalk agreed to, among other things, within two (2) business days after the proxy statement/prospectus relating to the approval by the Company shareholders of the Obagi and Milk Business Combinations is declared effective by the SEC and delivered or otherwise made available to the Company shareholders, execute and deliver a written consent with respect to the outstanding ordinary shares of Obagi held by Cedarwalk adopting the Obagi Merger Agreement and related transactions and approving the Obagi and Milk Business Combinations.
The consummation of the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Obagi Merger Agreement and the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement.
For more information about the Obagi Merger Agreement and the Milk Equity Purchase Agreement and the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations, see our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on November 15, 2021. Unless specifically stated, this Annual Report on Form 10-K does not give effect to the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations and does not contain the risks associated with the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from December 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination, and the negotiation and execution of the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $14,427,685, which consisted of operating costs of $9,133,011, a non-cash charge for offering expenses related to issuance of warrants of $719,201, offset by a non-cash change in fair value of warrant derivative liabilities and Forward Purchase Agreement (as defined below) liabilities of $2,963,666 and $1,665,000, respectively, and interest income from operating bank account of $1,146, and interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $52,047.
For the period from December 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $10,951, which consisted of operating costs of $10,951.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 18, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000, which is discussed in Note 3. Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,933,333 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, which is discussed in Note 4 in the Financial Statements.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $345,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $20,169,599 in transaction costs, including $6,900,000 of underwriting fees, $12,075,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $1,194,599 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $815,682. Net loss of $14,427,685 was affected by non-cash changes in the deferred legal fees of 8,186,101, the fair value of warrant derivative liabilities, and Forward Purchase Agreement liabilities of $2,963,666 and $1,665,000, respectively, and offering costs related to warrant issuance of $719,201, and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $52,047. Changes in current assets and liabilities provided $130,082 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $345,052,047. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our taxes. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination (including the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations), the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,503,768 and working capital of $1,340,636. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination (including the proposed Obagi and Milk Business Combinations).
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. On October 28, 2021, the Sponsor funded $1,500,000 to us. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Going Concern
We anticipate that the $1,503,768 outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to allow us to operate for the remainder of the Business Combination period. Until consummation of its Business Combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional Working Capital Loans from the initial shareholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, or other third parties, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating its business. However, if our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to the business combination. Moreover, we will need to raise additional capital through loans from its Sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of the Sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to or to invest in us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of its business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
In addition, we have 24 months from the closing of the IPO, which occurred on March 18, 2021 (with the ability to extend with shareholder approval) to consummate a business combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if we are unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares for a pro rata portion of the funds held in the Trust Account, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us, divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, subject to applicable law and as further described in the registration statement, and then seek to dissolve and liquidate.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space administrative and support services provided to us. We began incurring these fees on March 15, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the our liquidation.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $12,075,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ deficit. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, 34,500,000 and no shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet, respectively.
Warrant Liabilities and Forward Purchase Agreements
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. The warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, and therefore the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” with changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations in the period of change.
We account for the Forward Purchase Agreements in accordance with ASC 815-40 and accounts for such agreements as a derivative liability. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date, with changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Shares
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of ordinary shares outstanding during the period.
Our statements of operations include a presentation of net loss per share for ordinary shares subject to possible redemption and applies the two-class method in calculating net loss per share. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the allocable interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for Class A and Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for loss (income) attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class A and Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares include the Founder Shares as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Item 7.A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk.
Not required for smaller reporting companies.