Item 7.
Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues through December 31, 2021. All activity for the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering as described below and, subsequent to the closing of the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $319,872, which consists of operating costs of $325,511, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $5,639.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 24, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000 as described in Note 3 to the financial statements. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,666,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement transaction to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000 as described in Note 4 to the financial statements.
On September 3, 2021, the company consummated the sale of 1,487,039 Units pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their 45-day
over-allotment option to purchase up to an additional 3,000,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units
”). Such Over-Allotment Units were sold at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $14,870,390. Substantially concurrently with the closing of the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the company consummated the private sale of an additional 198,272 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $297,408 (together with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the “Over-Allotment Closing
”).
Following the Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Warrants and the Over-Allotment Closing, a total of $214,870,390 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $12,432,293 in costs related to the Initial Public Offering, consisting of $4,297,408 of underwriting fees, $7,520,462 of deferred underwriting fees and $614,423 of other offering costs.
For the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $774,348. Net loss of $319,872 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $5,639 and changes in operating assets and liabilities used $448,837 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $214,876,029 (including $5,639 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,595,984 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the company’s executive officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the company funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such Working Capital Loans. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such Working Capital Loans but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrant.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of the Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the critical accounting policies set forth below.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The company accounts for its ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity
”. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The company’s Class A ordinary shares feature contains certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are classified as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the company’s balance sheet. Given the above, the management determined that to the extent funds are available, shares of the company’s redeemable equity should be reported as temporary equity. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 21,487,039 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the company’s balance sheet.
Net loss per share
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The company applies the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The calculation of diluted income per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Public Offering, (ii) exercise of over-allotment and (iii) Private Placement, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the two-class
method. As a result, diluted earnings per ordinary share is the same as basic earnings per ordinary share for the periods presented. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 12,027,285 Class A ordinary shares in the aggregate.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2020-6, “
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
” and “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity
,” which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-6
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-6
is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.