Item 7. Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere herein and the description of the Company’s business and reportable segments in Part I, Item 1. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Factors that might cause a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed under “Cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements” below and in Risk factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. References herein to the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our” refer to Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. and its subsidiaries, and in each case do not include unconsolidated partially-owned entities, except as otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires.
Certain amounts in the Consolidated Financial Statements and associated notes may not add due to rounding. All percentages have been calculated using unrounded amounts for each of the periods presented.
INTRODUCTION AND SEGMENTS
Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. and its subsidiaries (“Walgreens Boots Alliance” or the “Company”) is a global leader in retail pharmacy and is positioning itself to become a leading provider of healthcare services. Its operations are conducted through three reportable segments:
•U.S. Retail Pharmacy,
•International, and
•U.S. Healthcare.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, the Company changed the name of two reportable segments to better align with the Company’s business activities, structure and strategy. The “United States” segment was renamed to “U.S. Retail Pharmacy” and the “Walgreens Health” segment was renamed to “U.S. Healthcare”. The segment name changes did not result in any change to the composition of the segments and therefore no change to the historical results of segment operations. The information for these segments for all periods included in these consolidated financial statements has been presented using the new names. See Note 17. Segment reporting and Note 18. Sales, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 for further information.
FACTORS, TRENDS AND UNCERTAINTIES AFFECTING OUR RESULTS AND COMPARABILITY
The Company has been, and we expect it to continue to be, affected by a number of factors that may cause actual results to differ from our historical results or current expectations. These factors include: the impact of COVID-19 (“COVID-19”) on our operations and financial results; the financial performance of our equity method investees, including AmerisourceBergen; the influence of certain holidays; seasonality; foreign currency rates; changes in vendor, payer and customer relationships and terms and associated reimbursement pressure; strategic transactions and acquisitions, dispositions, joint ventures and other strategic collaborations; changes in laws, including U.S. tax law changes; changes in trade tariffs, including trade relations between the U.S. and China, and international relations, including the UK's withdrawal from the European Union and its impact on our operations and prospects, and those of our customers and counterparties; the timing and magnitude of cost reduction initiatives, including under our Transformational Cost Management Program (as defined below); the timing and severity of the cough, cold and flu season; fluctuations in variable costs; the impacts of looting, natural disasters, war, terrorism and other catastrophic events, and changes in general economic conditions in the markets in which the Company operates.
Specialty pharmacy represents a significant and growing proportion of prescription drug spending in the U.S., a significant portion of which is dispensed outside of traditional retail pharmacies. To better serve the evolving specialty pharmacy market, in March 2017, the Company and Prime Therapeutics LLC, a PBM, closed a transaction to form a combined central specialty pharmacy and mail services company, AllianceRx Walgreens Prime, using an innovative model that sought to align pharmacy, PBM and health plans to coordinate patient care, improve health outcomes and deliver cost of care opportunities. On December 31, 2021, the Company purchased Prime’s portion of the joint venture and now wholly own the joint venture, which was renamed AllianceRx Walgreens. Certain clients of AllianceRx Walgreens are not obligated to contract through AllianceRx Walgreens, and have in the past, and may in the future, enter into specialty pharmacy and other agreements without involving AllianceRx Walgreens. Certain clients have chosen not to renew their contracts through AllianceRx Walgreens which impacts gross sales. However, considering the relatively low margin nature of this business, the Company does not anticipate this will have a material impact on operating income.
In January 2022, the Company announced a strategic review of its Boots business, including the No7 beauty company. In June 2022, the Company announced the conclusion of the strategic review and decision to retain existing ownership in these businesses.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 35
On May 5, 2022, the Company entered into an agreement with the State of Florida to resolve all claims related to the distribution and dispensing of prescription opioid medications across the Company’s pharmacies in the State of Florida. The settlement amount of $683 million includes $620 million to be paid in equal installments to the State of Florida over 18 years and will be applied as remediation of past and future opioid damages, as well as a one-time payment of $63 million for attorneys’ fees. The Company made the first annual settlement payment of $97.4 million into escrow on June 17, 2022.
These and other factors can affect the Company’s operations and net earnings for any period and may cause such results not to be comparable to the same period in previous years. The results presented in this report are not necessarily indicative of future operating results.
COVID-19
Since the beginning of 2020, COVID-19 has severely impacted, and may continue to directly and indirectly impact, the economies of the U.S., the UK and other countries around the world. COVID-19 created significant public health concerns as well as significant volatility, uncertainty and economic and supply chain disruption in every region in which we operate, which has adversely affected our industries and our business operations. Further, financial and credit markets experienced volatility and could continue to experience volatility due to COVID-19 and other factors. As COVID-19 and its direct and indirect consequences continue to evolve, COVID-19 has impacted, and may again impact our business operations. In response to COVID-19 and emerging variants, various domestic and foreign, federal, state and local governmental legislation, regulations, orders, policies and initiatives were implemented that were designed to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, as well as to help address economic and market volatility and instability resulting from COVID-19. The Company has participated in certain of these programs, including for example availing itself to certain tax deferrals which were introduced by the CARES Act in the U.S., and certain tax deferral and benefit and employee wage support in the UK, and if available, may continue to do so in the future.
The Company continues to play a critical role in fighting COVID-19. The Company has worked with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) and the U.S. government to help administer COVID-19 vaccinations to the general public and to high priority groups, including long-term care facility residents and staff. The U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment also expanded vaccination models to ensure convenient access, including same-day and walk-in appointments, mobile clinics, employer partnerships and extended hours. As of August 31, 2022, the Company has administered more than 69 million COVID-19 vaccinations, including 23 million booster vaccinations, and more than 45 million COVID-19 tests in the U.S. In fiscal 2022, the Company has administered approximately 35 million COVID-19 vaccinations and more than 31 million COVID-19 tests in the U.S.
In fiscal 2022, the U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment comparable 30-day equivalent prescriptions filled increased 1.3%, including a positive impact of 12 basis points from COVID-19 vaccinations. Comparable retail sales increase was aided by at-home COVID-19 test sales.
The Company continues to monitor COVID-19 and its potential future impacts on the consumer, customer and healthcare utilization patterns, as well as the U.S. and global economies, including supply chains and the labor force. As a result, the financial and/or operational impact on the Company, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact, singularly or collectively, could be material and adverse.
The Company’s current expectations described above are forward-looking statements and our actual results may differ. Factors that might cause a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed below under “Cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements” and in Item 1A, Risk factors.
U.S. Healthcare
In fiscal 2022, the Company announced the launch of its new healthcare strategy. The Company plans to become a leading provider of local clinical care services by leveraging its consumer-centric technology and retail pharmacy network to deliver value-based care. The Company’s goal is to provide better consumer experiences, improve health outcomes and lower costs.
The Company’s U.S. Healthcare segment, created at the beginning of fiscal 2022, is a consumer-centric, technology-enabled healthcare business that engages consumers through a personalized, omni-channel experience across the care journey. The U.S. Healthcare segment delivers improved health outcomes and lower costs for payors and providers by delivering care through owned and partnered assets.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 36
The U.S. Healthcare segment currently consists of a majority position in Village Practice Management Company, LLC (“VillageMD”), a leading, national provider of value-based primary care services; a majority position in Shields Health Solutions Parent, LLC (“Shields”), a specialty pharmacy integrator and accelerator for hospitals, a majority position in CCX Next, LLC (“CareCentrix”), a leading player in the post-acute and home care management sectors; and the Walgreens Health organic business that contracts with payors and providers to deliver clinical healthcare services to their members and members’ caregivers through both digital and physical channels. On September 20, 2022, the Company announced that it entered into a definitive agreement to acquire the remaining 30% equity interest in Shields, not currently owned.
The Company is now aligned into three reportable segments: U.S. Retail Pharmacy, International and U.S. Healthcare. Fiscal 2021 data related to the U.S. Healthcare segment, has been reclassified in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes to conform to the current period presentation.
See Note 17. Segment reporting to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 herein for further information.
RECENT TRANSACTIONS
Shields acquisition
On October 29, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of a majority interest in Shields. Pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company purchased additional outstanding equity interests of Shields, increasing the Company’s total beneficial ownership in Shields’ outstanding equity interests from 25% to approximately 70%, for cash consideration of $969 million.
The Company accounted for this acquisition as a business combination resulting in consolidation of Shields within the U.S. Healthcare segment in its financial statements.
See Note 3. Acquisitions and other investments, and Note 6. Equity method investments to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 herein for further information.
On September 20, 2022, the Company announced the acceleration of its plans for full ownership of Shields. The Company entered into a definitive agreement to acquire the remaining 30% equity interest for approximately $1.37 billion of cash consideration. The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter of fiscal 2023. See Note 21. Subsequent events to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 herein for further information.
VillageMD acquisition
On November 24, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of a majority interest in VillageMD. Pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Unit Purchase Agreement, the Company purchased additional outstanding equity interests of VillageMD, increasing the Company’s total beneficial ownership in VillageMD’s outstanding equity interests from approximately 30% to approximately 63%, on a fully diluted basis, for a purchase price of $5.2 billion. The total purchase price is comprised of cash consideration of $4.0 billion and a promissory note of $1.2 billion.
The Company accounted for this acquisition as a business combination resulting in consolidation of VillageMD within the U.S. Healthcare segment in its financial statements.
See Note 3. Acquisitions and other investments, and Note 6. Equity method investments to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 herein for further information.
Sale of AmerisourceBergen common stock
On May 11, 2022, the Company sold 6.0 million shares of AmerisourceBergen Corporation (“AmerisourceBergen”) common stock pursuant to Rule 144 at a price of $150 per share for a total consideration of $900 million. This decreased the Company's ownership of AmerisourceBergen’s common stock from 58,854,867 shares, held at August 31, 2021 to 52,854,867 shares held as of August 31, 2022, representing approximately 25.4% of AmerisourceBergen common stock, based on the share count publicly reported by AmerisourceBergen in its most recent Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. The transaction resulted in the Company recording a pre-tax gain of $417 million in Other income, net in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings, including a $32 million loss reclassified from within Accumulated other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
See Note 6. Equity method investments, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 for further information.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 37
CareCentrix acquisition
On August 31, 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of a majority interest in CareCentrix. Pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, the Company acquired approximately 55% controlling equity interest in CareCentrix, a leading player in the post-acute and home care management sectors, for cash consideration of $332 million.
The Company accounted for this acquisition as a business combination resulting in consolidation of CareCentrix within the U.S. Healthcare segment in its financial statements.
See Note 3. Acquisitions and other investments to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 herein for further information
On October 11, 2022, the Company announced the acceleration of its plans for full ownership of CareCentrix. The Company entered into a definitive agreement to acquire the remaining 45% equity interest for approximately $392 million of cash consideration. The acquisition is subject to limited customary closing conditions and is expected to close by March 2023. See Note 21. Subsequent events to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 herein for further information.
TRANSFORMATIONAL COST MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
On December 20, 2018, the Company announced a transformational cost management program that was expected to deliver in excess of $2.0 billion of annual cost savings by fiscal 2022 (the “Transformational Cost Management Program”). The Company achieved this goal at the end of fiscal 2021.
On October 12, 2021, the Company expanded and extended the Transformational Cost Management Program through the end of fiscal 2024 and increased its annual cost savings target to $3.3 billion by the end of fiscal 2024. In fiscal 2022, the Company increased its annual cost savings target from $3.3 billion to $3.5 billion by the end of fiscal 2024. The Company is currently on track to achieve the savings target.
The Transformational Cost Management Program, which is multi-faceted and includes divisional optimization initiatives, global smart spending, global smart organization and the transformation of the Company’s information technology (IT) capabilities, is designed to help the Company achieve increased cost efficiencies. To date, the Company has taken actions across all aspects of the Transformational Cost Management Program which focus on the U.S. Retail Pharmacy and International reportable segments along with the Company's global functions. Divisional optimization within the Company’s segments includes activities such as optimization of stores, including plans to close approximately 350 stores in the UK and approximately 450 to 500 stores in the U.S. As of August 31, 2022, the Company has closed 235 and 287 stores in the UK and U.S., respectively.
The Company currently estimates that the Transformational Cost Management Program will result in cumulative pre-tax charges to its GAAP financial results of approximately $3.6 billion to $3.9 billion, of which $3.3 billion to $3.6 billion are expected to be recorded as exit and disposal activities. In addition to the impacts discussed above, as a result of the actions related to store closures taken under the Transformational Cost Management Program, the Company recorded $508 million of transition adjustments to decrease retained earnings due to the adoption of the new lease accounting standard (Topic 842) that became effective on September 1, 2019. The Company estimates that approximately 80% of the cumulative pre-tax charges relating to the Transformational Cost Management Program represent current or future cash expenditures, primarily related to employee severance and business transition costs, IT transformation and lease and other real estate payments.
The Company currently estimates that it will recognize aggregate pre-tax charges to its GAAP financial results related to the Transformational Cost Management Program as follows:
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 38
1Includes impairments relating to operating lease right-of-use and finance lease assets.
2Primarily related to store closures and other asset impairments.
From the inception of the Transformational Cost Management Program to August 31, 2022, the Company has recognized cumulative pre-tax charges to its financial results in accordance with GAAP of $2.2 billion, of which $2.0 billion is recorded as exit and disposal activities. See Note 4. Exit and disposal activities, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 for further information. These charges included $603 million related to lease obligations and other real estate costs, $443 million in asset impairments, $723 million in employee severance and business transition costs, $203 million of information technology transformation and other exit costs, and $272 million in other information technology costs.
Costs under the Transformational Cost Management Program, which were primarily recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses, were as follows (in millions):
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 39
Transformational Cost Management Program charges are recognized as the costs are incurred over time in accordance with GAAP. The Company treats charges related to the Transformational Cost Management Program as special items impacting comparability of results in its earnings disclosures.
The amounts and timing of all estimates are subject to change until finalized. The actual amounts and timing may vary materially based on various factors. See “Cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements”.
INVESTMENT IN AMERISOURCEBERGEN
As of August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, the Company owns approximately 25.4% and 28.5% of AmerisourceBergen outstanding common stock, based on the share count publicly reported by AmerisourceBergen in its most recent Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
On May 11, 2022, the Company sold 6.0 million shares of AmerisourceBergen common stock pursuant to Rule 144 at a price of $150 per share for a total consideration of $900 million, decreasing the Company's ownership of AmerisourceBergen’s common stock from 58,854,867 shares, held at August 31, 2021 to 52,854,867 shares held as of August 31, 2022. The transaction resulted in the Company recording a pre-tax gain of $417 million in Other income, net in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings, including a $32 million loss reclassified from within Accumulated other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The Company has a shareholders agreement with AmerisourceBergen, which was most recently amended and restated (the “A&R Shareholders Agreement”) in connection with the Company's sale of its Alliance Healthcare business to AmerisourceBergen (the “Alliance Healthcare Sale”). Pursuant to the A&R Shareholders Agreement, the Company has designated one member of AmerisourceBergen’s board of directors. The Company is also permitted, subject to certain conditions, to acquire up to an additional 12,398,752 AmerisourceBergen shares in the open market, and thereafter to designate another member of AmerisourceBergen’s board of directors. The amount of permitted open market purchases is subject to increase or decrease in certain circumstances.
The Company accounts for its investment in AmerisourceBergen using the equity method of accounting, subject to a two-month reporting lag, with the net earnings (loss) attributable to the investment classified within the Operating income of the Company’s U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment.
In fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized equity earnings (losses) in AmerisourceBergen of $418 million, $(1.1) billion, and $341 million, respectively. The equity losses for fiscal 2021 were primarily due to AmerisourceBergen's recognition of a loss of $5.6 billion, net of tax, related to its ongoing opioid litigation in its financial statements for the three months ended September 30, 2020.
The Company completed the Alliance Healthcare Sale in June 2021 per the Share Purchase Agreement with AmerisourceBergen. See Note 2. Discontinued operations, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 for further information.
The financial performance of AmerisourceBergen will impact the Company’s results of operations. Additionally, a substantial and sustained decline in the price of AmerisourceBergen’s common stock could trigger an impairment evaluation of our investment. These considerations may materially and adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. For more information, see Part I. Item 1. Business “Relationship with AmerisourceBergen” and Note 6. Equity method investments, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 40
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The following table presents certain key financial statistics for the Company for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020:
1See “--Non-GAAP Measures” below for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and related disclosures.
NM - Not meaningful. Percentage increases above 200% or when one period includes income and other period includes loss are considered not meaningful.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 41
WALGREENS BOOTS ALLIANCE RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following information summarizes our results of operations for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. For discussion related to the results of operations by segment for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in our fiscal 2021 Form 10-K, as amended by Form 10-K/A which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on November 24, 2021.
Net earnings from continuing operations fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021
Fiscal 2022 net earnings attributable to the Company were $4.3 billion compared to $2.0 billion for the prior year period. Diluted net earnings per share were $5.01 compared to $2.30 for the prior year period. The increases in net earnings and diluted net earnings per share reflect a $2.5 billion after-tax gain during the three months ended November 30, 2021 due to the remeasurement of the Company's previously held minority equity and debt investments in VillageMD and Shields to fair value, and a $1.2 billion charge, net of tax, from the Company's equity earnings in AmerisourceBergen in the prior fiscal year offset by the fiscal 2022 impairment charges related to intangible assets in Boots UK, and the charge related to the opioid settlement with the State of Florida in fiscal 2022.
Other income, net in fiscal 2022 was $3.0 billion compared to $558 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in other income is mainly due to the remeasurement of the Company's previously held equity and debt investments in VillageMD and Shields to fair value, and the partial sale of the Company’s equity method investments in AmerisourceBergen and Option Care Health.
Net interest expense was $400 million and $905 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was primarily the result of early debt extinguishments completed during fiscal 2021 and lower interest rates on remaining debt.
The Company's effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 and 2021 was a 0.8% benefit and 33.4%, respectively. The net decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily attributable to pre-tax gains from the consolidation of the Company’s investments in VillageMD and Shields, for which a majority of these gains were not subject to tax. Additionally, the Company recognized tax benefit due to the reduction of a valuation allowance previously recorded against deferred tax assets related to capital loss carryforwards. The reduction is primarily due to capital loss carryforwards utilized in the current year against capital gains recognized on the sale of shares in AmerisourceBergen and Option Care, capital gains recognized from internal restructuring, and based on forecasted capital gains. See Note 3. Acquisitions and other investments and Note 6. Equity method investments, to the Consolidated Financial Statement included in Part II, Item 8 for further information.
Adjusted net earnings from continuing operations (Non-GAAP measure) fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021
Adjusted net earnings attributable to the Company in fiscal 2022 increased 2.5 percent to $4.4 billion compared with the prior year period. Adjusted diluted net earnings per share in fiscal 2022 increased 2.5 percent to $5.04 compared with the year-ago period. Adjusted net earnings and adjusted diluted earnings per share were both negatively impacted by 0.9 percentage points as a result of currency translation.
Excluding the impact of currency translation, the increase in adjusted net earnings for fiscal 2022 primarily reflects improved retail contributions in the U.S. Retail Pharmacy and a continued rebound in International segment sales and profitability, partly offset by a decrease in U.S. pharmacy operating results, and growth investments in U.S. Healthcare. See “--Non-GAAP Measures” below for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and related disclosures.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS BY SEGMENT
The following information summarizes our results of operations by segment for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
U.S. Retail Pharmacy
The Company's U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment includes the Walgreens business which is comprised of the operations of retail drugstores, health and wellness services, specialty and home delivery pharmacy services, and its equity method investment in AmerisourceBergen. Sales for the segment are principally derived from the sale of prescription drugs and a wide assortment of retail products, including health and wellness, beauty, personal care and consumables and general merchandise.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 42
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
1See “--Non-GAAP Measures” below for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and related disclosures.
2Includes vaccinations, including COVID-19.
3Includes the adjustment to convert prescriptions greater than 84 days to the equivalent of three 30-day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects that these prescriptions include approximately three times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 43
4Comparable sales are defined as sales from stores that have been open for at least twelve consecutive months without closure for seven or more consecutive days, including due to looting or store damage, and without a major remodel or being subject to a natural disaster, in the past twelve months as well as e-commerce sales. E-commerce sales include digitally initiated sales online or through mobile applications. Relocated stores are not included as comparable sales for the first twelve months after the relocation. Acquired stores are not included as comparable sales for the first twelve months after acquisition or conversion, when applicable, whichever is later. Comparable sales, comparable pharmacy sales, comparable retail sales, comparable number of prescriptions and comparable number of 30-day equivalent prescriptions refer to total sales, pharmacy sales, retail sales, number of prescriptions and number of 30-day equivalent prescriptions, respectively. Comparable retail sales for previous periods have been restated to include e-commerce sales. The method of calculating comparable sales varies across the retail industry and our method of calculating comparable sales may not be the same as other retailers’ methods.
NM - Not meaningful. Percentage increases above 200% or when one period includes income and other period includes loss are considered not meaningful.
Sales fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021
The U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment’s sales for fiscal 2022 decreased by 2.6 percent to $109.1 billion, including a 650 basis point impact of AllianceRx Walgreens sales decline. Comparable sales increased by 5.1 percent in fiscal 2022.
Pharmacy sales decreased by 5.3 percent in fiscal 2022, including 8.6 percentage point of AllianceRx Walgreens sales decline and represented 73.7 percent of the segment’s sales. Excluding AllianceRx Walgreens, pharmacy sales increased 4.2 percent in fiscal 2022. The increase is due to brand drug inflation and COVID-19 vaccinations and testing, partially offset by generic drug utilization and reimbursement pressure. In fiscal 2021, pharmacy sales increased 5.5 percent and represented 75.8 percent of the segment’s sales. Comparable pharmacy sales increased 4.7 percent in fiscal 2022 compared to an increase of 6.7 percent in fiscal 2021. Within comparable sales, prescriptions filled in fiscal 2022 increased by 1.3 percent from a year earlier, including a positive impact of approximately 12 basis points from COVID-19 vaccinations. The effect of generic drugs, which have a lower retail price, replacing brand name drugs reduced prescription sales by 0.3 percent in fiscal 2022 compared to a reduction of 0.5 percent in fiscal 2021. The effect of generics on segment sales was a reduction of 0.2 percent in fiscal 2022 compared to a reduction of 0.4 percent for fiscal 2021. Third-party sales, where reimbursement is received from managed care organizations, governmental agencies, employers or private insurers, were 97.2 percent of prescription sales for fiscal 2022 compared to 97.5 percent for fiscal 2021. The total number of prescriptions (including vaccinations) filled in fiscal 2022 was 819.6 million compared to 827.5 million in fiscal 2021. Prescriptions (including vaccinations) adjusted to 30-day equivalents were 1,216.4 million in fiscal 2022 compared to 1,210.6 million in fiscal 2021.
Retail sales increased by 5.6 percent in fiscal 2022 and were 26.3 percent of the segment’s sales. In comparison, fiscal 2021 retail sales decreased by 0.4 percent and comprised 24.2 percent of the segment’s sales. Comparable retail sales increased 6.1 percent in fiscal 2022 and increased 1.2 percent in fiscal 2021. The increase in comparable retail sales in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by health and wellness, including favorable impact of at-home COVID-19 tests and cough, cold and flu, as well as personal care and beauty, partially offset by the planned decline in tobacco.
Operating income fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021
The U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment’s operating income for fiscal 2022 increased 13.8 percent to $2.9 billion, including income of $418 million from the Company's share of equity earnings in AmerisourceBergen. Excluding the impact of equity earnings in AmerisourceBergen, the year over year decrease in operating income was driven by higher Selling, general and administrative expenses, including charges related to the opioid settlement with the State of Florida in the third quarter, offset by COVID-19 testing and retail gross profit growth.
Gross margin was 21.7 percent in fiscal 2022 compared to 21.2 percent in fiscal 2021. Gross margin was positively impacted in fiscal 2022 by retail margin, offset by pharmacy margin. The increase in retail margin was primarily due to favorable rate and product mix. The decrease in pharmacy margin was primarily driven by continued reimbursement pressure.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales were 19.4 percent in fiscal 2022 compared to 17.9 percent in fiscal 2021. The increase was driven by costs related to the opioid settlement with the State of Florida, COVID-19 vaccinations and testing and labor investments, partially offset by savings related to the Company's Transformational Cost Management Program.
WBA Fiscal 2022 Form 10-K 44
Adjusted operating income (Non-GAAP measure) fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021
U.S. Retail Pharmacy segment’s adjusted operating income for fiscal 2022 increased 0.2 percent to $5.0 billion. The increase was primarily due to retail gross profit growth and COVID-19 vaccinations and testing, partially offset by pharmacy reimbursement pressure.
See “--Non-GAAP Measures” below for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and related disclosures.
International
The Company's International segment consists of pharmacy-led health and beauty retail businesses outside the U.S. and the Company's pharmaceutical wholesale and distribution business in Germany. Pharmacy-led health and beauty retail businesses include Boots branded stores in the UK, the Republic of Ireland and Thailand, the Benavides brand in Mexico and the Ahumada brand in Chile. Sales for these businesses are principally derived from the sale of prescription drugs and health and wellness, beauty, personal care and other consumer products.
The International segment operates in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, including the British pound sterling, Euro, Chilean peso and Mexican peso and therefore the segment’s results are impacted by movements in foreign currency exchange rates. See