ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
You should read the following discussion together with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on our current expectations, estimates and projections about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements.
Overview
Since inception, the Company acquired the Webstar eCampus assets from Webstar Networks, a related party that is controlled by our controlling stockholder, on May 12, 2018 in exchange for issuance of 17,000,000 shares of our common stock. In addition, we signed two letters of intent to license proprietary software from Soft Tech, a related party that is wholly owned by our founder and controlling stockholder James Owens; i.e., Gigabyte Slayer and WARP-G. The Company began to operate and market the Webstar eCampus website on May 12, 2018 when it acquired those assets from Webstar Networks. Previously, we had been focused in large part on organizational activities and the development of our business plans to license the Gigabyte Slayer software application that is designed to deliver live video streams, video downloads and large data files more efficiently by using new proprietary data compression technology and to license the WARP-G software application that is designed to enable enterprise customers that transmit live video streams, video downloads and large data files to push such data over existing pipelines at higher speeds in less time also by using new proprietary data compression technology. On April 21, 2020, we entered into the License Agreement with Soft Tech Development Corporation to exclusively license, market and distribute Soft Tech’s Gigabyte Slayer and WARP-G software (the “Licensed Technology”) and further develop and commercialize these softwares throughout the world. James Owens, our controlling stockholder, owns Soft Tech. Pursuant to the terms of the License Agreement, we agreed to pay a contingent licensing fee of $650,000 for each of the two components of Soft Tech’s technology, for a total of $1,300,000 for the Licensed Technology. The contingent licensing fee becomes due and payable only upon the earlier of: (i) the closing of an aggregate of $20 million in net capital offering of our stock or (ii) when our cumulative net sales from the Licensed Technology reaches $20 million. Further, we have agreed to pay a royalty rate of 7% based on the net sales of the Licensed Software. The term of the license agreement is five years with one automatic renewal period. However, the royalty will continue as long as we are selling the Licensed Technology. See “Item 1 Business”. As of December 31, 2021, we have generated an accumulated deficit of $11,202,076.
Recent Developments
Common Stock Option Grant
On December 9, 2021, the Company issued 2,500,000 non-qualified options to purchase the Company’s common stock to its Chief Financial Officer. The options were fully vested as of the grant date and have an exercise price of $0.0001 per share. The Company valued the option grant at $0.56 per option, which was the market price of the underlying stock on the grant date and was based on the Black-Scholes method of valuation. The total value of the grant was determined to be $1,406,250. Stock compensation expense was $1,406,250 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Plan of Operations
Management has decided that the fastest way to get the Company’s technologies to market is to not bear the burden ourselves. Numerous third-parties already have the requisite infrastructure in place and there is no need for the Company to re-build those elements.
Additionally, the third-parties we seek to align ourselves with, are better positioned to handle the retail, business and governmental marketing sectors worldwide. They will be experienced, globally well-known entities with everything already in place for a quick launch/utilization of the Company’s technology.
There are three main paths that the Company will pursue: 1) Licensing the technology to third-parties; 2) Selling the technology via Permanent License to a third-party; 3) Acquisition of the Company by a third party via a change of control of the Company; all of which would generate up-front and residual revenues for the Company.
Our primary focus for this three-pronged approach will be on the following products:
Gigabyte Slayer. Gigabyte Slayer is a retail-oriented software application that will be sub-licensed to targeted companies who provide data streaming services.
WARP-G. WARP-G is a business-to-business software solution that companies can use on an enterprise-wide basis to transmit more data over existing data streams to optimize their data usage. We plan to engage in sales through licensing transactions with data delivery companies such as Verizon, AT&T, T-Mobile, Amazon, Google, cable operators, Netflix, Electronic Arts and other gaming companies.
Webstar eCampus. In 2022, our marketing plan for the eCampus software will be suspended and we will focus on the development and marketing of our other products.
Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following comparative analysis on results of operations were based primarily on the comparative financial statements, footnotes and related information for the periods identified below and should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to those statements that are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The results discussed below are for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Subsequent to the purchase of the Webstar eCampus assets, we have had minimal revenues and have funded our operating expenses through loans from our controlling stockholder and accrual of various costs and expenses. Revenue earned from the eCampus Software totaled $0 and $6,739 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease is due to the loss of our sole customer in January 2021. Total operating expenses which are comprised of salaries and related expenses, consulting fees, and general and administrative expenses were $2,629,017, which includes $1,406,250 of stock based compensation, and $1,357,014 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in stock compensation expense arising from the stock option grant in December 2021 to our Chief Financial Officer, the loss of revenue due to the loss of our only customer, and partially offset by a decrease in consulting fees and a material decrease in general and administrative expenses primarily due to decreases in legal and accounting fees, transfer agent fees, rent, and internet cable fees partially offset by an increase in EDGAR and OTC Market listing fees.
The net loss was $2,629,017 and $1,351,875 for the years ended, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase is primarily a result of the increase in stock compensation expense and partially offset by the decreases in total operating expenses discussed above.
Liquidity, Going Concern and Uncertainties
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. As of December 31, 2021, our working capital deficit amounted to $3,122,121 an increase of $1,221,307 as compared to our working capital deficit of $1,900,814 as of December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily a result of increases in accrued salaries and related expenses and the amount due to shareholder, partially offset by a decrease in the accounts payable.
Net cash used in operating activities was $168,435 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $273,123 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash from operating activities is primarily attributable to decreases in consulting fees, general and administrative expenses, and accounts payable partially offset by a decrease in accounts receivable and an increase in accrued salaries and related expenses.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $167,369 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $238,093 in the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash from financing activities was the result of decreases in cash received from a related party and cash received from the sale of common stock in 2020.
Generally, the Company’s operations are subject to a number of factors that can affect its operating result and financial condition. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the results of our marketing efforts to promote users for our software solutions, successful launch and acceptance of our software solutions in the marketplace, competition of our software solutions, attraction of talented and skilled employees to support the business and the ability to raise capital to support its operations.
In order to continue as a going concern, we will need, among other things, additional capital resources. Management’s plan is to obtain such resources for our capital needs by obtaining capital from management and significant stockholders sufficient to meet its operating expenses. Further, management cannot provide any assurances that we will be successful in accomplishing any of our plans. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to successfully accomplish the plans described in the preceding paragraph and eventually secure other sources of financing and attain profitable operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we were unable to continue as a going concern.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company follows subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. The Company’s legal costs associated with contingent liabilities are recorded to expense as incurred.
Income taxes
We are a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes. As such we are subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes and are taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if these positions are more likely than not to be sustained. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. The financial statements included in this annual report do not include a provision for federal income taxes since each of our statements of operations have a net loss. In the future, if we determine that such tax benefits are likely to be realized by us, we will record a deferred tax asset based on the then effective income tax rate.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, reduced disclosure obligations relating to the presentation of financial statements in Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and stockholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation. We have availed ourselves of the reduced reporting obligations and executive compensation disclosure in this annual report and expect to continue to avail ourselves of the reduced reporting obligations available to emerging growth companies in future filings.
In addition, an emerging growth company can delay its adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. However, we are choosing to take advantage of such extended transition period, and as a result, we may not comply with any new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which non-emerging growth companies must adopt such standards.
We will continue to qualify as an emerging growth company until the earliest of:
● The last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our IPO;
● The last day of our fiscal year in which we have annual gross revenues of $1.0 billion or more;
● The date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt;
● The date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer”, which will occur at such time as we (1) have an aggregate worldwide market value of common equity securities held by non-affiliates of $700 million or more as of the last business day of our most recently completed second quarter, (2) have been required to file annual and quarterly reports under the Exchange Act for a period of at least 12 months and (3) have filed at least one annual report pursuant to the Exchange Act.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not and will not have a material effect on our operations in the immediate future. Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the following policies below as critical to our business and results of operations. Our reported results are impacted by the application of the following accounting policies, certain of which require management to make subjective or complex judgments. These judgments involve making estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may significantly impact quarterly or annual results of operations. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as expected, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. Specific risks associated with these critical accounting policies are described in the following paragraphs.
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period for adopting any new or revised accounting standards. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we may adopt the standard for the private company. This may make comparison of our financial statements with any other public company that is neither an emerging growth company, nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period, difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
We have elected to take advantage of the scaled disclosures and other relief under the JOBS Act described above in this annual report (see “Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company”), and we may take advantage of some or all of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements that will be available to us under the JOBS Act, so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Stock-based Compensation. We follow the provisions of ASC 718 which requires all share-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of employee and non-employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their grant date fair values.
Revenue. The Company recognizes revenues when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. For student fees, the Company generates student fee revenue by registering each student that participates in an on-line classroom utilizing our eCampus platform. This revenue is earned at the time the on-line class takes place and is accrued during the period whether or not actually billed. The student fees are billed to the college conducting the classes during the period the classes are conducted. There are no prepayments for student fees so there is no deferred revenue related to student fees.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We implemented all new accounting standards that are in effect and that may impact our financial statements. We do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on the financial position or results of operations.