ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations covers fiscal 2022 and 2021 items and year-over-year comparisons between fiscal 2022 and 2021. Discussions of fiscal 2020 items and year-over-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, that was filed with the SEC on March 2, 2021.
Overview
Workday delivers applications for financial management, spend management, human capital management, planning, and analytics. With Workday, our customers have a unified system that can help them plan, execute, analyze, and extend to other applications and environments, thereby helping them continuously adapt how they manage their business and operations. Our diverse customer base includes medium-sized and large, global organizations within numerous industry categories, including professional and business services, financial services, healthcare, education, government, technology, media, retail, and hospitality.
We have achieved significant growth since our inception in 2005, with a substantial amount of our growth coming from new customers. Our current financial focus is on growing our revenues and expanding both our customer base and our footprint within our existing customers. While we have a history of GAAP operating losses, we strive to invest in a disciplined manner across all of our functional areas to sustain continued near-term revenue growth and support our long-term initiatives. We expect our product development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues will decrease over the longer term as we grow our revenues, and we anticipate that we will gain economies of scale by increasing our customer base without direct incremental development costs.
We plan to reinvest a significant portion of our incremental revenues in future periods to grow our business. We have invested and expect to continue to invest heavily in our product development efforts to deliver additional compelling applications, enhance existing applications, and to address customers’ evolving needs. In addition, we plan to continue to expand our ability to sell our applications globally, particularly in Europe and Asia-Pacific, by investing in product development and customer support to address the business needs of local markets, increasing our sales and marketing organizations, acquiring and leasing additional office space, and expanding our ecosystem of service partners to support local deployments. We expect to make further significant investments in our data center capacity and equipment and third-party hosted infrastructure platforms as we plan for future growth. We are also investing in personnel to support our growing customer base.
We regularly evaluate acquisition and investment opportunities in complementary businesses, employee teams, services, technologies, and intellectual property rights in an effort to expand our product and service offerings. For example, we acquired Peakon, Zimit, and VNDLY in fiscal 2022, and Scout in fiscal 2020. We expect to continue making such acquisitions and investments in the future. While we remain focused on improving operating margin, these acquisitions and investments will increase our costs on an absolute basis in the near term. Many of these investments will occur in advance of experiencing any direct benefit from them and could make it difficult to determine if we are allocating our resources efficiently.
Since inception, we have also invested heavily in our professional services organization to help ensure that customers successfully deploy and adopt our applications. Additionally, we continue to expand our professional services partner ecosystem to further support our customers. We believe our investment in professional services, as well as partners building consulting practices around Workday, will drive additional customer subscriptions and continued growth in revenues. Due to our ability to leverage the expanding partner ecosystem, we expect the rate of professional services revenue growth to decline over time and continue to be lower than subscription revenue growth.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic is having unpredictable impacts on global societies, economies, financial markets, and business practices. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed the majority of our offices; required most of our employees to work remotely; implemented travel restrictions; and postponed certain of our customer, industry, implementation partner, analyst, investor, and employee events and converted others to virtual-only experiences. Most of these operational changes remain in effect and we continue to prioritize the health and safety of our employees, customers, and partners. While the majority of our employees continue to work remotely, we began to reopen our offices in fiscal 2022 and are allowing employees to return to the office on a voluntary basis with enhanced safety protocols in place.
Despite the continuing uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to achieve solid new subscription bookings as demand for our products remains strong, and we are confident in the long-term overall health of our business, the strength of our product offerings, and our ability to continue to execute on our strategy. Our operating margin in fiscal 2022 and 2021 was favorably impacted by the moderation of operating expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not anticipate the extent of the favorable margin impact to continue long-term as we remain committed to investing in our business to drive top line growth and to support our customer base.
Our near-term revenues are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model. However, if the economic uncertainty increases, we may experience a negative impact on new business, customer renewals, sales and marketing efforts, revenue growth rates, customer deployments, customer solvency, product development, or other financial metrics, similar to what we experienced at the onset of the pandemic. Any of these factors could harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
For further discussion of the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, and operating results, see “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Financial Results Overview
The following table provides an overview of our key metrics (in thousands, except percentages and headcount data):
(1) See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We derive our revenues from subscription services and professional services. Subscription services revenues primarily consist of fees that give our customers access to our cloud applications, which include related customer support. Professional services revenues include fees for deployment services, optimization services, and training.
Subscription services revenues accounted for 88% of our total revenues during fiscal 2022, and represented 96% of our total unearned revenue as of January 31, 2022. Subscription services revenues are driven primarily by the number of customers, the number of workers at each customer, the specific applications subscribed to by each customer, and the price of our applications.
The mix of applications to which a customer subscribes can affect our financial performance due to price differentials in our applications. Pricing for our applications varies based on many factors, including the complexity and maturity of the application and its acceptance in the marketplace. New products or services offerings by competitors in the future could also impact the mix and pricing of our offerings.
Subscription services revenues are recognized over time as services are delivered and consumed concurrently over the contractual term, beginning on the date our service is made available to the customer. Our subscription contracts typically have a term of three years or longer and are generally noncancelable. We generally invoice our customers annually in advance. Amounts that have been invoiced are initially recorded as unearned revenue.
Our consulting engagements are billed on a time and materials basis or a fixed price basis. For contracts billed on a time and materials basis, revenues are recognized over time as the professional services are performed. For contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenues are recognized over time based on the proportion of the professional services performed. In some cases, we supplement our consulting teams by subcontracting resources from our service partners and deploying them on customer engagements. As the Workday-related consulting practices of our partner firms continues to develop, we expect these partners to increasingly contract directly with our subscription customers. As a result of this trend, and the increase of our subscription services revenues, we expect our professional services revenues as a percentage of total revenues to continue to decline over time.
Subscription Revenue Backlog
Our subscription revenue backlog, which is also referred to as remaining performance obligations for subscription contracts, represents contracted subscription services revenues that have not yet been recognized and includes billed and unbilled amounts. Subscription revenue backlog may fluctuate from period to period due to a number of factors, including the timing of renewals and overall renewal rates, new business growth, average contract duration, and seasonality.
Costs and Expenses
Costs of subscription services revenues. Costs of subscription services revenues consist primarily of employee-related expenses associated with hosting our applications and providing customer support, expenses related to data centers and computing infrastructure operated by third parties, and depreciation of computer equipment and software.
Costs of professional services revenues. Costs of professional services revenues consist primarily of employee-related expenses associated with these services, subcontractor expenses, and travel expenses.
Product development. Product development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses. We continue to focus our product development efforts on adding new features and applications, increasing functionality, and enhancing the ease of use of our cloud applications.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, and travel expenses. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, corporate communications, brand awareness, brand ambassador campaigns, and product marketing activities. Sales commissions are considered incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for new revenue contracts are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be five years.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of employee-related expenses for finance and accounting, legal, human resources, information systems personnel, professional fees, and other corporate expenses.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Our total revenues were as follows (in thousands):
Total revenues were $5.1 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $4.3 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $821 million, or 19%. Subscription services revenues were $4.5 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $3.8 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $758 million, or 20%. The increase in subscription services revenues was primarily due to an increased number of customer contracts and strong customer renewals, with gross retention over 95%. Professional services revenues were $592 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $530 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $63 million, or 12%. The increase in professional services revenues was primarily due to Workday performing deployment and integration services for a greater number of customers.
Subscription Revenue Backlog
As of January 31, 2022, our total subscription revenue backlog was $12.8 billion, with $8.0 billion expected to be recognized in revenues over the next 24 months. As of January 31, 2021, our total subscription revenue backlog was $10.1 billion, with $6.5 billion expected to be recognized in revenues over the next 24 months. The increase in subscription revenue backlog during fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by the addition of new customers, expansion of our product offerings with existing customers, and the timing of renewals.
Operating Expenses
GAAP operating expenses were $5.3 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $4.6 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $689 million, or 15%, which was primarily related to an increase of $517 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, due to higher average headcount. The increase in employee-related expenses also included $32 million for a performance-based cash bonus program that was expanded to all employees in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022. Additionally, there were increases of $59 million related to marketing programs, $51 million in professional services and subcontractor expenses, $44 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, and $37 million in depreciation expense related to equipment in our data centers, offset by a decrease of $79 million related to a one-time cash bonus that had been paid in fiscal 2021 to non-executive employees to help accommodate unforeseen costs brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic (“COVID-19 one-time employee bonus”).
We use the non-GAAP financial measure of non-GAAP operating expenses to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for internal budgeting and forecasting purposes, for short- and long-term operating plans, and to evaluate our financial performance. We believe that non-GAAP operating expenses reflect our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful period-to-period comparisons and analysis of trends in our business. We also believe that non-GAAP operating expenses provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results and prospects in the same manner as management and in comparing financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies.
Non-GAAP operating expenses were calculated by excluding share-based compensation expenses and certain other expenses, which consist of employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions and amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further information.
Non-GAAP operating expenses were $4.0 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $3.5 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $538 million, or 16%, which was primarily related to an increase of $385 million in employee-related expenses due to higher average headcount. The increase in employee-related expenses also included $32 million for a performance-based cash bonus program that was expanded to all employees in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022. Additionally, there were increases of $59 million related to marketing programs, $51 million in professional services and subcontractor expenses, $44 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, and $37 million in depreciation expense related to equipment in our data centers, offset by a decrease of $79 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
Reconciliations of our GAAP to non-GAAP operating expenses were as follows (in thousands):
(1)Other operating expenses include amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets of $78 million, $60 million, and $72 million for fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively. In addition, other operating expenses include employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions of $76 million, $51 million, and $55 million for fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
(2)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further information.
Costs of Subscription Services
GAAP operating expenses in costs of subscription services were $796 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $612 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $184 million, or 30%. The increase in costs of subscription services included increases of $91 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, due to higher average headcount, $37 million in depreciation expense related to equipment in our data centers, and $28 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, offset by a decrease of $5 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
Non-GAAP operating expenses in costs of subscription services were $656 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $514 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $142 million, or 28%. The increase in costs of subscription services included increases of $66 million in employee-related expenses due to higher average headcount, $37 million in depreciation expense related to equipment in our data centers, and $28 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, offset by a decrease of $5 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
We expect GAAP and non-GAAP operating expenses in costs of subscription services will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we improve and expand our technical operations infrastructure, including our data centers and computing infrastructure operated by third parties.
Costs of Professional Services
GAAP operating expenses in costs of professional services were $632 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $586 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $46 million, or 8%. The increase in costs of professional services was primarily due to an increase of $54 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, due to higher average headcount, offset by a decrease of $12 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
Non-GAAP operating expenses in costs of professional services were $508 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $478 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $30 million, or 6%. The increase in costs of professional services was primarily due to an increase of $38 million in employee-related expenses due to higher average headcount, offset by a decrease of $12 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
We expect GAAP and non-GAAP costs of professional services as a percentage of total revenues to continue to decline as we continue to rely on our service partners to deploy our applications and as the number of our customers continues to grow.
Product Development
GAAP operating expenses in product development were $1.9 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $1.7 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $158 million, or 9%. The increase in product development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $169 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, due to higher average headcount, offset by a decrease of $31 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
Non-GAAP operating expenses in product development were $1.3 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $1.2 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $115 million, or 10%. The increase in product development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $122 million in employee-related expenses due to higher average headcount, offset by a decrease of $31 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
We expect GAAP and non-GAAP product development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we improve and extend our applications and develop new technologies.
Sales and Marketing
GAAP operating expenses in sales and marketing were $1.5 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $1.2 billion for fiscal 2021, an increase of $229 million, or 19%. The increase in sales and marketing expenses included increases of $149 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, due to higher average headcount, and $59 million related to marketing programs, offset by decrease of $25 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
Non-GAAP operating expenses in sales and marketing were $1.2 billion for fiscal 2022, compared to $995 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $204 million, or 21%. The increase in sales and marketing expenses included increases of $130 million in employee-related expenses due to higher average headcount and $59 million related to marketing programs, offset by decrease of $25 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
We expect GAAP and non-GAAP sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in our domestic and international selling and marketing activities to expand brand awareness and attract new customers.
General and Administrative
GAAP operating expenses in general and administrative were $486 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $414 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $72 million, or 17%. The increase in general and administrative expenses included increases of $54 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, due to higher average headcount, and $22 million in professional services expenses, offset by a decrease of $6 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
Non-GAAP operating expenses in general and administrative were $324 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $276 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $48 million, or 17%. The increase in general and administrative expenses included increases of $30 million in employee-related expenses due to higher average headcount and $22 million in professional services expenses, offset by a decrease of $6 million related to the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus.
We expect GAAP and non-GAAP general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we further invest in our infrastructure and support our global expansion.
Operating Margin
GAAP operating margin improved from (5.8)% for fiscal 2021 to (2.3)% for fiscal 2022. Our GAAP operating margin for fiscal 2022 was favorably impacted by our revenue growth outpacing average headcount growth, moderation of operating expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the absence of the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus paid in the prior fiscal year.
We use the non-GAAP financial measure of non-GAAP operating margin to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for internal budgeting and forecasting purposes, for short- and long-term operating plans, and to evaluate our financial performance. We believe that non-GAAP operating margin reflects our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful period-to-period comparisons and analysis of trends in our business. We also believe that non-GAAP operating margin provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results and prospects in the same manner as management and in comparing financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies.
Non-GAAP operating margin was calculated using GAAP revenues and non-GAAP operating expenses. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further information.
Non-GAAP operating margin improved from 20.1% for fiscal 2021 to 22.4% for fiscal 2022. Our non-GAAP operating margin for fiscal 2022 was favorably impacted by our revenue growth outpacing average headcount growth, moderation of operating expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the absence of the COVID-19 one-time employee bonus paid in the prior fiscal year.
Reconciliations of our GAAP to non-GAAP operating income (loss) and operating margin were as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further information.
Other Income (Expense), Net
We had other income (expense), net of $133 million, $(27) million, and $20 million during fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
The increase in other income, net for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was primarily related to net gains of $124 million recognized on our equity investments, of which $83 million was due to an equity investment that completed its IPO during fiscal 2022. Additionally, there was a decrease in interest expense for our convertible senior notes of $52 million from the adoption of Accounting Standard Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06 and the conversion of our 1.50% convertible senior notes (“2020 Notes”) in fiscal 2021, offset by a decrease of $13 million in interest income on marketable securities resulting from lower prevailing interest rates.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Regulation S-K Item 10(e), “Use of non-GAAP financial measures in Commission filings,” defines and prescribes the conditions for use of non-GAAP financial information. Our measures of non-GAAP operating expenses, non-GAAP operating income (loss), and non-GAAP operating margin meet the definition of a non-GAAP financial measure.
Non-GAAP Operating Expenses, Non-GAAP Operating Income (Loss), and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
Our non-GAAP operating expenses, non-GAAP operating income (loss), and non-GAAP operating margin exclude the components listed below. For the reasons set forth below, management believes that excluding the components provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results and prospects in the same manner as management, in comparing financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies, and to better understand the long-term performance of our core business.
•Share-Based Compensation Expenses. Although share-based compensation is an important aspect of the compensation of our employees and executives, management believes it is useful to exclude share-based compensation expenses to better understand the long-term performance of our core business and to facilitate comparison of our results to those of peer companies. Share-based compensation expenses are determined using a number of factors, including our stock price, volatility, and forfeiture rates that are beyond our control and generally unrelated to operational decisions and performance in any particular period. Further, share-based compensation expenses are not reflective of the value ultimately received by the grant recipients.
•Other Operating Expenses. Other operating expenses includes employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions and amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets. The amount of employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions is dependent on our stock price and other factors that are beyond our control and do not correlate to the operation of the business. For business combinations, we generally allocate a portion of the purchase price to intangible assets. The amount of the allocation is based on estimates and assumptions made by management and is subject to amortization. The amount of purchase price allocated to intangible assets and the term of its related amortization can vary significantly and are unique to each acquisition and thus we do not believe it is reflective of ongoing operations. Although we exclude the amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets from these non-GAAP measures, management believes that it is important for investors to understand that such intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation.
Limitations on the Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
A limitation of our non-GAAP financial measures of non-GAAP operating expenses, non-GAAP operating income (loss), and non-GAAP operating margin is that they do not have uniform definitions. Our definitions will likely differ from the definitions used by other companies, including peer companies, and therefore comparability may be limited. Further, the non-GAAP financial measure of non-GAAP operating expenses has certain limitations because it does not reflect all items of expense that affect our operations and are reflected in the GAAP financial measure of total operating expenses. In the case of share-based compensation, if we did not pay out a portion of compensation in the form of share-based compensation and related employer payroll tax-related items, the cash salary expense included in operating expenses would be higher, which would affect our cash position.
We compensate for these limitations by reconciling the non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure, and to view our non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with the most comparable GAAP financial measures.
See “Results of Operations-Operating Expenses” and “Results of Operations-Operating Margin” for reconciliations from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, GAAP operating expenses, GAAP operating income (loss), and GAAP operating margin, to the non-GAAP financial measures, non-GAAP operating expenses, non-GAAP operating income (loss), and non-GAAP operating margin, for fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 31, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaling $3.6 billion, which were primarily held for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents and marketable securities are composed primarily of, in order from largest to smallest, commercial paper, U.S. treasury securities, money market funds, corporate bonds, U.S. agency obligations, and marketable equity investments. We have financed our operations primarily through customer payments, issuance of debt, and sales of our common stock.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, cash provided by operating activities, unbilled amounts related to the remaining term of contracted noncancelable subscription agreements, which are not reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and, if necessary, our borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility that provides for $750 million of unsecured financing, are sufficient to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, and debt repayment needs over the next 12 months. As part of our strategy, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, technologies, or intellectual property rights in the future. We may also choose to seek additional debt or equity financing.
Our long-term future capital requirements depend on many factors, including the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, customer growth rates, subscription renewal activity, headcount growth, timing and extent of development efforts, expansion of sales and marketing activities, introduction of new and enhanced services offerings, timing of construction or acquisition of additional facilities, investments, and acquisition activities.
Our cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $1.7 billion and $1.3 billion for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The improvement in cash flows provided by operating activities during fiscal 2022, compared to the prior fiscal year, was primarily due to increases in sales and related cash collections and moderation of operating expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect our business to continue to generate sufficient operating cash flows; however, if the COVID-19 pandemic worsens or is prolonged, our customers may request payment timing concessions, which could materially impact the timing and predictability of our operating cash flows in any given period.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2022 was $1.6 billion, which was primarily related to cash consideration for the acquisitions of VNDLY, Zimit, and Peakon, net of cash acquired, of $1.2 billion. Cash used in investing activities also included capital expenditures of $264 million mainly for data center projects, the purchase of office space within our corporate headquarters of $171 million, purchases of non-marketable equity and other investments of $123 million, and the timing of purchases and maturities of marketable securities. These payments were partially offset by proceeds of $199 million from sales of marketable securities.
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 was $1.2 billion, which was primarily comprised of a net cash outflow related to purchases and maturities of marketable securities of $930 million, capital expenditures for data center and office space projects of $253 million, and purchases of non-marketable investments of $67 million.
We expect capital expenditures will be approximately $475 million in fiscal 2023. This includes investments in our office facilities, corporate IT infrastructure, and customer data centers to support our continued growth.
Financing Activities
For fiscal 2022, cash provided by financing activities was $110 million, which was primarily due to proceeds of $148 million from the issuance of common stock from employee equity plans, offset by payments of $38 million on the Term Loan.
For fiscal 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $625 million, which was primarily due to net proceeds of $748 million from borrowing on the Term Loan and $149 million from the issuance of common stock from employee equity plans, partially offset by the principal payment of $250 million in connection with the conversion of the 2020 Notes.
Our 2022 Notes are convertible at the option of the holders during the first quarter of fiscal 2023 since the trigger for early conversion was met. Through the date of this filing, the amount of the principal balance of the 2022 Notes that has been converted or for which conversion has been requested was not material. We may receive additional conversion requests that require settlement in the first quarter of fiscal 2023. For further information, see Note 11, Debt, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations primarily consist of borrowings under our Credit Agreement, our convertible senior notes, leases for office space and co-location facilities for data center capacity, agreements for third-party hosted infrastructure platforms for business operations, and other purchase obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business. The table below includes our material contractual obligations, excluding imputed interest, as of January 31, 2022 (in thousands). For further information, see the associated Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report referenced in the table below.
(1)Consists of principal and interest payments on the Term Loan and 2022 Notes. The interest obligation on the Term Loan included in the table above assumes interest rates consistent with those in effect for our Term Loan as of January 31, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgements, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, judgements, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2, Accounting Standards and Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report, the following accounting policies and specific estimates involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and operating results.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues from subscription services and professional services. Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for services rendered.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenues when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
We believe the areas we apply the most critical judgements when determining revenue recognition relate to the identification of distinct performance obligations and the assessment of the standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each performance obligation identified.
Determination of Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract with a customer to transfer products or services that are distinct. Our contracts with customers may include multiple promises to transfer services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined as a single performance obligation may require significant judgment that requires us to assess the nature of the promise and the value delivered to the customer.
Our primary performance obligations consist of subscription services and professional services. We satisfy these performance obligations over time as we transfer the promised services to our customers. Subscription services are made up of a daily requirement to deliver the service to the customer. Each day the delivery of the service provides value to the customer and each day represents a measure toward completion of the service. As such, subscription services meet the criteria to be a series of distinct services. In determining whether professional services are distinct, we consider the following factors for each professional services agreement: availability of the services from other vendors, the nature of the professional services, the timing of when the professional services contract was signed in comparison to the subscription start date and the contractual dependence of the service on the customer’s satisfaction with the professional services work. To date, we have concluded that professional services included in contracts with multiple performance obligations are generally distinct as the professional services are not interrelated with subscription services nor do they result in significant customization of the subscription service. As such, we view professional services as a performance obligation to the customer.
At contract inception, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation. We combine contracts entered into at or near the same time with the same customer if we determine that the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective; the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price or performance of the other contract; or the services promised in the contracts are a single performance obligation. For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we assess each promise separately and allocate the transaction price on a relative standalone selling price basis. We apply significant judgment in identifying and evaluating any terms and conditions in contracts which may impact revenue recognition.
Standalone Selling Price Assessment
We determine the SSP based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including the value of our contracts, the cloud applications sold, customer demographics, geographic locations, and the number and types of users within our contracts.
We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP for both subscription and professional services sold together in a contract to determine whether there is a discount to be allocated based on the relative SSP of the performance obligations. Judgement is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. Our SSP ranges are reassessed on a periodic basis or when facts and circumstances change. Changes in SSP for our services can evolve over time due to changes in our pricing practices that are influenced by market competition, changes in demand for our services, and other economic factors. As our go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which could result in changes to SSP and may therefore impact revenue recognized in our consolidated financial statements.
Deferred Commissions
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for new revenue contracts are capitalized and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be five years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, our technology, and other factors.
Periodically, we review whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that could impact the period of benefit. Any future changes in circumstances around the terms of our initial and renewal contracts, customer attrition, underlying technology life, and certain other factors may materially change the period of benefit and therefore the amortization amounts recognized on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. There was no change to the period of benefit during the periods presented.
Business Combinations, Goodwill, and Acquisition-Related Intangible Assets
We allocate the purchase consideration of acquired companies to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date, with the excess recorded to goodwill. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions related to the fair value of identifiable intangible assets, deferred tax asset valuation allowances, liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, and contingencies. Critical estimates used in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer contracts, expected life cycle and innovation timelines for acquired technologies, forecasted customer attrition rates and revenue growth, the fair value of pre-existing relationships, royalty rates for comparable market technologies, and discount rates. The amounts and estimated useful lives assigned to acquisition-related intangible assets impact the amount and timing of future amortization expense.
We test goodwill and acquisition-related intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if a significant event or circumstance indicates impairment, by considering qualitative and quantitative factors. Significant qualitative inputs used in our impairment tests include, but are not limited to, consideration of general macroeconomic conditions, industry market conditions, overall Workday financial performance, and growth or declines in Workday’s share price. The primary quantitative input for our impairment test is Workday’s market capitalization as of the date of the analysis. We also evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of acquisition-related intangible assets for changes in circumstances that warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization at least annually, or more frequently if significant events or circumstances indicate a change in expected use.
Non-Marketable Equity Investments
Non-marketable equity investments include investments in privately held companies without readily determinable fair values in which we do not own a controlling interest or exercise significant influence. We adjust the carrying values of non-marketable equity investments based on observable price changes from orderly transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer. Non-marketable equity investments are valued using significant unobservable inputs or data in an inactive market. Valuations of non-marketable equity investments are inherently complex due to the lack of readily available market data, and require our judgment due to the absence of market prices and an inherent lack of liquidity. In addition, the rights and preferences related to the particular non-marketable equity investments, as compared to the rights and preferences of other securities within the company’s capital structure, may impact the magnitude of change in the fair value of our investment as compared to the change in total enterprise value of the company.
We assess our non-marketable equity investments quarterly for impairment. Our impairment analysis encompasses a qualitative and quantitative analysis of key factors including the investee’s financial metrics, such as growth or decline in revenues and operating expenses, market acceptance of the investee’s product or technology, other competitive products or technology in the market, general market conditions, and the rate at which the investee is using its cash. These factors require significant judgment. If impairment indicators are identified, we will assess the severity and duration of the impairment.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Accounting Standards and Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements.