Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide the reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results. This MD&A includes the following sections: Overview, Highlights, Results of Operations, Performance Measures and Non-GAAP Reconciliations, Liquidity and Capital Resources, Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates, and Recently Issued Accounting Standards. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Item 15 of this report.
Use of Non-GAAP Constant Currency
In order to show the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on our results of operations, we have included constant currency disclosures, where necessary, in the Overview and Results of Operations sections which follow. Constant currency disclosures represent the translation of our current fiscal year revenues, expenses and net income from the functional currencies of our subsidiaries to U.S. Dollars using the exchange rates in effect for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year. Results on a constant currency basis are not in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“non-GAAP”) and should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results prepared in accordance with GAAP. We use results on a constant currency basis as one of the measures to understand our operating results and evaluate our performance in comparison to prior periods in order to enhance the visibility of the underlying business trends, excluding the impact of translation arising from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Management believes this non-GAAP financial measure provides investors with additional financial information that should be considered when assessing our underlying business performance and trends. However, reference to constant currency basis should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for other financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Overview
The Company
WD-40 Company, based in San Diego, California, is a global marketing organization dedicated to creating positive lasting memories by developing and selling products that solve problems in workshops, factories and homes around the world. We own a wide range of well-known brands that include maintenance products and homecare and cleaning products: WD-40 Multi-Use Product, WD-40 Specialist, 3-IN-ONE, GT85, X-14, 2000 Flushes, Carpet Fresh, no vac, Spot Shot, 1001, Lava and Solvol.
Our products are sold in various locations around the world. Maintenance products are sold worldwide in markets throughout North, Central and South America, Asia, Australia, Europe, the Middle East and Africa. Homecare and cleaning products are sold primarily in North America, the United Kingdom (“U.K.”) and Australia. We sell our products primarily through warehouse club stores, hardware stores, automotive parts outlets, industrial distributors and suppliers, mass retail and home center stores, value retailers, grocery stores, online retailers, farm supply, sport retailers, and independent bike dealers.
Highlights
The following summarizes the financial and operational highlights for our business during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022:
Consolidated net sales increased $30.7 million, or 6%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $8.3 million on consolidated net sales for fiscal year 2022. Thus, on a constant currency basis, net sales would have increased by $39.0 million, or 8%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. This unfavorable impact from changes in foreign currency exchange rates mainly came from our EMEA segment, which accounted for 39% of our consolidated sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022.
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased to 49.1% for fiscal year 2022 compared to 54.0% for the prior fiscal year, primarily due to ongoing global supply chain challenges, including the increased cost of raw materials and constraints related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. These ongoing challenges have resulted in increased inflation rates globally. See the Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business section which follows for details, including actions we are taking in response to these challenges.
Consolidated net income decreased $2.9 million, or 4%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $0.8 million on consolidated net income for fiscal year 2022. Thus, on a constant currency basis, net income would have decreased by $2.1 million, or 3%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Diluted earnings per common share for fiscal year 2022 were $4.90 versus $5.09 in the prior fiscal year.
Our strategic initiatives and the areas where we will continue to focus our time, talent and resources in future periods include: (i) building a business for the future; (ii) attracting, developing and engaging outstanding tribe members; (iii) striving for operational excellence; (iv) growing WD-40 Multi-Use Product; (v) growing WD-40 Specialist product line; and (vi) expanding and supporting portfolio opportunities that help us grow.
‎
Significant Developments Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
Our financial results and operations continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic that began during our fiscal year 2020. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has impacted global economies, the rate of inflation, supply chains, distribution networks and consumer behavior around the world. We have experienced both favorable and unfavorable impacts to our financial results and our operations as a result of the direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, sales have been negatively impacted at varying times in the regions in which we operate due to health and safety restrictions required by local governmental authorities; such restrictions most recently impacted our Asia-Pacific segment when COVID-19 lockdowns were in place in China sporadically during the second half of fiscal year 2022. These negative sales impacts since the start of the pandemic have been offset in certain periods by increased demand for our products, particularly in fiscal year 2021, as a result of the shift in consumer spending patterns due to increased renovation and maintenance activities. However, global supply chain issues have resulted in increased raw material costs and other input costs, higher competition for freight resources, and labor constraints within manufacturing and distribution networks. These increased costs started to negatively impact our gross margin and financial results in fiscal year 2021. This inflationary environment worsened during fiscal year 2022 resulting in lower gross margins compared to the corresponding periods of the prior fiscal year.
Some of the increasing supply chain challenges that we have experienced include general aerosol production capacity constraints and competition for such capacity by other companies who also utilize third-party manufacturers for their aerosol production. Supply chains at many companies globally are being strained due to shortages of certain materials and this is impacting the ability of our third-party manufacturers to procure certain raw materials needed to manufacture our products. These challenges have periodically resulted in us not being able to meet the high level of demand for our products by customers and end-users in certain markets, most significantly those markets in our Americas segment where demand for aerosols has periodically outpaced the available production capacity in the region. We are continuing to actively manage periodic supply chain constraints and transportation disruptions. We have been actively working on various initiatives with our existing third-party manufacturers and we are also identifying and onboarding new third-party manufacturers, particularly in the Americas and EMEA segments. In addition, we have taken actions to increase inventory levels of certain raw materials and finished goods, given the current challenges within supply chain and increased lead times required by suppliers. As a result of these initiatives, we have begun to see increases in the capacity and flexibility of our supply chain throughout fiscal year 2022, particularly in the Americas segment. When we onboard new third-party manufacturers, it comes with inherent risks and in the current economic environment, it also potentially comes with higher costs. Although we are not able to estimate the costs or impacts associated with potential future supply chain disruptions, we believe that the changes we continue to implement as a result of the pandemic will have a positive lasting impact on our ability to better manage any future disruptions. However, some of the additional costs resulting from these recent supply chain constraints, including costs resulting from maintenance of higher inventory levels, as well as the inflationary environment that is impacting our raw material costs, are expected to unfavorably impact our cost of goods sold for as long as such conditions exist.
To offset these unfavorable impacts to gross margin, significant price increases have been implemented across all of our markets and geographies in fiscal year 2022 and further price increases may be implemented in certain regions in fiscal year 2023. Although we are beginning to see the favorable impacts of these price increases, it will take additional time before the full impact of these price increases is reflected in our reported results, especially those in some of our largest markets which we implemented late in the third quarter and in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022. However, it is possible that sales volumes may be impacted unfavorably in the short term as customers and end users adjust to increased sales prices. The severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on our supply chain, changes in end-user demand and the current inflationary environment remain uncertain and it is not possible to estimate the extent to which these conditions will impact our financial results and operations in future periods.
We have continued to follow a variety of measures to promote the safety and security of our employees during the pandemic, support the communities in which we operate and ensure the availability and functioning of our critical infrastructure. These measures have included allowing for or requiring remote working arrangements for employees in some regions and the imposition of various travel restrictions. In addition, we continue to develop and monitor plans to support a safe working environment for our employees in the various office locations in which we operate around the world. These plans vary by region based on the evolving situations within those regions. In connection with these plans, we have put in place our “Work from Where” philosophy to support work-life integration, and enable management and employees to align on where work is completed.
See our risk factors disclosed in Part I-Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” for further information on risks associated with pandemics, including COVID-19.
‎
The Impact of Russian Military Action in Ukraine
On February 24, 2022, Russian forces launched significant military action against Ukraine, which has resulted in conflict and disruption in the region. In response to this action taken by Russia, the U.S. and other countries immediately imposed various economic sanctions against Russia. These geopolitical tensions continued throughout the remainder of the fiscal year and it is uncertain when conditions will improve or whether additional governmental sanctions will be enacted in future periods. The direct and indirect impacts of this evolving situation and its effect on global economies in future periods are difficult to predict. We suspended selling our products to markets in Russia and Belarus beginning in March 2022, which had an unfavorable impact on our sales. In addition, we are currently unable to sell our products in Ukraine due to the disruption in the country. Our net sales to the regions that are directly impacted were approximately 3% of consolidated net sales for fiscal year 2021 and approximately 4% of consolidated net sales for the first half of fiscal year 2022, prior to the suspension of sales in these regions. As a result of this event that impacted the second half of our fiscal year, sales in these regions decreased 38% for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. We do not have facilities, third-party manufacturing partners, employees or inventory in these affected regions. Additionally, the only activities we conducted in these regions prior to the suspension of sales were through local marketing distributors. Write-offs of previously existing accounts receivable from those marketing distributors affected by the crisis have not been significant to date and are not expected to become significant in future periods.
As a result of this conflict, commodity markets remain subject to heightened levels of uncertainty, especially as they relate to the price of crude oil, which increased significantly in the immediate aftermath of the sanctions against Russia. Increases in crude oil prices unfavorably impact the cost of our products, as well as the cost of the transportation and distribution of our products. The length and severity of the recent increases in the price of crude oil are highly unpredictable and may unfavorably impact our cost of goods sold for as long as these conditions exist.
‎
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2021
Operating Items
The following table summarizes operating data for our consolidated operations (in thousands, except percentages and per share amounts):
Net Sales by Segment
The following table summarizes net sales by segment (in thousands, except percentages):
‎
Americas Sales
The following table summarizes net sales by product line for the Americas segment (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Current fiscal year constant currency (“CC”) net sales translated at the foreign currency exchange rates in effect for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, compared to prior period actual net sales
Americas Sales - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Net sales of maintenance products in the Americas segment increased due primarily to the following:
U.S. sales increased $15.3 million, or 10%, due to increased sales of WD-40 Multi-Use Product and WD-40 Specialist of $7.1 million, or 6%, and $7.7 million, or 51%, respectively. The increase for WD-40 Multi-Use Product was primarily due to price increases that went into effect during the last twelve months and supply chain improvements we made during fiscal year 2022 which resulted in increased product availability. These increases were offset by lower demand, partially due to unusually high levels of renovation and maintenance activities exhibited by our end-users during the prior fiscal year 2021 in earlier stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. WD-40 Specialist sales increased primarily due to significantly higher product availability. WD-40 Specialist products are sourced at certain third-party manufacturers that were significantly impacted by global supply chain constraints in fiscal year 2021. However, adjustments we have made in our supply chain to increase the production capacity of our most significant products, including WD-40 Specialist, improved the availability of these products throughout fiscal year 2022. In addition, WD-40 Specialist also benefited from price increases we implemented over the last 12 months.
Latin America sales increased $11.8 million, or 35%, primarily due to higher sales throughout many markets in the region, including in our direct market in Mexico. Sales were favorably impacted by price increases, increased product availability, successful promotional programs, and the continued momentum of achieving new distribution in our direct market in Mexico. In addition, sales were favorably impacted in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022 due to marketing distributors purchasing product in advance of additional price increases which were implemented late in fiscal year 2022.
Canada sales increased $2.1 million, or 16%, primarily due to demand in the industrial channel in Western Canada as a result of increased activity levels of end-users in the oil industry. In addition, price increases we implemented over the last twelve months, increased promotional activities and new distribution also had a favorable impact on sales.
Net sales of homecare and cleaning products in the Americas decreased due to the following:
Challenges in our Americas supply chain, primarily in the U.S., resulted in decreased product availability and lower net sales for most homecare and cleaning product brands. While we have been actively working to increase the capacity and flexibility of our supply chain in recent periods, the adjustments we have made to date have been more heavily focused on our most significant products, primarily our maintenance products.
While each of our homecare and cleaning products have continued to generate positive cash flows, we have experienced flat or decreased sales for many of these products in recent periods.
For the Americas segment, 74% of sales came from the U.S., and 26% of sales came from Canada and Latin America combined for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year when 77% of sales came from the U.S., and 23% of sales came from Canada and Latin America combined.
‎
EMEA Sales
The following table summarizes net sales by product line for the EMEA segment (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)While our reporting currency is the U.S. Dollar, the functional currency of our U.K. subsidiary, the entity in which the EMEA results are generated, is Pound Sterling. Although the functional currency of this subsidiary is Pound Sterling, approximately 50% of its sales are generated in Euro and approximately 15% are generated in U.S. Dollar. As a result, the Pound Sterling sales and earnings for the EMEA segment can be negatively or positively impacted from period to period upon translation from these currencies depending on whether the Euro and U.S. Dollar are weakening or strengthening against the Pound Sterling.
(2)Current fiscal year constant currency net sales translated at the foreign currency exchange rates in effect for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, compared to prior period actual net sales.
EMEA Sales - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Net sales decreased in the EMEA segment due to the following drivers:
Direct Markets - EMEA (67% of net sales YTD FY2022 vs 68% YTD FY2021)
Direct markets decreased $4.5 million, or 3%, primarily due to decreased sales in the U.K of $8.4 million, or 21%, offset by increases in our other EMEA direct markets, when combined, of $3.9 million, or 4%. Sales in our direct markets were unfavorably impacted by the weakening of the Pound Sterling, the functional currency of our U.K subsidiary, against the U.S. Dollar. On a constant currency basis, sales would have increased $1.0 million in our direct markets in fiscal year 2022 as compared to the prior fiscal year.
Decreased sales in the U.K. direct market were primarily due to a lower level of demand, as renovation, maintenance and homecare and cleaning activities exhibited by our end-users in the U.K. during the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in particularly strong demand in fiscal year 2021. In addition, sales were unfavorably impacted by changes in foreign currency exchange rates. These decreases were partially offset by price increases we have implemented over the last twelve months. Although these price increases positively impacted sales, the overall impact was partially offset by a lower level of customer orders and promotional programs as customers adjust to these price increases.
Sales in EMEA direct markets, excluding the U.K., increased from period to period primarily due to new distribution and sales price increases, as well as successful promotional programs that occurred during fiscal year 2022. These favorable impacts were partially offset by lower demand and reduced renovation and maintenance activities exhibited by our end-users, as discussed above, as well as unfavorable impacts due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Distributor Markets - EMEA (33% of net sales YTD FY2022 vs 32% YTD FY2021)
Sales increased $0.9 million, or 1%, in EMEA markets wherein we utilize a marketing distributor model (“distributor markets”), in which products are sold to marketing distributors who in turn sell to wholesalers and retailers. The increase was primarily due to increased sales in India, the Middle East, Poland and the Czech Republic of $2.5 million, $1.5 million, $1.0 million, and $0.9 million, respectively. The increases in the distributor market sales were significantly offset by decreased sales in Russia and Turkey of $4.8 million and $0.9 million, respectively. The sales decrease in Russia was primarily due to the ongoing effects of the Russian military action in Ukraine. See The Impact of Russian Military Action in Ukraine described in the “Significant Developments” section above for further information regarding the suspension of our sales to Russian markets.
Sales were positively impacted in the distributor markets due to strong demand, new distribution and price increases we have implemented over the last twelve months.
‎
Asia-Pacific Sales
The following table summarizes net sales by product line for the Asia-Pacific segment (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Current fiscal year constant currency net sales translated at the foreign currency exchange rates in effect for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, compared to prior period actual net sales
Asia-Pacific Sales - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Net sales in the Asia-Pacific segment increased due to the following drivers:
Sales in the Asia distributor markets increased $5.9 million, or 23%, primarily due to the success of promotional programs and the continued easing of COVID-19 lockdown measures throughout the fiscal year, which resulted in increased demand and higher sales in most countries, as well as the timing of customer orders in response to price increases.
Sales in China increased $2.3 million, or 13%, primarily due to a higher level of promotional activities during the first half of fiscal year 2022, as well as customers purchasing product in advance of anticipated price increases. These increases in sales were partially offset by decreased sales due to COVID-19 lockdowns in Shanghai and other cities, primarily in the third quarter, that severely limited the production of our products by our third-party manufacturer located in the region. In addition, these lockdowns and the severe restrictions placed on various regions in China during certain periods in the second half of fiscal year 2022 negatively impacted logistics networks in the country.
Australia sales increased $0.5 million, or 2%, primarily due to the ongoing growth of the base business, increased promotional activities and price increases that went into effect in February 2022. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact on sales in Australia. On a constant currency basis, sales in Australia would have increased $1.5 million, or 7%.
Gross Profit
The following general information regarding the timing and nature of our product costs is important when assessing fluctuations in our gross margin from period to period:
There is often a delay of one quarter or more before changes in costs of raw materials, such as specialty chemicals used in the formulation of our products, impact cost of products sold due to production and inventory life cycles;
In general, the timing of advertising, promotional and other discounts may cause fluctuations in gross margin from period to period. Advertising, promotional and other discounts that are given to our customers are recorded as a reduction to sales, whereas advertising and sales promotional costs associated with promotional activities that we pay to third parties are recorded as advertising and sales promotion expenses;
In the EMEA segment, the majority of our cost of goods sold is denominated in Pound Sterling whereas sales are generated in Pound Sterling, Euro and the U.S. Dollar. The strengthening or weakening of the Euro and U.S. Dollar against the Pound Sterling may result in foreign currency related changes to the gross margin percentage in the EMEA segment from period to period; and
Our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to those of other consumer product companies, since some of these companies include all costs related to distribution of their products in cost of products sold, whereas we exclude the portion associated with amounts paid to third parties for shipment to our customers from our distribution centers and contract manufacturers and include these costs in selling, general and administrative expenses. These costs totaled $18.6 million and $16.5 million for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
‎
For further information pertaining to recent trends and economic conditions affecting gross margin, please see the section titled “Significant Developments”.
The following table summarizes gross margin and gross profit (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Basis points (“bps”) change in gross margin.
Gross Margin - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Gross margin decreased 490 bps primarily due to the following unfavorable impacts, partially offset by favorable impacts:
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
SG&A Expenses - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
The decrease in SG&A expenses from period to period was primarily due lower employee-related costs, which decreased $11.5 million due to lower incentive compensation accruals of $15.2 million, which were partially offset by higher salary and other employee costs of $3.7 million primarily due to increased headcount and annual compensation increases. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates from period to period also resulted in a decrease of $2.0 million in SG&A expenses. These decreases to SG&A expense were partially offset by higher travel and meeting expense, which increased $3.5 million due to the reduction in travel restrictions related to COVID-19, resulting in a higher level of travel and meetings by employees. Additionally, freight costs increased $2.5 million primarily due to carrier price increases associated with supply chain constraints and limited capacity in the global distribution networks. Miscellaneous costs also increased $0.7 million from period to period.
We continued our research and development investment, the majority of which is associated with our maintenance products, in support of our focus on innovation and renovation of our products. Research and development costs for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021 were $5.1 million and $5.6 million, respectively. Our research and development team engages in consumer research, product development, current product improvements and testing activities. This team leverages its development capabilities by collaborating with a network of outside resources including our current and prospective third-party contract manufacturers. The level and types of expenses incurred within research and development can vary from period to period depending upon the types of activities being performed.
Advertising and Sales Promotion (“A&P”) Expenses
A&P Expenses - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact of $0.6 million on advertising and sales promotion expenses from period to period. On a constant currency basis, A&P expenses would have been relatively constant.
As a percentage of net sales, A&P expenses may fluctuate period to period based upon the type of marketing activities we employ and the period in which the costs are incurred. Total promotional costs recorded as a reduction to sales were $28.1 million and $24.8 million for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Therefore, our total investment in A&P activities totaled $55.4 million and $52.8 million for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Income from Operations by Segment
The following table summarizes income from operations by segment (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Unallocated corporate expenses are general corporate overhead expenses not directly attributable to any one of the business segments. These expenses are reported separate from our identified segments and are included in Selling, General and Administrative expenses on our consolidated statements of operations.
Americas
Americas Operating Income - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Income from operations for the Americas increased to $54.2 million, up $2.6 million, or 5%, primarily due to a $25.6 million increase in sales and slightly lower operating expenses, significantly offset by a lower gross margin. Gross margin for the Americas segment decreased from 52.0% to 47.3% primarily due to increases in the costs of specialty chemicals and aerosol cans. In addition, gross margin was unfavorably impacted by increased warehousing, distribution and freight costs and higher costs at our third-party manufacturers due to supply chain constraints and inflationary impacts, as well as unfavorable changes in sales mix and higher overhead costs. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by the favorable impacts of price increases that were implemented during the previous 12 months. Although operating expenses decreased due to lower accrued incentive compensation, these decreases were almost entirely offset by higher outbound freight costs primarily due to higher freight rates, increased headcount and salaries, and higher travel and meeting expenses. Operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased from 24.0% to 22.6% period over period.
‎
EMEA
EMEA Operating Income - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Income from operations for the EMEA segment decreased to $42.1 million, down $10.9 million, or 21%, primarily due to a lower gross margin and a $3.6 million decrease in sales, partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses. Gross margin for the EMEA segment decreased from 55.6% to 49.6% primarily due to increases in the costs of specialty chemicals and aerosol cans. In addition, gross margin was also unfavorably impacted by fluctuations in exchange rates as well as increased warehousing, distribution and freight costs due to supply chain constraints and inflationary impacts. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by price increases that were implemented over the last twelve months. Operating expenses decreased $3.2 million primarily due to lower accrued incentive compensation, partially offset by increased headcount and salaries, higher travel and meeting expenses and higher outbound freight costs. Operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased from 25.5% to 20.5% period over period.
Asia-Pacific
Asia-Pacific Operating Income - Fiscal Year Ended - August 31, 2022 Compared to August 31, 2021
Income from operations for the Asia-Pacific segment increased to $22.6 million, up $3.5 million, or 18%, primarily due to a $8.6 million increase in sales, partially offset by a lower gross margin. Gross margin for the Asia-Pacific segment decreased from 55.8% to 53.6% primarily due to combined unfavorable impacts of increases to the cost of specialty chemicals and aerosol cans. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by price increases that were implemented during the previous 12 months. Operating income as a percentage of net sales increased from 29.3% to 30.6% period over period.
Non-Operating Items
The following table summarizes non-operating income and expenses for our consolidated operations (in thousands):
Interest Income
Interest income was not significant for both the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased primarily due to an increased weighted average outstanding balance on our revolving credit facility and higher interest rates related to draws on this credit facility.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net was $0.6 million for the fiscal year ended 2022 and was not significant for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year. The $0.6 million change from period to period was primarily due to net foreign currency losses during fiscal year 2022 as a result of fluctuations in the foreign currency exchange rates for both the U.S. Dollar and the Euro against the Pound Sterling.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was 19.9% of income before income taxes for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 compared to 18.8% for the prior fiscal year. The increase in the effective income tax rate from period to period was primarily due to an increase in non-deductible performance-based compensation expense.
‎
Net Income
Net income was $67.3 million, or $4.90 per common share on a fully diluted basis, for fiscal year 2022 compared to $70.2 million, or $5.09 per common share on a fully diluted basis, for the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates year over year had an unfavorable impact of $0.8 million on net income for fiscal year 2022. Thus, on a constant currency basis, net income for fiscal year 2022 would have been $68.1 million.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2020
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and the results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, refer to Part II - Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, which was filed with the SEC on October 22, 2021.
Performance Measures and Non-GAAP Reconciliations
In managing our business operations and assessing our financial performance, we supplement the information provided by our financial statements with certain non-GAAP performance measures. These performance measures are part of our current 55/30/25 business model, which includes gross margin, cost of doing business, and earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), the latter two of which are non-GAAP performance measures. Cost of doing business is defined as total operating expenses less amortization of definite-lived intangible assets, impairment charges related to intangible assets and depreciation in operating departments, and EBITDA is defined as net income before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. We target our gross margin to be at or above 55% of net sales, our cost of doing business to be at 30% of net sales, and our EBITDA to be at or above 25% of net sales. Results for these performance measures may vary from period to period depending on various factors, including economic conditions and our level of investment in activities for the future such as those related to quality assurance, regulatory compliance, and intellectual property protection in order to safeguard our WD-40 brand. Our financial results and operations continue to be impacted by increased global supply chain constraints and an inflationary environment, both of which have significantly lowered our gross margin percentage over the last twelve months and moved us well below our target of 55%. Although we have been implementing strategic sales price increases across all segments at varying times in response to increased costs, it will take time before the full impact of these sales price increases are reflected in our reported results. In addition, it is difficult to determine how long these supply chain and inflationary conditions will exist and if they will worsen or improve over time. However, the targets for gross margin and these other performance measures are long-term in nature and we expect to make progress towards achieving them over time. For more detailed information pertaining to recent trends and economic conditions and the actions we are taking to respond to them, please see the section titled “Significant Developments”.
The following table summarizes the results of these performance measures:
(1)Percentages may not aggregate to EBITDA percentage due to rounding and because amounts recorded in other income (expense), net on our consolidated statement of operations are not included as an adjustment to earnings in the EBITDA calculation.
We use the performance measures above to establish financial goals and to gain an understanding of our comparative performance from period to period. We believe that these measures provide our shareholders with additional insights into how we run our business. We believe these measures also provide investors with additional financial information that should be considered when assessing our underlying business performance and trends. These non-GAAP financial measures are supplemental in nature and should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income, income from operations or other financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP as indicators of our performance or operations. The use of any non-GAAP measure may produce results that vary from the GAAP measure and may not be comparable to a similarly defined non-GAAP measure used by other companies.
‎
Reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to our financial statements as prepared in accordance with GAAP are as follows:
Cost of Doing Business (in thousands, except percentages):
EBITDA (in thousands, except percentages):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our financial condition and liquidity remain strong. Although there continues to be uncertainty related to the ongoing and anticipated impact of the current COVID-19 pandemic on our future results, we believe our efficient business model and the steps that we have taken position us to manage our business through the situation as it continues to develop. We continue to manage all aspects of our business including, but not limited to, monitoring our liquidity, the financial health of our customers, suppliers and other third-party relationships, implementing gross margin enhancement strategies and developing new opportunities for growth
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations and cash currently available from our existing unsecured revolving credit facility under the Credit Agreement with Bank of America. We use proceeds of the revolving credit facility primarily for our general working capital needs. We also hold borrowings under the Note Agreement. See Note 8 - Debt for additional information on these agreements.
We have historically held a balance of outstanding draws on our line of credit in either U.S. Dollars in the Americas segment or in Euros and Pound Sterling in the EMEA segment. Euro and Pound Sterling denominated draws will fluctuate in U.S. Dollars from period to period due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. We regularly convert many of our draws on our line of credit to new draws with new maturity dates and interest rates. We have the ability to refinance any draws under the line of credit with successive short-term borrowings through the September 30, 2025 maturity date of the Credit Agreement. Outstanding draws for which we have both the ability and intent to refinance with successive short-term borrowings for a period of at least twelve months are classified as long-term. As of August 31, 2022, $39.5 million of the outstanding balance under our line of credit resides in the EMEA segment and is denominated in Euros and Pound Sterling and classified long-term, whereas $38.4 million is denominated in U.S. Dollar and classified as short-term. In the United States, we held $68.4 million in fixed rate long-term borrowings as of August 31, 2022, consisting of senior notes under our Note Agreement. We paid $0.8 million in principal payments on our Series A Notes during fiscal year 2022. There were no other letters of credit outstanding or restrictions on the
amount available on our line of credit or notes. Per the terms of both the Note Agreement and the Credit Agreement, our consolidated leverage ratio cannot be greater than three and a half to one and our consolidated interest coverage ratio cannot be less than three to one. See Note 8 - Debt for additional information on these financial covenants. At August 31, 2022, we were in compliance with all material debt covenants. We continue to monitor our compliance with all debt covenants and, at the present time, we believe that the likelihood of being unable to satisfy all material covenants is remote. At August 31, 2022, we had a total of $37.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. We do not foresee any ongoing issues with repaying our borrowings and we closely monitor the use of this credit facility.
We believe that our future cash from domestic and international operations, together with our access to funds available under our unsecured revolving credit facility, will provide adequate resources to fund short-term and long-term operating requirements, capital expenditures, dividend payments, acquisitions, new business development activities and share repurchases. On October 12, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase plan. Under the plan, which became effective on November 1, 2021, we are authorized to acquire up to $75.0 million of our outstanding shares through August 31, 2023, of which $45.8 million remains available for the repurchase of common shares as of August 31, 2022.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows by category for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $82.1 million to $2.6 million for fiscal year 2022. Cash flows from operating activities depend heavily on operating performance and changes in working capital. Our primary source of operating cash flows for fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 was net income of $67.3 million, which decreased $2.9 million from period to period. Changes in our working capital significantly decreased net cash provided by operating activities, primarily due to increases in inventory, most significantly in the Americas segment but also in the EMEA segment. This increase in inventory was due to actions we took to stock certain raw materials and finished goods to increase the flexibility and capacity within our supply chain, as well as the higher carrying value of inventory due to higher raw material costs and other input costs from period to period. Net cash provided by operating activities was further decreased due to higher earned incentive payouts in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 compared to the same period of the prior fiscal year as well as lower level of earned incentive accruals from period to period. Additionally, net cash provided by operating activities decreased from period to period due to lower increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, as well as increases in other assets primarily due to capitalized costs related to the new cloud-based ERP system which we are currently implementing.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $6.8 million to $7.7 million for fiscal year 2022, primarily due to a lower level of manufacturing-related capital expenditures within the United States and the United Kingdom. Some of this manufacturing equipment is still under construction and will be located at our third-party manufacturers in the United States and the United Kingdom once completed.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $2.8 million to $38.0 million for fiscal year 2022. This change was primarily due to the resumption of treasury stock purchases in November 2021, resulting in increased treasury stock purchases of $29.2 million. In addition, increases in dividends paid to our shareholders of $3.8 million and increases in shares withheld to cover taxes on conversion of equity rewards of $0.8 million resulted in higher cash outflows from period to period. These increases in cash outflows from period to period were significantly offset by $36.4 million in higher proceeds provided by the Company’s debt agreements, primarily due to $38.4 million in proceeds from our line of credit in fiscal year 2022. In fiscal year 2021, we repaid $50.0 million of borrowings outstanding under our line of credit using $52.0 million in proceeds that we received from the issuance and sale of senior notes. This net borrowing activity resulted in a $2.0 million cash inflow during fiscal year 2021 related to our debt agreements compared to the $38.4 million in net proceeds during fiscal year 2022.
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes
All of our foreign subsidiaries currently operate in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar and a significant portion of our consolidated cash balance is denominated in these foreign functional currencies, particularly at our U.K. subsidiary which operates in Pound Sterling. As a result, our cash and cash equivalents balances are subject to the effects of the fluctuations in these functional currencies against the U.S. Dollar at the end of each reporting period. The net effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents, when expressed in U.S. Dollar terms was a decrease in cash of $5.0 million in fiscal year 2022, while such changes were not significant in fiscal year 2021 and resulted in an increase in cash of $2.2 million for fiscal year 2020. These changes were primarily due to fluctuations in various foreign currency exchange rates from period to period, but the majority is related to the fluctuations in the Pound Sterling against the U.S. Dollar.
Cash Flows
Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2020
For discussion related to changes in the consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, refer to Part II - Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, which was filed with the SEC on October 22, 2021.
Share Repurchase Plans
The information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 9 - Share Repurchase Plans, included in this report.
Dividends
We have historically paid regular quarterly cash dividends on our common stock. In December 2021, the Board of Directors declared an 8% increase in the regular quarterly cash dividend, increasing it from $0.72 per share to $0.78 per share. On October 11, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.78 per share payable on October 31, 2022 to shareholders of record on October 21, 2022. Our ability to pay dividends could be affected by future business performance, liquidity, capital needs, alternative investment opportunities and loan covenants.
Contractual Obligations
We hold borrowings under our Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement with fixed repayment requirements and under a Revolving Credit Facility that has variable underlying interest rates. For additional details on these borrowings, including ability and intent assessment on our credit facility agreement with Bank of America, refer to the information set forth in Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules”, Note 8 - Debt.
Additionally, we have ongoing relationships with various third-party suppliers (contract manufacturers) that manufacture our products and third-party distribution centers which warehouse and ship our products to customers. The contract manufacturers maintain title and control of certain raw materials and components, materials utilized in finished products, and of the finished products themselves until shipment to our customers or third-party distribution centers in accordance with agreed upon shipment terms. Although we have definitive minimum purchase obligations in the contract terms with certain of our contract manufacturers, when such obligations have been included, they have either been immaterial or the minimum amounts have been such that they are well below the volume of goods that we have historically purchased. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we communicate supply needs to our contract manufacturers based on orders and short-term projections, ranging from two to six months. We are committed to purchase the products produced by the contract manufacturers based on the projections provided. Upon the termination of contracts with contract manufacturers, we obtain certain inventory control rights and are obligated to work with the contract manufacturer to sell through all product held by or manufactured by the contract manufacturer on our behalf during the termination notification period. If any inventory remains at the contract manufacturer at the termination date, we are obligated to purchase such inventory which may include raw materials, components and finished goods. The amounts for inventory purchased under termination commitments have been immaterial.
In addition to the commitments to purchase products from contract manufacturers described above, we may also enter into commitments with other manufacturers to purchase finished goods and components to support innovation initiatives and/or supply chain initiatives. As of August 31, 2022, no such commitments were outstanding.
At August 31, 2022, the liability recorded for uncertain tax positions, excluding associated interest and penalties, was approximately $9.3 million. For additional details on our uncertain tax positions, refer to the information set forth in Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 13 - Income Taxes. We have estimated that up to $0.2 million of
unrecognized tax benefits related to income tax positions may be affected by the resolution of tax examinations or expiring statutes of limitation within the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our results of operations and financial condition, as reflected in our consolidated financial statements, have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We use historical experience and other relevant factors when developing estimates and assumptions and these estimates and assumptions are continually evaluated. Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this report includes a discussion of our significant accounting policies. The accounting policies discussed below are the ones we consider to be most critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements because their application places the most significant demands on our judgment. Our financial results may have varied from those reported had different assumptions been used or other conditions prevailed.
Revenue Recognition
Sales are recognized as revenue at a point in time upon transferring control of the product to the customer. This typically occurs when products are shipped or delivered, depending on when risks of loss and title have passed to the customer per the terms of the contract. For certain of our sales we must make judgments and certain assumptions in order to determine when delivery has occurred. Through an analysis of end-of-period shipments for these particular sales, we determine an average time of transit of product to our customers, and this is used to estimate the time of delivery and whether revenue should be recognized during the current reporting period for such shipments. Differences in judgments or estimates related to the lengthening or shortening of the estimated delivery time used could result in material differences in the timing of revenue recognition.
Sales are recorded net of allowances for damaged goods and other sales returns, sales incentives, trade promotions and cash discounts. We apply a five-step approach in determining the amount and timing of revenue to be recognized which includes the following: (1) identifying the contract with a customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognizing revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied.
In determining the transaction price, management evaluates whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment related to variable consideration to determine the net consideration to which we expect to be entitled. We record estimates of variable consideration, which primarily includes rebates/other discounts (cooperative marketing programs, volume-based discounts, shelf price reductions and allowances for shelf space, charges from customers for services they provided to us related to the sale and penalties/fines charged to us by our customers for failing to adhere to contractual obligations), coupon offers, cash discount allowances, and sales returns, as a reduction of sales in the consolidated statements of operations. These estimates are based on the expected value method considering all reasonably available information, including current and past trade promotion spending patterns, status of trade promotion activities and the interpretation of historical spending trends by customer and category, customer agreements and/or currently known factors that arise in the normal course of business. We review our assumptions and adjust these estimates accordingly on a quarterly basis. Our consolidated financial statements could be materially impacted if the actual promotion rates are different from the estimated rates. If our accrual estimates for sales incentives at August 31, 2022 were to differ by 10%, the impact on net sales would be approximately $1.0 million.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Current income tax expense is the amount of income taxes expected to be payable for the current year. A deferred income tax liability or asset is established for the expected future tax consequences resulting from the differences in financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Based on changes in the related tax law as well as forecasted results, a valuation allowance is provided if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In addition to valuation allowances, we provide for uncertain tax positions when such tax positions do not meet the recognition thresholds or measurement standards prescribed by the authoritative guidance on income taxes. Amounts for uncertain tax positions are adjusted in periods when new information becomes available or when positions are effectively settled. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense.
We are required to make assertions on whether our foreign subsidiaries will invest their undistributed earnings indefinitely and these assertions are based on the capital needs of the foreign subsidiaries. Generally, unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are not considered to be indefinitely reinvested. However, there is an exception regarding specific statutory remittance restrictions imposed on our China subsidiary. Costs associated with repatriating unremitted foreign earnings, including U.S. state income taxes and foreign withholding taxes, are immaterial to our consolidated financial statements. For additional
information on income tax matters, see Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 13 - Income Taxes, included in this report.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Information on Recently Issued Accounting Standards that could potentially impact our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures is incorporated by reference to Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, included in this report.