Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
WeWork is the leading global flexible workspace provider, serving a membership base of businesses large and small through our network of 756 locations, including 624 Consolidated Locations (as defined in the section entitled "Key Performance Indicators"), around the world as of December 2021. With our global footprint, we have worked to establish ourselves as the preeminent brand within the space-as-a-service category by combining best-in-class locations and design with member-first hospitality and exceptional community experiences. Since new management was instituted in 2020, we immediately began to execute a strategic plan to transform our business. With a more efficient operating model and cost conscious mindset, moving forward we expect to pursue profitable growth and focus on the digitization of our real estate in order to enhance our product offerings, and expand and diversify our membership base, while continuously meeting the growing demand for flexibility.
In the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, WeWork opened its first location in lower Manhattan in 2010 to provide entrepreneurs and small businesses with flexible, affordable and community-centered office space. The initial vision was to create environments where people and companies could come together to "do what they love." Our value proposition proved to be highly attractive to a range of users, which soon evolved to encompass a growing set of medium- and large-scale businesses, including our Enterprise Members (as defined in the section entitled "Key Performance Indicators").
For nearly a decade, WeWork embarked on a high-growth path towards global expansion. Within four years, the Company grew to 23 locations across eight cities and opened its first international locations in the United Kingdom and Israel. In 2019, WeWork filed a registration statement in connection with a proposed initial public offering which was later withdrawn. Following the withdrawal of the registration statement, SBG provided WeWork with additional access to capital to support our day-to-day operations and other capital needs. Subsequently, the board of directors of WeWork directed a change in leadership.
We rebuilt our leadership team beginning with the appointment of Sandeep Mathrani as Chief Executive Officer in February 2020. With a new leadership team comprised of seasoned professionals in the public and private sectors, WeWork immediately began to execute a strategic plan to transform our business. That plan included robust expense management efforts, the exit of non-core businesses and material real estate portfolio optimization. On October 20, 2021 Legacy BowX consumated its going-public business combination with Legacy WeWork. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, Legacy BowX changed its name to WeWork Inc. and the Company's stock began trading on the NYSE under the ticker symbol "WE".
WeWork’s core business offering provides flexibility across space, time and cost. Whether users are looking for a dedicated desk, a private office or a fully customized floor, our members have the flexibility to choose the amount of space they need and scale with us as their businesses grow. Members also have the optionality to choose the type of membership that works for them, with a range of flexible offerings that provide access to space on a monthly subscription basis, through a multi-year membership agreement or on a pay-as-you-go basis. Additionally, a WeWork membership provides members with portability of cost, giving our members the flexibility to move part or all of an existing commitment to a new market, region or country.
Membership agreements provide our members with access to space along with certain baseline amenities and services, such as private phone booths, internet, high-speed business printers and copiers, mail and packaging handling, front desk services, 24/7 building access, unique common areas and daily enhanced cleaning for no additional cost.
Beyond the amenities offered, we believe that our community team is what sets us apart from other space providers in the industry. With a member-first mindset, our community teams provide an exceptional level of hospitality by not only overseeing onsite operations and supporting day-to-day needs, but also focusing on cultivating meaningful relationships with and between our members to deliver a premium experience.
By providing all of the overhead services required to find and operate office space, WeWork significantly reduces the complexity and cost of leasing real estate to a simplified membership model.
Key Performance Indicators
To evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions, we rely on our financial results prepared in accordance GAAP, non-GAAP measures and the following key performance indicators.
For certain key performance indicators the amounts we present are based on whether the indicator relates to a location for which the revenues and expenses of the location are consolidated within our results of operations ("Consolidated Locations") or whether the indicator relates to a location for which the revenues and expenses are not consolidated within our results of operations, but for which we are entitled to a management fee for our advisory services ("Unconsolidated Locations").
On October 2, 2020, the Company deconsolidated ChinaCo, a previously consolidated subsidiary of the Company that operated our locations in the Greater China region. On June 1, 2021, we closed a franchise agreement with Ampa and transferred the building operations and obligations of our Israel locations to Ampa. Subsequent to the date of these respective transactions our ChinaCo and Israel locations are included in our Unconsolidated Locations. For amounts relating to periods prior to October 2, 2020, and June 1, 2021, ChinaCo and Israel locations, respectively, remain reflected as Consolidated Locations and as a result, periods may not be comparable. There is no impact to the combined Consolidated Locations and Unconsolidated Locations ("Total Locations" or "Systemwide Locations") indicators as a result of the ChinaCo Deconsolidation or Israel franchise agreement. As of December 31, 2021, our locations in India, the Greater China region and Israel are our only Unconsolidated Locations.
Unless otherwise noted, we present our key performance indicators as an aggregation of Consolidated Locations and Unconsolidated Locations. As presented in this Form 10-K, certain amounts, percentages and other figures have been subject to rounding adjustments. Accordingly, figures shown as totals, dollars or percentage amounts of changes may not represent the arithmetic summation or calculation of the figures that precede them. Any totals of key performance indicators presented as of a period end reflect the count as of the first day of the last month in the period. First-of-the-month counts are used because the economics of those counts generally impact the results for that monthly period, and most move-ins and openings occur on the first day of the month.
Workstation Capacity
Workstation capacity represents the estimated number of workstations available at total open locations.
Workstation capacity is a key indicator of our scale and our capacity to sell memberships across our network of locations. Our future sales and marketing expenses and capital expenditures will be a function of our efforts to increase workstation capacity. The cost at which we build out our workstations affects our capital expenditures, and the cost at which we acquire memberships and fill our workstations affects our sales and marketing expenses. As of December 2021, we had total workstation capacity of 912 thousand, down 11% from 1,030 thousand as of December 2020, with the decrease as a direct result of the Company's continued operational restructuring efforts to exit leases throughout 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2021.
Workstation capacity is presented in this Form 10-K rounded to the nearest thousand. Workstation capacity is based on management’s best estimates of capacity at a location based on our inventory management system and sales layouts and is not meant to represent the actual count of workstations at our locations.
Memberships
Memberships are the cumulative number of WeWork memberships, WeWork All Access memberships, and WeMemberships (the latter of which are certain predecessor products). WeWork memberships provide access to a workstation and represent the number of memberships from our various product offerings, including our standard dedicated desks, private offices and customized floors. WeWork All Access memberships are monthly memberships providing an individual with access to participating WeWork locations. WeMemberships are legacy products that provide member user login access to the WeWork member network online or through the mobile application as well as access to service offerings and the right to reserve space on an à la carte basis, among other benefits. Each WeWork membership, WeWork All Access membership and other virtual memberships is considered to be one membership.
The number of memberships is a key indicator of the adoption of our global membership network, the scale and reach of our network and our ability to fill our locations with members. Memberships also represent monetization opportunities from our current and future service offerings. Memberships are presented in this Form 10-K rounded to the nearest thousand. Memberships can differ from the number of individuals using workspace at our locations for a number of reasons, including members utilizing workspace for fewer individuals than the space was designed to accommodate.
As of December 2021, we had 635 thousand total memberships, which is an increase of 30% from the 490 thousand memberships as of December 2020. This increase in total memberships included a 254% increase in WeWork All Access and Other Legacy Memberships from 13 thousand as of December 2020 to 46 thousand as of December 2021.
Physical Occupancy Rate
Physical occupancy rates are calculated by dividing WeWork memberships by workstation capacity in a location. Physical occupancy rates are a way of measuring how full our workspaces are. As of December 2021, our physical occupancy rate was 65%, compared to 46% as of December 2020. The increase in physical occupancy rate was due to both a 24% increase in physical memberships as members are returning to the office and an 11% decrease in workstation capacity due to our continued operational restructuring efforts.
Enterprise Physical Membership Percentage
Enterprise memberships represent memberships attributable to Enterprise Members, which we define as organizations with 500 or more full-time employees. Enterprise Members are strategically important for our business as they typically sign membership agreements with longer-term commitments and for multiple solutions, which enhances our revenue visibility.
Enterprise physical membership percentage represents the percentage of our memberships attributable to these organizations. There is no minimum number of workstations that an organization needs to reserve in order to be considered an Enterprise Member. For example, an organization with 700 full-time employees that pays for 50 of its employees to occupy workstations at our locations would be considered one Enterprise Member with 50 memberships. As of December 2021, 47% of our Consolidated Locations physical memberships were attributable to Enterprise Members, down from 52% as of December 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, enterprise memberships accounted for 48% of membership and service revenue compared to 49% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To evaluate the performance of our business, we rely on both our results of operations prepared in accordance with GAAP as well as certain non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow. These non-GAAP measures, as discussed further below, are not defined or calculated under principles, standards or rules that comprise GAAP. Accordingly, the non-GAAP financial measures we use and refer to should not be viewed as a substitute for financial measures calculated in accordance
with GAAP and we encourage you not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business, financial condition or results of operations. These non-GAAP financial measures are supplemental measures that we believe provide management and our investors with a more detailed understanding of our performance. Our definitions of Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow described below are specific to our business and you should not assume that they are comparable to similarly titled financial measures that may be presented by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
We supplement our GAAP financial results by evaluating Adjusted EBITDA which is a non-GAAP measure. We define "Adjusted EBITDA" as net loss before income tax (benefit) provision, interest and other (income) expenses, net, depreciation and amortization, restructuring and other related costs, impairment (gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets, stock-based compensation expense, stock-based payments for services rendered by consultants, change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities, legal, tax and regulatory reserves or settlements, legal costs incurred by the Company in connection with regulatory investigations and litigation regarding the Company’s 2019 withdrawn initial public offering and the related execution of the SoftBank Transactions, as defined in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K, net of any insurance or other recoveries, and expense related to mergers, acquisitions, divestitures and capital raising activities.
A reconciliation of net loss, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below:
(a)As presented on our consolidated statements of operations.
(b)Represents the non-cash expense of our equity compensation arrangements for employees, directors, and consultants.
(c)Represents the change in fair value of the contingent consideration associated with acquisitions as included in selling, general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statements of operations.
(d)Legal costs incurred by the Company in connection with regulatory investigations and litigation regarding the Company’s 2019 withdrawn initial public offering and the related execution of the SoftBank Transactions, net of any insurance or other recoveries. See section entitled "Legal Matters" in Note 23 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for details regarding the related regulatory investigations and litigation matters.
When used in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a useful supplemental measure of operating performance because it facilitates comparisons of historical performance by excluding non-cash items such as stock-based payments, fair market value adjustments and impairment charges and other amounts not directly attributable to our primary operations, such as the impact of restructuring costs, acquisitions, disposals, non-routine investigations, litigation and settlements. Depreciation and amortization relate primarily to the depreciation of our leasehold improvements,
equipment and furniture. These capital expenditures are incurred and capitalized subsequent to the commencement of our leases and are depreciated over the lesser of the useful life of the asset or the term of the lease. The initial capital expenditures are assessed by management as an investing activity, and the related depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges that are not considered in management’s assessment of the daily operating performance of our locations. As a result, the impact of depreciation and amortization is excluded from our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA. Restructuring and other related costs relate primarily to the decision to slow growth and terminate leases and are therefore not ordinary course costs directly attributable to the daily operation of our locations. In addition, while the legal costs incurred by the Company in connection with regulatory investigations and litigation regarding the Company’s 2019 withdrawn initial public offering and the related execution of the SoftBank Transactions are cash expenses, these are not expected to be recurring after the matters are resolved and they do not represent expenses necessary for our business operations.
Adjusted EBITDA is also a key metric used internally by our management to evaluate performance and develop internal budgets and forecasts.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP and does not provide a complete understanding of our operating results as a whole. Some of these limitations are:
•it does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•it does not reflect our interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•it does not reflect our tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
•it does not reflect historical capital expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•although stock-based compensation expenses are non-cash charges, we rely on equity compensation to compensate and incentivize employees, directors and certain consultants, and we may continue to do so in the future; and
•although depreciation, amortization and impairments are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and this non-GAAP measure does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Free Cash Flow
Because of the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA, as noted above, we also supplement our GAAP results by evaluating Free Cash Flow, a non-GAAP measure. We define "Free Cash Flow" as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, each as presented in the Company's consolidated statements of cash flows and calculated in accordance with GAAP.
A reconciliation of net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Free Cash Flow is set forth below:
(a) As presented on our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Free Cash Flow is both a performance measure and a liquidity measure that we believe provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by or used in the business. Free Cash Flow is also a key metric used internally by our management to develop internal budgets, forecasts and performance targets.
Free Cash Flow has limitations as an analytical tool, should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP and does not provide a complete understanding of our results and liquidity as a whole. Some of these limitations are:
•it only includes cash outflows for purchases of property and equipment and not for other investing cash flow activity or financing cash flow activity;
•it is subject to variation between periods as a result of changes in working capital and changes in timing of receipts and disbursements;
•although non-cash GAAP straight-line lease costs are non-cash adjustments, these charges generally reflect amounts we will be required to pay our landlords in cash over the lifetime of our leases; and
•although stock-based compensation expenses are non-cash charges, we rely on equity compensation to compensate and incentivize employees, directors and certain consultants, and we may continue to do so in the future.
Key Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results
ChinaCo Financing and Deconsolidation
In September 2020, the shareholders of ChinaCo executed a restructuring and Series A subscription agreement (the "ChinaCo Agreement"). Pursuant to the ChinaCo Agreement, TBP agreed to subscribe for a new series of ChinaCo shares on October 2, 2020 ( the "Initial Investment Closing") for $100.0 million in total gross proceeds to ChinaCo. On September 29, 2021 (the "Subsequent Investment Closing"), TBP invested an additional $100.0 million in gross proceeds to ChinaCo. The ChinaCo Agreement also included the restructuring of the ownership interests of all other preferred and ordinary shareholders’ interests into new ordinary shares of ChinaCo and the conversion of a total of approximately $233 million in net intercompany payables, payable by ChinaCo to various wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company into new ordinary shares of ChinaCo such that subsequent to the Initial Investment Closing in October 2020, WeWork held 21.6% of the total shares issued by ChinaCo. Following the Second Investment Closing the Company's remaining interest in ChinaCo was 19.7%.
Pursuant to the terms of the ChinaCo Agreement, the rights of the ChinaCo shareholders were also amended such that upon the Initial Investment Closing, WeWork no longer retained the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance, and as a result, WeWork was no longer the primary beneficiary of ChinaCo and ChinaCo was deconsolidated from the Company's consolidated financial statements on October 2, 2020 (the "ChinaCo Deconsolidation"). As such, the Company's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 include 12 and nine months, respectively, of consolidated ChinaCo revenue and expense activity. Beginning on October 2, 2020, our remaining 21.6% ordinary share investment, valued at $26.3 million upon the ChinaCo Deconsolidation, is accounted for as an unconsolidated equity method investment.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a loss on the ChinaCo Deconsolidation of $153.0 million included in impairment/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets in the consolidated statement of operations. During the first quarter of 2021, the Company discontinued applying the equity method on the ChinaCo investment when the carrying amount was reduced to zero, resulting in a loss of $29.3 million included in equity method investments in the consolidated statement of operations.
See also Note 7 and Note 10 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details regarding the ChinaCo Agreement and the ChinaCo Deconsolidation and discontinuation of applying the equity method, respectively.
ChinaCo contributed the following to the Company's consolidated results of operations and Adjusted EBITDA prior to its deconsolidation on October 2, 2020, in each case excluding amounts that eliminate in consolidation:
(1) A reconciliation of net loss, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below:
See Note 24 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for details regarding various related party fees payable by ChinaCo to the Company subsequent to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation.
Restructuring and Impairments
In September 2019, we commenced an operational restructuring program to improve our financial position and refocus on our core space-as-a-service business, establishing a clear path to profitable growth.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we were successful in achieving a 43% reduction totaling $1.2 billion in total costs associated with selling, general and administrative expenses as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we achieved an additional 37% reduction totaling $594.1 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we also terminated leases associated with a total of 98 and 24 previously opened locations, respectively, and 8 and 82 pre-open locations, respectively, as part of our efforts to right-size our existing real estate portfolio to better match supply with demand in certain markets and to help improve overall operating performance. Included in the lease terminations during the year ended December 31, 2020, were nine previously opened locations and seven pre-open locations that were terminated in ChinaCo prior to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation on October 2, 2020.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we also successfully amended over 230 and 200 leases, respectively, for a combination of partial terminations to reduce our leased space, rent reductions, rent deferrals, offsets for tenant improvement allowances and other strategic changes. These amendments and full and partial lease terminations have resulted in an estimated reduction of approximately $8.8 billion in total future undiscounted fixed minimum lease cost payments that were scheduled to be paid over the life of the original executed lease agreements. The ChinaCo Deconsolidation also resulted in a decline of approximately $2.7 billion in our consolidated total future undiscounted fixed minimum lease cost payments based on the future obligations that existed as of September 30, 2020 immediately prior to the deconsolidation.
Management is continuing to evaluate our real estate portfolio in connection with our ongoing restructuring efforts and expects to exit additional leases over the remainder of the restructuring period. During 2022, the Company anticipates there may be additional restructuring and related costs consisting primarily of lease termination charges, other exit costs and costs related to ceased use buildings and employee termination benefits, as the Company is still in the process of finalizing its operational restructuring plans.
As of December 31, 2021, we believe that the positive changes we have made and our focused business plan with enhanced cost discipline will set the stage for our future success as we continue to increase our membership offerings and expand our footprint strategically through flexible and capital light growth alternatives.
As the Company continues to execute on its operational restructuring program and experiences the benefits of our efforts to create a leaner, more efficient organization, results may be less comparable period over period.
See Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding our restructuring and impairment activity.
Asset Dispositions
In connection with our operational restructuring program, and our refocus on our core space-as-a-service offering, we have been successful in the disposition of certain non-core operations in 2020 including:
•Flatiron, acquired in 2017, was sold in August 2020;
•SpaceIQ, a workplace management software platform acquired in 2019, was sold in May 2020;
•Meetup, a web-based platform that brings people together for face to face interactions acquired in 2017, was sold in March 2020, with the Company retaining a 9% noncontrolling equity interest, accounted for as an equity method investment;
•Managed by Q, a workplace management platform acquired in 2019, was sold in March 2020;
•The 424 Fifth Venture (as defined in "-Liquidity and Capital Resources" below) real estate investment, acquired in 2019, was sold in March 2020; and
•Teem, a software-as-a-service workplace management solution acquired in 2018, was sold in January 2020.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we also completed the disposition of Conductor, a search engine optimization and enterprise content marketing solutions software company acquired in 2018, and in 2020 we wound down certain other non-core businesses, including Spacious Technologies Inc. ("Spacious"), Prolific Interactive LLC ("Prolific"), Waltz Inc. ("Waltz") and WeGrow.
There were no dispositions or intangible asset or goodwill impairments during the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenue generated prior to the disposition of the non-core offerings listed above is recorded in Other Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021.
See Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding historical dispositions and the related impairments and gains recorded on sale.
Growth Strategy Changes
As we enter into more management agreements and/or participating leases, our net loss, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow may be negatively impacted as we share some of our margin with landlords or other partners in exchange for them funding the capital expenditures at a particular location. Under a participating lease, the landlord typically pays or reimburses us for the full build-out of the space and we generally do not pay a specified annual rent, but rather rent is determined based on revenues or profits from the space. Similarly, in a management agreement, the partner may fund all capital expenditures to build out the space to our design specifications and maintains full responsibility for the space, while we function as the manager and receive an agreed upon management fee. In contrast to standard lease arrangements where we receive the full benefit of the future margin from a given location, under these alternative arrangements, we share portions of this future margin with the landlord or other partner. The percentage of open locations subject to such alternative arrangements was approximately 24% as of December 2021 and 2020, compared to 15% as of December 31, 2019. The increase in this percentage year over year is primarily driven by the October 2, 2020 transition of ChinaCo from a primarily traditional consolidated lease structure to an unconsolidated management agreement arrangement with the leases now controlled by TBP. This percentage may continue to increase as our response to the COVID-19 pandemic and our operational restructuring in general may include the conversion of certain traditional leases to management agreements.
COVID-19 and Impact on our Business
In late 2019, an outbreak of COVID-19 had emerged and by March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. Since that time, COVID-19 has resulted in various governments imposing numerous restrictions, including travel bans, quarantines, stay-at-home orders, social distancing requirements and mandatory closure of “non-essential” businesses.
We continue to face a period of uncertainty as a result of the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and expect there may continue to be a material impact on demand for our space-as-a-service offering in the short-term.
As a result, the Company’s business was significantly disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the Company’s operations have been significantly reduced. In particular, markets in which the Company operates both in the United States and internationally, and the state and local governments in these areas, among others, have in the past implemented stay-at-home orders, social distancing requirements and mandatory closures of all “non-essential” businesses, and have either re-implemented or may in the
future re-implement these or other restrictions, in an effort to curb the spread of COVID-19. In response to these measures, the Company has previously temporarily closed certain locations in various U.S. and international markets and may also do so in the future, in an effort to help protect the health and safety of its employees and members, and various planned new location openings have been delayed. In addition, the spread of COVID-19 has caused the Company to modify its business practices (including employee travel, employee work locations and cancellation of physical participation in meetings, events and conferences), and the Company may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that the Company determines are in the best interests of its employees and members.
The Company had also been, and may continue to be, adversely impacted by member churn, non-payment (or delayed payment) from members or members seeking payment concessions or deferrals or cancellations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although new sales volumes improved during the second half of 2021, the Company continued to experience reduced new sales volumes at our locations during 2021, which negatively affected, and may continue to negatively affect, the Company's results of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's bad debt expense increased to $67.5 million from $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, and subsequently improved to $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company is continuing to actively monitor its accounts receivable balances in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and also ceased recording revenue on certain existing contracts where collectability is not probable. The Company determined collectability was not probable and did not recognize revenue totaling approximately $36.9 million on such contracts, net of recoveries since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company reached settlement agreements with members on certain of these contracts and recognized revenue related to these recoveries of approximately $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We also continue to engage with our members as it relates to COVID-19 related payment deferral programs. Additionally, in order to retain our members, we may offer additional discounts or deferrals that may continue to negatively impact our net loss, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow. Average revenue per Physical Member for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 declined 7% and 4%, respectively as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The implementation of professional distancing standards, de-densification of common areas and reconfiguring of offices, may also impact our key performance indicators and the comparability of our results. Our key performance indicators may also be impacted by the speed at which we can open locations and stabilize occupancy at those locations, as well as the average revenue per WeWork membership that we generate, which all may continue to decline in the short-term as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have sought to mitigate the operational and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business by taking the following measures:
•Proactively negotiating with landlords on a location-by-location based approach for deferrals, abatements and the conversion of some traditional leases to management agreements.
•Continuing our restructuring efforts and reorganizing our business and operating model with the goal of creating a leaner, more efficient organization to accelerate our path to positive Adjusted EBITDA.
•Temporarily delaying certain new location openings and the capital investment associated with the expansion of our portfolio.
•Taking steps to delay or reduce spending during this period of disruption in areas such as marketing, professional fees, personnel cost and maintenance capital. This is in addition to significant organic reductions in variable expenses such as consumables, utilities, sales commissions and broker referrals, among others, related to overall lower business activity.
In response to COVID-19, our product, design, technology and member experience teams are also working together to enhance our spaces and ensure that we are prepared to satisfy our members' changing needs for space if and when they consider a return to work in the coming months. The Company has been awarded a Global Certificate of Conformity for the company’s health and safety enhancements from Bureau Veritas, an internationally recognized testing, inspection, and certification organization. The certification was awarded after an independent audit of our COVID-19 health and safety measures, response plans, and space modifications.
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated our efforts to digitize our real estate offering through the launch of the WeWork All Access and WeWork On Demand products. WeWork All Access is a monthly subscription-based model that provides members with access to book space at any participating WeWork location within their home country. Through WeWork All Access, members can book dedicated desks, conference rooms and private offices right from their phones - enabling users to choose when, where and how they work. WeWork On Demand provides users pay-as-you-go access to book individual workspace or conference rooms at nearby WeWork locations, giving members the flexibility to book individual workspace by the hour or conference rooms by the day on the WeWork On Demand mobile app.
While the total effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our business are uncertain, our senior management team is proactively monitoring its impact on a daily basis and will continue to adjust our operations as necessary.
We also believe our liquidity position will be sufficient to help us mitigate the near-term uncertainty associated with COVID-19. As of December 31, 2021, we had over $1.5 billion of cash and unfunded cash commitments, which includes $923.7 million of cash and cash equivalents on our consolidated balance sheet, as well as access to an additional $550.0 million in undrawn senior secured debt commitments. In addition to the Company's cash and unfunded cash commitments as of December 31, 2021, there was $0.5 billion in remaining letter of credit availability under the 2020 LC Facility (see the section entitled "-Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information on our liquidity position and undrawn debt availability).
While we cannot reasonably estimate the impact of COVID-19 on our future financial condition and results of operations, we do anticipate that it will likely have a continued negative impact in the near-term. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we observed indicators of recovery with an increase of Systemwide Memberships to 635 thousand as of December 2021 from 490 thousand as of December 2020. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to impact our business depends on future developments, including those that are highly uncertain, cannot be predicted and are outside our control, including new information which may quickly emerge regarding the severity of the virus, the spread and impact of new variants, the scope of the pandemic and the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, vaccination rollout plans, as well as actions the Company is taking including the duration of our location closures, delays in new openings, our ongoing negotiations with landlords and how quickly we can resume normal operations, among others.
Components of Results of Operations
We assess the performance of our locations differently based on whether the revenues and expenses of the location are consolidated within our results of operations, which we refer to as Consolidated Locations, or whether the revenues and expenses of the location are not consolidated within our results of operations but we are entitled to a management fee for our services, such as locations (“IndiaCo locations”, "ChinaCo locations" and "Israel locations," and, collectively, Unconsolidated Locations) operated by WeWork India Services Private Limited, TBP and Ampa, respectively. Beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020, ChinaCo locations are included in Unconsolidated Locations. Prior to and during the nine months ended September 30, 2020, ChinaCo locations were included in Consolidated Locations. The term “locations” includes only Consolidated Locations when used in the sections entitled “-Components of Results of Operations" and "-Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020
and 2019” but includes both Consolidated Locations and Unconsolidated Locations when used elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Revenue
Revenue includes membership and service revenue as well as other revenue as described below.
Membership revenue represents membership fees, net of discounts, from sales of WeWork memberships, WeWork All Access Memberships, WeWork On Demand and WeMemberships, as well as any revenue associated with our former WeLive offering. We derive a significant majority of our revenue from recurring membership fees. The price of each membership varies based on the type of workplace solution selected by the member, the geographic location of the space occupied, and any monthly allowances for business services, such as conference room reservations and printing or copying allotments, that are included in the base membership fee. All memberships include access to our community through the WeWork app. Membership revenue is recognized monthly, on a ratable basis, over the life of the agreement, as access to space is provided.
Service revenue primarily includes additional billings to members for ancillary business services in excess of the monthly allowances mentioned above. Services offered to members include access to conference rooms, printing, photocopies, initial set-up fees, phone and IT services, parking fees and other services.
Service revenue also includes commissions we earn from third-party service providers. We offer access to a variety of business and other services to our members, often at exclusive rates, and receive a percentage of the sale when one of our members purchases a service from a third party. These services range from business services to lifestyle perks. Service revenue also includes any management fee income for services provided to IndiaCo locations, ChinaCo locations (subsequent to deconsolidation on October 2, 2020), and Israel locations (subsequent to the franchise agreement on June 1, 2021). Service revenue is recognized on a monthly basis as the services are provided.
Service revenue does not include any revenue recognized related to other non-core offerings not related to our space-as-a-service offering.
Other revenue primarily includes our former Powered by We design and development services in which we offered on-site office management that provides integrated design, construction and space management services. Also included in other revenue is other management and advisory fees earned.
Design and development services performed are recognized as revenue over time based on a percentage of contract costs incurred to date compared to the total estimated contract cost. The Company identifies only the specific costs incurred that contribute to the Company’s progress in satisfying the performance obligation. Contracts are generally segmented between types of services, such as consulting contracts, design and construction contracts, and operate contracts. Revenues related to each respective type of contract are recognized as or when the respective performance obligations are satisfied. When total cost estimates for these types of arrangements exceed revenues in a fixed-price arrangement, the estimated losses are recognized immediately.
Income generated from sponsorships and ticket sales from WeWork branded events are recognized upon the occurrence of the event. Other revenues are generally recognized over time, on a monthly basis, as the services are performed.
Other revenue also includes revenue generated from various other non-core offerings, not directly related to the revenue we earn under our membership agreements through which we provide space-as-a-service. For example, the revenue generated by the following during the periods subsequent to their acquisition and prior to their disposition or wind down, are all classified as other revenue: Flatiron, Meetup, SpaceIQ, Managed by Q, Teem, Prolific, Waltz and WeGrow (collectively, our "non-core operations" or "non-core offerings").
As other revenue includes significant amounts related to non-core operations that have been disposed of or have been wound down, we expect these other revenues to continue to decline. See the section entitled "-Key Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Results-Asset Dispositions" above.
Location Operating Expenses
Location operating expenses include the day-to-day costs of operating an open location and exclude pre-opening costs, depreciation and amortization and general sales and marketing, which are separately recorded.
Lease Cost
Our most significant location operating expense is lease cost. Lease cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease term in accordance with GAAP based on the following three key components:
•Lease cost contractually paid or payable represents cash payments due for base and contingent rent, common area maintenance amounts and real estate taxes payable under the Company’s lease agreements, recorded on an accrual basis of accounting, regardless of the timing of when such amounts were actually paid.
•Amortization of lease incentives represents the amortization of amounts received or receivable for tenant improvement allowances and broker commissions (collectively, “lease incentives”), amortized on a straight-line basis over the terms of our leases.
•Non-cash GAAP straight-line lease cost represents the adjustment required under GAAP to recognize the impact of "free rent" periods and lease cost escalation clauses on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Non-cash GAAP straight-line lease cost also includes the amortization of capitalized initial direct costs associated with obtaining a lease.
Other Location Operating Expenses
Other location operating expenses typically include utilities, ongoing repairs and maintenance, cleaning expenses, office expenses, security expenses, credit card processing fees and food and beverage costs. Location operating expenses also include personnel and related costs for the teams managing our community operations, including member relations, new member sales and member retention and facilities management.
Pre-Opening Location Expenses
Pre-opening location expenses include all expenses incurred while a location is not open for members. The primary components of pre-opening location expenses are lease cost expense, including our share of tenancy costs (including real estate and related taxes and common area maintenance charges), utilities, cleaning, personnel and related expenses and other costs incurred prior to generating revenue. Personnel expenses are included in pre-opening location expenses as we staff our locations prior to their opening to help ensure a smooth opening and a successful member move-in experience. Pre-opening location expenses also consist of expenses incurred during the period in which a workspace location has been closed for member operations and all members have been relocated to a new workspace location, prior to management's decision to enter negotiations to terminate a lease.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses consist primarily of personnel and stock-based compensation expenses related to our corporate employees, technology, consulting, legal and other professional services expenses, and costs for our corporate offices, such as costs associated with our billings, collections, purchasing and accounts payable functions. Also included in SG&A expenses are general sales and marketing efforts, including advertising costs, member referral fees, and costs
associated with strategic marketing events, and various other costs we incur to manage and support our business.
SG&A expenses also include cost of goods sold in connection with our former Powered by We on-site office design, development and management solutions and the costs of services or goods sold related to our various other non-core offerings described above in the periods subsequent to their acquisition and prior to their disposition or wind down.
Also included are corporate design, development, warehousing, logistics and real estate costs and expenses incurred researching and pursuing new markets, solutions and services, and other expenses related to the Company's growth and global expansion incurred during periods when the Company was focused on expansion. These costs include non-capitalized personnel and related expenses for our development, design, product, research, real estate, growth talent acquisition, mergers and acquisitions, legal, technology research and development teams and related professional fees and other expenses incurred such as growth related recruiting fees, employee relocation costs, due diligence, integration costs, transaction costs, contingent consideration fair value adjustments relating to acquisitions, write-off of previously capitalized costs for which the Company is no longer moving forward with the lease or project and other routine asset impairments and write-offs.
We expect that overall SG&A expenses will decrease as a percentage of revenue over time as we continue to execute on our operational restructuring plans aimed to enhance our operating efficiency and leverage the historical investments in people and technology that we have made to support the growth of our global community. We also expect decreases in SG&A expenses over time due to the sale or wind down of certain non-core operations discussed above. Prior to 2020, much of our sales and marketing efforts were focused on pre-opening locations and non-mature locations. With the decline in overall occupancy and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our mature locations continuing in 2021, future sales and marketing costs may be required to help as we continue to restabilize our mature locations.
Restructuring and Other Related Costs and Impairment/(gain on sale) of Goodwill, Intangibles and Other Assets
See the section entitled "-Key Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Results-Restructuring and Impairments" above for details surrounding the components of these financial statement line items.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization primarily relates to the depreciation expense recorded on our property and equipment, the most significant component of which are the leasehold improvements made to our real estate portfolio.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Interest and other income (expense) is comprised of interest income, interest expense, loss on extinguishment of debt, earnings from equity method and other investments, foreign currency gain (loss), and gain (loss) from change in fair value of related party financial instruments.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the Company’s consolidated results of operations and other key metrics for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately on the depreciation and amortization line in the amount of $671.9 million, $715.4 million and $515.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)Includes cost of revenue in the amount of $91.3 million, $248.8 million and $384.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Excludes depreciation and amortization of none, $0.2 million and $14.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, shown separately below.
(1)All key performance indicators are presented as of December 2021, 2020 and 2019, except for membership and services revenue which are presented for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(2)Consolidated Locations and Total Locations Memberships include WeMemberships of 3 thousand, 6 thousand and 43 thousand as of December 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. WeMemberships are legacy products that provide member user login access to the WeWork member network online or through the mobile application as well as access to service offerings and the right to reserve space on an à la carte basis, among other benefits.
(3)Effective October 2, 2020, the Company deconsolidated ChinaCo and as a result, beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020, the workstation capacity, memberships, occupancy and enterprise physical memberships percentages for Consolidated Locations as of December 2021 excludes the impact of ChinaCo locations, and they are included in the totals for Unconsolidated Locations presented as of December 2021, with no impact on Total Locations. Prior to October 2, 2020, ChinaCo was still consolidated and therefore the key performance indicators for ChinaCo are included in Consolidated Locations as of December 2019, and the Consolidated Locations membership and services revenue for the periods prior to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation.
(4)On June 1, 2021, we closed a franchise agreement with Ampa and transferred the building operations and obligations of our Israel locations to Ampa. Beginning on June 1, 2021, our Israel locations are no longer Consolidated Locations and are classified as Unconsolidated Locations. Included in Consolidated Locations indicators above are 12 thousand and 10 thousand workstation capacity and 8 thousand and 8 thousand memberships at Israel locations as of December 2020 and 2019, respectively. Consolidated Locations membership and services revenue include Isreal results prior to June 1, 2021.
(5)Unconsolidated membership and service revenues represents the results of Unconsolidated Locations that typically generate ongoing management fees for the Company at a rate of 2.75-4.00%.
(6)Systemwide Location membership and service revenues represents the results of all locations regardless of ownership.
Consolidated Results of Operations as a Percentage of Revenue
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations information as a percentage of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately on the depreciation and amortization line.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
Total revenue decreased $845.7 million primarily driven by membership and service revenue, which decreased $665.5 million to $2,467.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $3,133.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in membership and service revenue was primarily driven by an 18% decrease in average physical memberships to approximately 416 thousand physical memberships as of December 31, 2021 from approximately 505 thousand physical memberships as of December 31, 2020. We also continued to offer COVID-19 related discounts to retain our members, decreasing the average revenue per physical member by 3% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Throughout 2021, the Company reached settlement agreements with members on certain contracts in which we ceased recognizing revenue for where we deemed collectability was not probable previously and recognized revenue related to these recoveries of approximately $19.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. For additional information, see the section entitled "Key Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results-COVID-19 and Impact on our Business" above. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in average physical memberships during the year ended December 31, 2021, we accelerated our efforts to digitize our real estate offering through the launch of the WeWork All Access and WeWork On Demand products in 2021, attributing to $70.8 million of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Included in net decreases in membership and service revenue discussed above was a decrease of approximately $204.3 million in membership and service revenue related to ChinaCo. ChinaCo was deconsolidated as of October 2, 2020 and therefore contributed to consolidated membership and service revenue for nine months during the year ended December 31, 2020 but not during the same period in 2021.
Additionally, there was a 64% decrease in other revenue, which decreased to $102.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $282.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $180.2 million decrease primarily related to a $122.4 million decrease in revenue generated from our Powered by We solution, primarily Powered by We development services. Included within current year Powered by We development services is approximately $68.9 million related to a development project scheduled to be completed during 2022. There was also a $47.5 million decrease in other revenue primarily due to the sale of non-core ventures that were sold in 2020 as a result of our plan to refocus on our core space-as-a-
service business. The remaining $10.3 million net decrease is related to decreases in revenue from various other offerings, of which $2.0 million related to ChinaCo revenue.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
Total revenue decreased $42.7 million primarily driven by a 29% decrease in other revenue, which decreased $117.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a $74.6 million increase in membership and service revenue. This increase in membership and service revenue was primarily driven by a 6% growth in our monthly average membership base for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the monthly average membership base for the year ended December 31, 2019. Overall memberships as of December 31, 2020 were down as compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, however the COVID-19 related declines during 2020 occurred at a slower rate than the growth in memberships experienced during 2019, resulting in an increase in monthly average memberships period over period. The positive impact on revenue from the increase in monthly average memberships was also partially offset by increases in COVID-19 related discounts and a lower than average incremental service revenue earned during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decline in service revenue was primarily related to conference room charges based on a decline in average utilization primarily as a result of COVID-19. Average revenue per WeWork membership declined approximately 6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Included in the net increases in membership and service revenue discussed above was an offsetting decrease of approximately $21.1 million in membership and service revenue related to ChinaCo. ChinaCo was deconsolidated as of October 2, 2020 and therefore contributed only 9 months of consolidated membership and service revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 12 months of consolidated membership and service revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other revenue decreased $117.3 million, primarily related to a $39.5 million payment from an affiliate of SBG relating to the Creator Fund (defined below) recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 that did not reoccur during the year ended December 31, 2020, a $74.2 million decrease primarily due to the sale of non-core ventures that were sold in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 as a result of our plan to refocus on our core space-as-a-service business, and a $14.9 million decrease in revenue generated from our former Powered by We solution. The decreases were partially offset by a $14.2 million increase in revenue related to management fees earned by the WeCap Manager. The remaining $2.9 million net increase related to revenue from various other offerings.
Location Operating Expenses
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
Location operating expenses decreased $458.3 million due primarily to a decrease of approximately $266.3 million in location operating expenses related to ChinaCo. ChinaCo was deconsolidated as of October 2, 2020 and therefore contributed to consolidated location operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 but not during the same period in 2021. The remaining $192.0 million decrease was primarily due to decline in office expenses, payroll, consulting fees and physical occupancy, including real estate operating lease costs primarily as a result of COVID-19 and cost cutting strategies. As a percentage of total revenue, location operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 16 percentage points to 120% compared to 104% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in location operating expenses as a percentage of total revenue was primarily impacted by the overall decline in average revenue, discussed above.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company terminated leases associated with a total of 98 previously open locations. Management is continuing to evaluate our real estate portfolio in connection with its ongoing restructuring efforts and may exit additional leases during 2022. The location decreases were partially offset by the opening of 30 locations during the year ended December 31, 2021, of which, 5 were previously placed back into pre-open and re-opened during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company also successfully amended over 230 leases for a combination of partial terminations to reduce our leased space, rent reductions, rent deferrals, offsets for tenant improvement allowances and other strategic changes.
Our most significant location operating expense is real estate operating lease cost, which includes the following components and changes:
The following table includes the components of real estate operating lease cost included in location operating expenses as a percentage of membership revenue:
The $107.2 million decrease in lease cost contractually paid or payable was generally due to continued lease terminations during the year ended December 31, 2021, and the ChinaCo Deconsolidation in 2020.
The $149.0 million decrease in non-cash GAAP straight-line lease cost was driven by continued lease terminations during the year ended December 31, 2021, the ChinaCo Deconsolidation in 2020, decreases in lease cost escalations and the end of free rent periods. The impact of straight-lining lease cost typically increases straight-line lease cost adjustments in the first half of the life of a lease, when lease cost recorded in accordance with GAAP exceeds cash payments made, and then decreases lease cost in the second half of the life of the lease when lease cost is less than the cash payments required. The impact of straight-lining of lease cost nets to zero over the life of a lease.
The $17.2 million decrease in amortization of lease incentives benefit was primarily due to locations that incurred amortization of lease incentive benefits during the year ended December 31, 2020 no longer incurring amortization during the year ended December 31, 2021 mainly through lease terminations.
The remaining net decrease in all other location operating expenses consisted of decreases related to bad debt expense, cleaning expenses, the purchase of COVID-19 prevention supplies during 2020, and other office expenses as a result of a reduction in the use of certain locations during the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of COVID-19. Additionally, the decrease was also due to the reductions in operating costs as a result of the Company's efforts to create a more efficient organization, including payroll and consulting expenses. These were offset by an increase in repairs and maintenance, utilities and other various operating costs during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
Location operating expenses increased $784.6 million due primarily to an increase in real estate operating lease cost resulting from the overall growth in our workstation capacity and the increase in the number of open locations. As a percentage of total revenue, location operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 24 percentage points to 104% compared to 80% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the growth in workstation capacity combined with a decline in memberships, occupancy and average revenue per member, primarily as a result of COVID-19 as discussed above.
The total net increase in our 2020 location operating expenses was partially offset by the closure of previously opened locations. During 2020 we strategically closed 24 previously open Consolidated
Locations, including 9 associated with ChinaCo during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 that it was consolidated.
Our most significant location operating expense is real estate operating lease cost, which includes the following components and changes:
The following table includes the components of real estate operating lease cost included in location operating expenses as a percentage of membership revenue:
The reasons for the $793.6 million net increase in total real estate operating lease cost and the increase in the amounts as a percentage of revenue was primarily driven by the growth in workstation capacity combined with a decline in memberships, occupancy and average revenue per member, primarily as a result of COVID-19 as discussed above. The $30.3 million decrease in non-cash GAAP straight-line lease cost was primarily driven by the ending of free rent periods, cash rent increases due to lease cost escalations and the aging of our portfolio. The impact of straight-lining lease cost typically increases lease cost in the first half of the life of a lease, when lease cost recorded in accordance with GAAP exceeds cash payments made, and then decreases lease cost in the second half of the life of the lease when lease cost is less than the cash payments required. The impact of straight-lining of lease cost nets to zero over the life of a lease.
Total location operating expenses also declined by $37.2 million during 2020 as a result of higher stock-based compensation expense incurred during 2019 primarily driven by the 2019 Tender Offer and 2020 Tender Offer (each as defined in Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K), through which common shares were acquired (or, in the case of the 2020 Tender Offer, offered to be acquired subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions) from WeWork employees at a price greater than the fair market value of the shares, which resulted in additional stock-based compensation expense during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The remaining $28.2 million net increase in all other location operating expenses consisted of increases related to cleaning expenses, the purchase of additional COVID-19 prevention supplies, increases in bad debt expense and other expenses required to operate our locations and were offset by reductions in variable operating costs which were lower than average as a result of a reduction in the use of certain locations during 2020 as a result of COVID-19 as well as reductions in operating costs as a result of the Company's efforts to create a more efficient organization.
Pre-Opening Location Expenses
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
Pre-opening location expenses decreased $114.0 million to $159.1 million, primarily as a result of the Company's decision in the fourth quarter of 2019 and first half of 2020 to decelerate the growth rate of our platform and to focus on increasing the profitability of our existing portfolio of locations. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was an average of approximately 60 and 115 locations where we had taken possession of the new leased spaces but the location had not yet opened for member operations, respectively. Included in the 60 pre-open locations was an average of approximately 15 locations that were closed for member operations and all members have been relocated to a new workspace location during the year ended December 31, 2021, but management has not yet ceased use of the building.
Included in the net decreases discussed above was a decrease of approximately $13.5 million in pre-opening expenses related to ChinaCo. ChinaCo was deconsolidated as of October 2, 2020 and therefore contributed to consolidated pre-opening expenses for nine months during the year ended December 31, 2020 but none during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our most significant pre-opening location expense is real estate operating lease cost for the period before a location is open for member operations, which includes the following components and changes:
The $17.9 million decrease in lease cost contractually paid or payable was generally the result of the decrease in the number of pre-opening locations described above.
The $110.7 million decrease in non-cash GAAP straight-line lease cost is primarily driven by the decrease in pre-opening locations and fewer free rent periods associated with our pre-opening locations as described above. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, lease cost recorded in accordance with GAAP exceeded cash payments required to be made. As the number of pre-opening locations at the end of each period has decreased as described above, so too have non-cash GAAP straight-line lease costs relating to those pre-open locations. The impact of straight-lining of lease cost nets to zero over the life of a lease.
The $19.2 million decrease in amortization of lease incentives benefit was driven by the decrease in pre-opening locations discussed above.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
Pre-opening location expenses decreased $298.9 million to $273.0 million primarily as a result of the Company's decision in the fourth quarter of 2019 to decelerate the growth rate of our platform and to focus on increasing the profitability of our existing portfolio of locations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also successfully terminated leases associated with a total of 82 consolidated pre-open locations, including 7 associated with ChinaCo during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 that it was consolidated, which also contributed to the decline in expense. As of December 1, 2020, there were 59 locations where we had taken possession of the new leased spaces but the location had not yet opened for member operations compared to 165 as of December 1, 2019.
Our most significant pre-opening location expense is real estate operating lease cost for the period before a location is open for member operations, which includes the following components and changes:
The $9.2 million increase in lease cost contractually paid or payable was generally the result of fewer free rent periods associated with our pre-opening locations during the year ended December 31, 2020 than during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The $312.3 million decrease in non-cash GAAP straight-line lease cost is primarily driven by the decrease in pre-opening locations and fewer free rent periods associated with our pre-opening locations as described above. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, lease cost recorded in accordance with GAAP exceeded cash payments required to be made. As the number of pre-opening locations at the end of each period has decreased as described above, so too have non-cash GAAP straight-line lease costs relating to those pre-open locations. The impact of straight-lining of lease cost nets to zero over the life of a lease.
The $19.9 million decrease in amortization of lease incentives benefit was driven by the decrease in pre-opening locations discussed above.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
SG&A expenses decreased $594.1 million to $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, from the year ended December 31, 2020. Included in the $594.1 million decrease is a $68.9 million decrease in SG&A expenses related to ChinaCo. ChinaCo was deconsolidated as of October 2, 2020 and therefore contributed to consolidated SG&A expenses for nine months during the year ended December 31, 2020 but none during the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of total revenue, SG&A expenses decreased by 8 percentage points to 39% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 47% for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by our decision during the fourth quarter of 2019 and into 2020 to slow our growth and focus on our goal of creating a leaner, more efficient organization resulting in reductions in headcount, including a $309.7 million decrease in employee compensation and benefits expenses, professional fees and other expenses. In addition, as a result of the temporary business interruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company was proactive in taking steps to delay or reduce spending in areas such as marketing with a steady increase in marketing costs during the year ended December 31, 2021 but an overall decrease of $29.2 million in advertising and promotional expenses compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We also incurred fewer variable sales costs that are driven by our portfolio stabilization throughout 2021 and increased expense management, specifically on broker agreements during the year ended December 31, 2021, such as member referral fees which declined by $28.5 million during year ended December 31, 2021.
Included in the decrease in SG&A expenses was a $157.5 million decrease in cost of revenue attributable to our former Powered by We solution and non-core businesses that were sold or wound down as the Company has refocused on its core space-as-a-service offering.
Partially offsetting the increases discussed above included an increase of $53.0 million of stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year end December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $1.2 billion to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, from the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of total revenue, SG&A expenses decreased by 34 percentage points to 47% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by our decision during the fourth quarter of 2019 to slow our growth and focus on our goal of creating a leaner, more efficient organization.
The decrease in SG&A expenses was driven by a $310.0 million decrease in other employee compensation and benefits expenses, a $153.6 million decrease in professional fees, a $60.0 million
decrease in routine impairment charges relating to excess, obsolete, or slow-moving inventory, and an $88.5 million decrease in travel expenses all driven by progress made through our restructuring program and efforts to create a leaner, more efficient organization. COVID-19 travel restrictions also contributed to the decline in our travel expense decline year-to-year.
Also included in the decrease in SG&A expenses was a $135.9 million decrease in cost of revenue attributable to non-core businesses which were sold or wound down during the fourth quarter of 2019 and during the year ended December 31, 2020 as the Company has refocused on its core space-as-a-service offering.
SG&A expenses decreased due to $94.5 million of costs associated with the withdrawn initial public offering registration statement and related bank credit facilities incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019, that did not reoccur during 2020. Partially offsetting these decreases, during 2020, we incurred $53.0 million in legal costs incurred by the Company in connection with regulatory investigations and litigation regarding our 2019 withdrawn initial public offering registration statement and the related execution of the SoftBank Transactions.
Included in the decrease in SG&A expenses was a $271.2 million decrease as a result of higher stock-based compensation expense incurred during 2019, primarily driven by the 2019 Tender Offer and 2020 Tender Offer (each, as defined in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K), through which common shares were acquired (or, in the case of the 2020 Tender Offer, offered to be acquired subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions) from WeWork employees at a price greater than the fair market value of the shares, which resulted in additional stock-based compensation expense during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decreases were partially offset by a $61.5 million increase in expense due to a $61.7 million benefit recorded by ChinaCo during the year ended December 31, 2019, relating to a decline in fair value of the contingent consideration payable in stock associated with ChinaCo's naked Hub acquisition, compared to a $0.1 million benefit recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, prior to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation. The decrease in fair value of contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by a decrease in the Company's projected obligation to issue additional shares of the Company's Class A Common Stock.
Restructuring and other related costs and Impairment/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets
Comparison of the year ended ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
Restructuring and other related costs increased $227.1 million to $433.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to a $366.9 million increase in employee termination costs, including the following transactions:
The restructuring cost increase was also due to $140.2 million increase in costs related to ceased use buildings.
Restructuring and other related costs was offset by a $273.9 million increase to gains on terminated leases associated with a total of 98 previously open locations and a $6.1 million decrease in legal and other exit costs. Management is continuing to evaluate our real estate portfolio in connection with its ongoing restructuring efforts and may exit additional leases during 2022.
In connection with the operational restructuring program and related changes in the Company's leasing plans and planned or completed disposition or wind down of certain non-core operations and projects, and the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations, the Company has also recorded various other non-routine write-offs, impairments and gains on sale of goodwill, intangibles and various other long-lived assets. Impairments/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets decreased $485.9 million to $870.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and included the following components in year:
For additional information on restructuring costs and impairments, see Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K and "-Key Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Results-Restructuring and Impairments" above.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
Restructuring and other related costs decreased $122.5 million to $206.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $185.0 million charge during 2019 relating to a non-compete agreement with Mr. Neumann, the Company's former CEO, which included a cash payment totaling $185.0 million to be paid by SBG (as defined in Note 1 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) to Mr. Neumann. We recorded this as an expense of the Company to be paid for by a principal shareholder as the Company also benefits from the arrangement through restricting Mr. Neumann's ability to provide similar services to a competing organization. The Company recognized the expense in full during 2019, with a corresponding increase in additional paid-in capital, representing a deemed capital contribution by SBG.
Restructuring and other related costs during 2020 also benefited by $37.4 million from net gains on lease terminations during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a $3.2 million net loss on lease terminations during 2019. During 2020, the Company terminated leases associated with a total of 82 consolidated pre-open locations, including 7 associated with ChinaCo during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 that it was consolidated and strategically closed 24 previously open Consolidated Locations, including 9 associated with ChinaCo during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 that it was consolidated. During 2019, the Company terminated leases associated with 2 pre-open locations in connection with its restructuring efforts which began in September 2019.
The restructuring cost decline was also offset by a $52.3 million increase in employee termination benefits as a result of further headcount reduction plans during 2020 and a $50.8 million increase in various other restructuring related costs both incurred as we continued to reiterate and execute on our plans to refocus on our core space-as-a-service business and create a leaner, more efficient organization.
In connection with the operational restructuring program and related changes in the Company's leasing plans and planned or completed disposition or wind down of certain non-core operations and projects, and the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations, the Company has also recorded various other non-routine write-offs, impairments and gains on sale of goodwill, intangibles and various other long-lived assets. Impairments/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets increased $1,020.9 million to $1,355.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and included the following components in year:
For additional information on restructuring costs and impairments, see Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K and "-Key Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Results-Restructuring and Impairments" above.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $69.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by a $39.2 million decrease related to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation. The remaining decrease in depreciation and amortization expense is due to the decrease in number of our Consolidated Locations and workstation capacity throughout 2021.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $189.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by an increase in costs associated with leasehold improvements, furniture, and equipment primarily associated with the growth of our platform, including the increase in the number of our Consolidated Locations and workstation capacity throughout 2019 and 2020.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
Interest and other income (expense), net decreased $1.5 billion to $(930.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a $1.2 billion decrease on net gain due to the change in fair value of related party financial instruments. The related party financial instruments are remeasured to fair value through their exercise dates, with such adjustments driven by changes in the Company's stock price. See Note 15 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further details on these related party financial instruments.
Foreign currency gains decreased by $282.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by decrease in the foreign currency denominated intercompany transactions that are not of a long-term investment nature as a result of our prior international expansion and currency fluctuations against the dollar. The $133.6 million foreign currency loss during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily impacted by fluctuations in the U.S. dollar-Euro, U.S. dollar-British Pound, U.S. dollar-Mexican Peso, and U.S. dollar-South Korean Won exchange rates.
Interest expense increased by $123.5 million primarily due to a $83.6 million increase in interest expense due to the increased principal balance of the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes, and a $31.8 million increase in deferred financing costs related to the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes and 2020 LC Facility and related amendment .
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company recognized a $77.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt due to the extinguishment of certain other loans as a result of principal prepayments, with no comparable activity during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The loss from equity method investments decreased $26.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to equity pick-ups to earnings and gains on sale of equity method investments partially offset by the Company's loss on its investment in ChinaCo and credit losses related to available-for-sale debt securities. See Note 10 of
the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further details on equity method and other investments.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
N/M = Not meaningful
Interest and other income, net increased $342.2 million to $532.4 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a $580.5 million increase on the net gain on the change in fair value of related party financial instruments. The related party financial instruments are remeasured to fair value through their exercise dates, with such adjustments driven by changes in the Company's stock price. See Note 13 and Note 15 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further details on these related party financial instruments and the related fair value measurements, respectively.
Foreign currency gain increased $119.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by increases in the foreign currency denominated intercompany transactions that are not of a long-term investment nature as a result of our international expansion and currency fluctuations against the dollar. The $149.2 million foreign currency gain during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily impacted by fluctuations in the U.S. dollar-Euro, U.S. dollar-British Pound, U.S. dollar-Chinese Yuan, and U.S. dollar-Korean Won exchange rates.
Interest expense increased by $231.6 million primarily due to an $80.6 million increase in amortization of deferred financing costs in 2020 associated with the new SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes Warrant and $88.3 million in amortization of deferred financing costs in 2020 associated with the new 2020 LC Facility Warrant (each as defined in the section entitled "- Liquidity and Capital Resources" below). The Company also incurred a $60.7 million increase in interest expense related to letters of credit under the new 2020 LC Facility and other letters of credit fees and a $15.0 million increase in interest expense related to the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes. The increase was partially offset by a $9.4 million net decrease in imputed interest on the Convertible Notes (as defined in Note 14 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) and change in the fair value of the derivative associated with the convertible note which was converted in July 2019. The remaining $3.6 million decrease was related to interest expense associated with surety bonds and convertible notes issued in lieu of cash security deposits, finance leases, and interest associated with other loans.
The loss on extinguishment of debt of $77.3 million was primarily driven by the repayment of the loans securing the 424 Fifth Venture (as defined below) upon the sale of the real estate in March 2020. We recognized a $71.6 million loss on extinguishment of the 424 Fifth Venture Loans (as defined below) representing the difference between the $756.6 million in cash paid, including a prepayment penalty of $56.1 million and the net carrying amount of the debt and unamortized debt issuance costs immediately prior to the extinguishment of $685.0 million. The remaining $5.7 million of loss primarily relates to a $4.7
million write-off of deferred financing costs in conjunction with the termination of the 2019 Credit Facility and 2019 LC Facility (each, as defined below) which were terminated in February 2020 in conjunction with the availability of the 2020 LC Facility, as well as a $1.0 million loss on the extinguishment of other loans.
Interest income decreased $36.3 million, primarily due to changes in the average cash on hand throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The loss from equity method investments increased $12.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, and was primarily due to credit losses recorded relating to available-for-sale debt securities partially offset by gains on the sale of equity method investments.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020
There was a $16.0 million net decrease in the tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the deconsolidation of ChinaCo in 2020, rate changes in certain non-US jurisdictions and lower withholding taxes paid. This was partially offset by additional valuation allowance recorded during year ended December 31, 2021.
Our effective income tax rate during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to the effect of certain non-deductible permanent differences, the effect of our operating in jurisdictions with various statutory tax rates, and valuation allowances. For additional information, see Note 18 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
There was a $26.1 million net decrease in the tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall decrease is primarily related to a reduction in withholding tax payments in the current year on our intercompany interest and management fees as well as the impact of changes in tax laws which generated additional tax expense in prior periods.
Our effective income tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to the effect of certain non-deductible permanent differences, the impact of rate changes in certain non-US jurisdictions, the ChinaCo Deconsolidation and the change in the valuation allowance recorded. For additional information, see Note 18 of the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
During 2017 through 2021, various consolidated subsidiaries issued equity to other parties in exchange for cash as more fully described in Note 7 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. As we have the power to direct the activities of these entities that most significantly impact their economic performance and the right to receive benefits that could potentially be
significant to these entities, they remain our consolidated subsidiaries, and the interests owned by the other investors and the net income or loss and comprehensive income or loss attributable to the other investors are reflected as noncontrolling interests on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and consolidated statements of comprehensive loss, respectively.
The decrease in the net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests from the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 of $511.9 million is primarily due to our decision during the fourth quarter of 2019 and first half of 2020 to slow our growth and focus on our goal of creating a leaner, more efficient organization. Included during the year ended December 31, 2020, were increases in net losses incurred by the JapanCo, ChinaCo (prior to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation), and PacificCo (prior to the PacificCo Roll-up), while during the year ended December 31, 2021, only JapanCo and LatamCo were included, as PacificCo became wholly owned and ChinaCo was deconsolidated.
On October 21, 2021, Mr. Neumann converted 19,896,032 vested WeWork Partnership Profits Interest Units into WeWork Partnership Class A common units. As a result of Mr. Neumann's 2.74% ownership of the WeWork Partnership, the Company allocated a loss of $15.6 million through his noncontrolling interest for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was based on the relative ownership interests of Class A common unit holders in the WeWork Partnership in the Company’s consolidated statement of income.
See Note 7 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion of these transactions. See Note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the Company’s non-consolidated VIEs.
The increase in the net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests from the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 of $194.4 million is primarily due to the continued expansion of operations and the corresponding increases in net losses incurred by JapanCo and ChinaCo (prior to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation) ventures and partially offset by the PacificCo Roll-up which occurred in April 2020 as losses from PacificCo were included in noncontrolling interest for the full year of 2019 and the three months ended March 31, 2020, with no losses from PacificCo allocated to noncontrolling interest during the remainder of 2020.
Net Loss Attributable to WeWork Inc.
As a result of the factors described above, we recorded a net loss attributable to WeWork Inc. of $(4.4) billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $(3.1) billion and $(3.3) billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain unaudited financial and operating information for the quarterly periods presented. The quarterly information includes all adjustments (consisting of normal recurring adjustments) that, in the opinion of management, are necessary for a fair presentation of the information presented. This information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
(a) Unconsolidated membership and service revenues represents the results of Unconsolidated Locations that typically generate ongoing management fees for the Company at a rate of 2.75-4.00%.
(b) Systemwide Location membership and service revenues represents the results of all locations regardless of ownership.
(1) Exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately on the depreciation and amortization line.
(2) A reconciliation of net loss, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below:
(3) Effective October 2, 2020, the Company deconsolidated ChinaCo and as a result, beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020, the workstation capacity, memberships, and occupancy percentages for Consolidated Locations excludes the impact of ChinaCo locations, and they are included in Unconsolidated Locations, with no impact on Total Locations. Prior to October 2, 2020, ChinaCo was still consolidated and therefore the key performance indicators for ChinaCo are included in Consolidated Locations. Key performance indicators for ChinaCo locations were as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We currently expect that our principal sources of funds to meet our short-term and long-term liquidity requirements for working capital, expenses, capital expenditures, lease security, other investments and repurchases or repayments of outstanding indebtedness and other liabilities will include:
•Cash on hand, including $923.7 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, including $109.5 million held by our consolidated VIEs that will be used first to settle obligations of the VIEs and are also subject to the restrictions discussed below;
•The ability to draw up to $550.0 million in A&R Senior Secured Notes (defined below). On the Closing Date, WeWork Companies LLC, WW Co-Obligor, Inc. and the Note Purchaser (defined below) entered into the A&R NPA (defined below), which replaces the Master Senior Secured Notes Purchase Agreement relating to the SoftBank Senior Secured Notes; and
•The 2020 LC Facility (defined below) which became available in February 2020 to provide $1.75 billion in letters of credit that may be used as lease security for the Company's leases in lieu of providing cash security deposits and for general corporate purposes and other obligations of WeWork Companies LLC or its business. As of December 31, 2021, there was $0.5 billion in remaining letter of credit availability under the 2020 LC Facility.
The Company's strategic plan used for evaluating liquidity includes limited future growth initiatives, such as signing new leases. The actual timing at which we may achieve profitability and positive cash flow from operations depends on a variety of factors, including the occupancy of our locations, the rates we are able to charge, the success of our cost efficiency efforts, economic and competitive conditions in the markets where we operate, general macroeconomic conditions, the pace at which we choose to grow and our ability to add new members and new products and services to our platform. Alternate long-term growth plans may require raising additional capital. The Company regularly evaluates market conditions, to enhance its capital structure and diversify its investor base, and from time to time may refinance, redeem, repurchase or otherwise modify existing debt or issue equity or equity-linked securities.
The duration and scope of the COVID-19 pandemic has been unpredictable and has resulted in a slower than expected timing of recovery in our business. Management has continued to closely monitor the impact COVID-19 developments, such as COVID-19 cases continuing to be high in certain markets where we operate; while some governments are no longer imposing mask mandates, they may do so in the future and companies and individuals may continue to defer returning back to the office until a future time. Further, management has observed pricing challenges in the marketplace due to an excess supply of commercial real estate available to our customers as a result of companies of all sizes deferring their return back to offices, as well as businesses now considering remote and hybrid office space strategies. As a result of these recent developments, our current short-term liquidity forecast assumes that the pandemic will continue to negatively impact cash flow used in operating activities for the near term, but to a lessening extent based on improving customer demand that began in the second half of 2021. The Company believes that the recovery from the pandemic, which is now underway, combined with its available financing options, will provide liquidity sufficient to meet near-term requirements.
Our liquidity forecasts are based upon continued execution of the Company’s operational restructuring program and also includes management's best estimate of the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic, including the Delta, Omicron, or other variants, may continue to have on our business and our liquidity needs; however, the extent to which our future results and liquidity needs are further affected by the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will largely depend on the continued duration of closures, and delays in location openings, the success of ongoing vaccination efforts, the effect on demand for our memberships, any permanent shifts in working from home, how quickly we can resume normal operations and our ongoing lease negotiations with our landlords, among others. We believe continued execution of our operational restructuring program and our current liquidity position will be sufficient to help us mitigate the continued near-term uncertainty associated with COVID-19, however our assessment assumes a
continued recovery in our revenues and occupancy that began in the second half of 2021 with a gradual return toward pre-COVID levels. If we do not experience a recovery consistent with our projected timing, additional capital sources may be required, the timing and source of which are uncertain. There is no assurance we will be successful in securing the additional capital infusions if needed. See the section entitled "Key Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results-COVID-19 and Impact on our Business" above for further details on the impact of COVID-19 on our business and our efforts to mitigate its effects. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business is dependent on the duration of closures and delays and the larger macroeconomic impact of the virus depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions to contain the virus or mitigate its impact, among others.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our primary source of cash was $1.0 billion in proceeds from draws on the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes and the $1.2 billion net proceeds received from the consummation of the Business Combination. Our primary uses of cash included fixed operating lease cost and capital expenditures associated with the design and build-out of our spaces. We have also incurred significant costs related to our operational restructuring including employee benefit costs, lease termination fees, legal fees and other exit costs. Cash payments of restructuring liabilities totaled $424.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $379.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Pre-opening location expenses, SG&A expenses and cash payments made for acquisitions and investments have also historically included large discretionary uses of cash which can and have been scaled back to the extent needed based on our future cash needs. We also may elect to repurchase amounts of our outstanding debt, including the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes, for cash, through open market repurchases or privately negotiated transactions with certain of our debt holders, although there is no assurance we will do so.
As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated VIEs held the following, in each case after intercompany eliminations:
(1)The “SBG JVs” as of December 31, 2021 includes only JapanCo and LatamCo. As of December 31, 2021, JapanCo and LatamCo were prohibited from declaring dividends (including to us) without approval of an affiliate of SoftBank Group Capital Limited. As a result, any net assets of JapanCo and LatamCo would be considered restricted net assets to the Company as of December 31, 2021. SBG JVs include preferred stock issued to affiliates of SBG and other investors with aggregate liquidation preferences totaling $580.0 million as of December 31, 2021, of which $80.0 million is redeemable upon the occurrence of an event that is not solely within our control. The initial issuance price of such redeemable and non-redeemable preferred stock equals the liquidation preference for each share issued as of December 31, 2021. After reducing the net assets of the SBG JVs by the liquidation preference associated with such redeemable and non-redeemable preferred stock, the remaining net assets of the SBG JVs is negative as of December 31, 2021.
(2)"Other VIEs” includes the WeCap Manager, and WeCap Holdings Partnership as of December 31, 2021.
(3)Total net assets represents total assets less total liabilities and redeemable stock issued by VIEs after the total assets and total liabilities have both been reduced to remove amounts that eliminate in consolidation.
Based on the terms of the arrangements as of December 31, 2021, the assets of our consolidated VIEs will be used first to settle obligations of the VIE. Remaining assets may then be distributed to the VIEs' owners, including us, subject to the liquidation preferences of certain noncontrolling interest holders and any other preferential distribution provisions contained within the operating agreements of the relevant VIEs. Other than the restrictions relating to our SBG JVs discussed in note (1) to the table above, third-
party approval for the distribution of available net assets is not required for any of our consolidated VIEs as of December 31, 2021. See the section entitled "-Senior Notes" below for a discussion on additional restrictions on the net assets of WeWork Companies LLC. See the section entitled "-Key Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results-ChinaCo Financing and Deconsolidation" above for details regarding the October 2020 restructuring of ChinaCo. As of October 2, 2020, ChinaCo became an unconsolidated VIE.
As of December 31, 2021, creditors of our consolidated VIEs do not have recourse against the general credit of the Company except with respect to certain lease guarantees we have provided to landlords of our consolidated VIEs, which guarantees totaled $13.1 million as of December 31, 2021. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, the Company also continues to guarantee $3.5 million of lease obligations of ChinaCo subsequent to the ChinaCo Deconsolidation in October 2020.
We believe our sources of liquidity described above and in more detail below, will be sufficient to meet our obligations as of December 31, 2021 over the next twelve months from the issuance of this report.
We do not expect distributions from our consolidated VIEs or unconsolidated investments to be a significant source of liquidity and our assessment of our ability to meet our capital requirements over the next twelve months does not assume that we will receive distributions from those entities.
We may raise additional capital or incur additional indebtedness to continue to fund our operations and/or to refinance our existing indebtedness and to pay any related accrued interest, premiums and fees. Our future financing requirements and the future financing requirements of our consolidated VIEs will depend on many factors, including the number of new locations to be opened, our net member retention rate, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the timing and extent of spending to support the development of our platform, the expansion of our sales and marketing activities and potential investments in, or acquisitions of, businesses or technologies. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. In addition, the incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased fixed obligations and could result in operating covenants that restrict our operations.
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had $29.2 million of principal debt maturing within the next 12 months and our total debt consists of the following:
For further information on our debt, please see Note 14 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes
On December 27, 2019, WeWork Companies LLC, WW Co-Obligor Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of WeWork Companies LLC and a co-obligor under our Senior Notes (defined below), and StarBright WW LP, an affiliate of SoftBank (the “Note Purchaser”), entered into a master senior unsecured note purchase agreement (as amended from time to time and as supplemented by that certain waiver dated July 7, 2020, the “Master Note Purchase Agreement”).
Pursuant to the terms of the Master Note Purchase Agreement, WeWork Companies LLC may deliver from time to time to the Note Purchaser draw notices and accordingly sell to the Note Purchaser "SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes" up to an aggregate original principal amount of $2.2 billion. A draw notice pursuant to the Master Note Purchase Agreement may be delivered only if WeWork Companies LLC’s net liquidity is, or prior to the applicable closing is reasonably expected to be, less than $750.0 million, and the amount under each draw shall not be greater than the lesser of (a) $250.0 million and (b) the remaining commitment (defined as the original principal amount of $2.2 billion less notes issued) and shall not be greater than an amount sufficient to cause, or reasonably expected to cause, the net liquidity of WeWork Companies LLC to be equal to $750.0 million after giving effect to receipt of proceeds from the issuance of the applicable SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had delivered draw notices in respect of $2.2 billion under the Master Note Purchase Agreement and an aggregate principal amount of $2.2 billion of SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes were issued to the Note Purchaser and none remained available for draw.
Following the delivery of a draw notice, the Note Purchaser may notify WeWork Companies LLC that it intends to engage an investment bank or investment banks to offer and sell the applicable SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes or any portion thereof to third-party investors in a private placement. Solely with respect to the first $200.0 million in draws (the "Initial Notes"), the Note Purchaser waived this syndication right.
On December 16, 2021, WeWork Companies LLC and the Note Purchaser amended and restated the indenture governing the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes to subdivide the notes into two series, one of which consisting of $550.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.00% Senior Notes due 2025 (the "Series II Unsecured Notes") and another consisting of the remaining $1.65 billion in aggregate principal amount of 5.00% Senior Notes due 2025 (the "Series I Unsecured Notes" and, together with the Series II Unsecured Notes, the "Senior Unsecured Notes"), in connection with the resale by the Note Purchaser (through certain initial purchasers) of the Series II Unsecured Notes to qualified investors in a private offering exempt from registration under the Securities Act. The Series I Unsecured Notes remain held by the Note Purchaser.
The SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes have a stated interest rate of 5.0%. However, because the associated warrants obligate the Company to issue shares in the future, the implied interest rate upon closing, assuming the full commitment is drawn, will approximately 11.69%. The SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes will mature in July 2025.
SoftBank Senior Secured Notes
In August 2020, the Company and WW Co-Obligor Inc. entered into a Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement (the "Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement") for up to an aggregate principal amount of $1.1 billion of senior secured debt in the form of 12.5% senior secured notes (the "SoftBank Senior Secured Notes"). The Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement allows the Company to borrow once every 30 days up to the maximum remaining capacity with minimum draws of $50.0 million with a maturity date 4 years from the first draw. The Company had the ability to draw for 6 months starting from the date of the Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement, and the Company extended this draw period for an additional 6 months by delivery of an extension notice to StarBright WW LP, an affiliate of SBG (the "Note Purchaser"), in January 2021 pursuant to the terms of the agreement. On August 11, 2021, WeWork Companies LLC, WW-Co-Obligor Inc. and the Note Purchaser executed an amendment to the Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement governing the SoftBank Senior Secured Notes, which (i) amended the maturity date of any notes to be issued thereunder from 4 years from the date of first drawing to February 12, 2023 and (ii) extended the expiration of the draw period from August 12, 2021 to September 30, 2021. On September 27, 2021, WeWork Companies LLC, WW Co-Obligor Inc. and the Note Purchaser executed a further amendment to such agreement, which extended the expiration of the draw period from September 30,
2021 to October 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, no draw notices had been delivered pursuant to the senior secured note purchase agreement.
Amended and Restated Senior Secured Notes
On March 25, 2021, the Company and the Note Purchaser entered into a letter agreement (the "Commitment Letter") pursuant to which the Company and the Note Purchaser agreed to amend and restate the terms of the Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement that governs the SoftBank Senior Secured Notes (as amended and restated, the “A&R NPA”) on the earlier of (i) the Closing and (ii) August 12, 2021 (subsequently amended to October 31, 2021). The A&R NPA allows the Company to borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $550.0 million of senior secured debt in the form of new 7.5% senior secured notes. It was a condition to the execution of the A&R NPA that any outstanding SoftBank Senior Secured Notes be redeemed, repurchased or otherwise repaid and canceled at a price of 101% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest. The A&R NPA allows the Company to borrow once every 30 days with minimum draws of $50.0 million. Pursuant to the Commitment Letter, the Amended Senior Secured Notes will mature no later than February 12, 2024 or, if earlier, 18 months from the Closing.
On the Closing Date, the Company, WW Co-Obligor Inc. and the Note Purchaser entered into the A&R NPA for up to an aggregate principal amount of $550.0 million of senior secured debt in the form of 7.50% senior secured notes. Entry into the A&R NPA superseded and terminated the Master Senior Secured Notes Note Purchase Agreement governing the SoftBank Senior Secured Notes and the Commitment Letter pursuant to which the Company would enter into the A&R NPA. The A&R NPA allows the Company to borrow once every 30 days up to the maximum remaining capacity with minimum draws of $50.0 million. On December 16, 2021, the Company, WW Co-Obligor Inc. and the Note Purchaser entered into an amendment to the A&R NPA pursuant to which the Note Purchaser agreed to extend its commitment to purchase up to an aggregate principal amount of $500.0 million of the Amended Senior Secured Notes that may be issued by the Company from February 12, 2023 to February 12, 2024. The Amended Senior Secured Notes will mature on February 12, 2024. The Company has the ability to draw until February 12, 2024.
2020 LC Facility
On December 27, 2019, WeWork Companies LLC entered into a credit agreement (the "Company Credit Agreement," as amended by the First Amendment, dated as of February 10, 2020, the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement and First Amendment to the Security Agreement, dated as of April 1, 2020, and the Third Amendment to the Credit Agreement, dated as of December 6, 2021), among WeWork Companies LLC, as co-obligor, the SoftBank Obligor, as co-obligor, Goldman Sachs International Bank, as administrative agent, and the issuing creditors and letter of credit participants party thereto. The Company Credit Agreement provides for a $1.75 billion senior secured letter of credit facility (the "2020 LC Facility"), which was made available on February 10, 2020, for the support of WeWork Companies LLC's or its subsidiaries' obligations. The termination date of the 2020 LC Facility is February 9, 2024. As of December 31, 2021, $1.25 billion of standby letters of credit were outstanding under the 2020 LC Facility, of which $6.2 million has been utilized to secure letters of credit that remain outstanding under WeWork Companies LLC's previous credit facility (the "2019 Credit Facility") and letter of credit facility (the "2019 LC Facility"), which were terminated in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, there was $0.5 billion in remaining letter of credit availability under the 2020 LC Facility.
The 2020 LC Facility is guaranteed by substantially all of the domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries of WeWork Companies LLC (collectively the “Guarantors”) and is secured by substantially all the assets of WeWork Companies LLC and the Guarantors, in each case, subject to customary exceptions.
In connection with the 2020 LC Facility WeWork Companies LLC also entered into a reimbursement agreement, dated February 10, 2020 (as amended, the "Company/SBG Reimbursement Agreement"), with the SoftBank Obligor pursuant to which (i) the SoftBank Obligor agreed to pay substantially all of the
fees and expenses payable in connection with the Company Credit Agreement, (ii) the Company agreed to reimburse SoftBank Obligor for certain of such fees and expenses (including fronting fees up to an amount 0.125% on the undrawn and unexpired amount of the letters of credit, plus any fronting fees in excess of 0.415% on the undrawn and unexpired amount of the letters of credit) as well as to pay the SoftBank Obligor a fee of 5.475% on the amount of all outstanding letters of credit and (iii) the Guarantors agreed to guarantee the obligations of WeWork Companies LLC under the Company/SBG Reimbursement Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $82.2 million in interest expense in connection with amounts payable to SBG pursuant to the Company/SBG Reimbursement Agreement. As the Company is also obligated to issue 35,770,699 shares in the future pursuant to warrants issued to the SoftBank Obligor in connection with the SoftBank Obligor's commitment to provide credit support for the 2020 LC Facility, the implied interest rate for the Company on the 2020 LC Facility at issuance, assuming the full commitment is drawn, is approximately 12.47%. In December 2021, the Company/SBG Reimbursement Agreement was amended following the entry into the Amended Credit Support Letter (as defined below) to, among other things, change the fees payable by WeWork Companies LLC to SBG to (i) 2.875% of the face amount of letters of credit issued under the 2020 LC Facility (drawn and undrawn), payable quarterly in arrears, plus (ii) the amount of any issuance fees payable on the drawn amounts under the 2020 LC Facility.
On March 25, 2021, the Company and the SoftBank Obligor entered into a letter agreement (the “Credit Support Letter”) pursuant to which SBG committed to consent to an extension of the termination date of the 2020 LC Facility from February 10, 2023 to no later than February 10, 2024 (the "LC Facility Extension"), subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein. In November 2021, the parties amended the Credit Support Letter (as so amended, the “Amended Credit Support Letter”), pursuant to which SBG agreed to consent to a reduction of the total commitment under the 2020 LC Facility from $1.75 billion to $1.25 billion starting on February 10, 2023 and to an extension of the commitment under the A&R NPA for up to $500 million from February 12, 2023 to February 12, 2024. On December 6, 2021, the parties entered into an amendment to the Company Credit Agreement to effect the changes contemplated by the Amended Credit Support Letter and the Company issued to the SoftBank Obligor a warrant (the “LC Warrant”) to purchase 11,923,567 shares of the Company's Class A Common Stock at a price per share equal to $0.01. The LC Warrant is immediately exercisable, in whole or in part, and expires on the tenth anniversary of the date of issuance.
LC Debt Facility
In May 2021, the Company entered into a loan agreement with a third party to raise up to $350.0 million of cash in exchange for letters of credit issued from the LC Facility (the “LC Debt Facility”). The third party will issue a series of discount notes to investors of varying short term (1-6 month) maturities and make a matching discount loan to WeWork Companies LLC. WeWork Companies LLC will pay the 5.475% issuance fee on the letter of credit, the 0.125% fronting fee on the letter of credit and the interest on the discount note. At maturity, the Company has the option, based on prevailing market conditions and liquidity needs, to roll the loan to a new maturity or pay off the loan at par. No loans drawn under the LC Debt Facility can have maturity dates that extend beyond the termination date of the 2020 LC Facility.
In connection with the Merger Agreement, the Company agreed to not enter into loan facilities utilizing the LC Debt Facility without consent from SBG. In May 2021, the Company entered into a letter agreement with SBG pursuant to which SBG consented to the LC Debt Facility and the Company agreed to certain restrictions that will apply to the LC Debt Facility, including that (i) until such time as no amounts remain undrawn by the Company under the $2.2 billion SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes, amounts issued under the LC Debt Facility will not exceed $100.0 million, (ii) the Company would repay all amounts outstanding under the LC Debt Facility within 30 days after the closing of the Business Combination, (iii) on and after the closing of the Business Combination, the prior written consent of SBG will be required for the first draw under the LC Debt Facility that occurs after Closing.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company drew $349.0 million of loans under the LC Debt Facility, which draws occurred in the second quarter of 2021, and such loans matured in October 2021. In October of
2021 the Company repaid the outstanding principal balance, including the accrued interest, of $349.7 million.
Senior Notes
In April 2018, we issued $702.0 million in aggregate principal amount of unsecured 7.875% Senior Notes (the "Senior Notes") in a private offering. The Senior Notes mature on May 1, 2025. We received gross proceeds of $702.0 million from the issuance of the Senior Notes. As of December 31, 2021, $669.0 million in aggregate principal amount remains outstanding.
The indenture that governs the Senior Notes restricts us from incurring indebtedness or liens or making certain investments or distributions, subject to a number of exceptions. The indenture that governs the Senior Notes also restricts us from incurring indebtedness or liens or making certain investments or distributions, subject to a number of exceptions. Certain of these exceptions included in the indenture that governs our Senior Notes are subject to us having Minimum Liquidity (as defined in the indenture that governs our Senior Notes). For incurrences in 2020, Minimum Liquidity was required to be 0.3 times Total Indebtedness. Beginning on January 1, 2021, there is no longer a Minimum Liquidity requirement. Certain of these exceptions included in the indenture that governs our Senior Notes are subject to us having Minimum Growth-Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the indenture that governs our Senior Notes) for the most recent four consecutive fiscal quarters. For incurrences in fiscal years ending December 31, 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022-2025, the Minimum Growth-Adjusted EBITDA required for the immediately preceding four consecutive fiscal quarters is $200.0 million, $500.0 million, $1.0 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. For the four quarters ended December 31, 2021, the Company's Minimum Growth-Adjusted EBITDA, as calculated in accordance with the indenture, was less than the $1.0 billion requirement effective as of January 1, 2021. As a result, the Company was restricted in its ability to incur certain new indebtedness in 2021 that was not already executed or committed to as of December 31, 2019, unless such Minimum Growth-Adjusted EBITDA increased above the threshold required. The restrictions of the Senior Notes did not impact our ability to access the unfunded commitments pursuant to the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes and the SoftBank Senior Secured Notes.
Subsequent to the July 2019 legal entity reorganization, WeWork Companies LLC is the obligor of the Senior Notes, which is also fully and unconditionally guaranteed by WeWork Inc. WeWork Inc. and the other subsidiaries that sit above WeWork Companies LLC in our legal structure are holding companies that conduct substantially all of their business operations through WeWork Companies LLC. As of December 31, 2021, based on the covenants and other restrictions of the Senior Notes, WeWork Companies LLC is restricted in its ability to transfer funds by loans, advances or dividends to WeWork Inc. and as a result all of the net assets of WeWork Companies LLC are considered restricted net assets of WeWork Inc.. See the Supplementary Information - Consolidating Balance Sheet included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details regarding the net assets of WeWork Companies LLC.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our non-guarantor subsidiaries represented approximately 56% of our total revenue and approximately 30% of loss from operations, and approximately 30% of our Senior Notes-Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the indenture that governs our Senior Notes). As of December 31, 2021, our non-guarantor subsidiaries represented approximately 47% of our total assets, and had $0.8 billion of total liabilities, including trade payables but excluding intercompany liabilities and lease obligations.
Bank Facilities
In conjunction with the availability of the 2020 LC Facility, our 2019 Credit Facility and 2019 LC Facility were terminated in February 2020. As of December 31, 2021, $6.2 million in letters of credit remain outstanding under the 2019 LC Facility and 2019 Credit Facility that are secured by new letters of credit issued under the 2020 LC Facility.
Other Letter of Credit Arrangements
The Company has also entered into various other letter of credit arrangements, the purpose of which is to guarantee payment under certain leases entered into by JapanCo and PacificCo. There was $8.1 million of standby letters of credit outstanding under these other arrangements that are secured by $11.3 million of restricted cash at December 31, 2021.
Uses of Cash
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth certain contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the timing and effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and capital requirements in future periods:
(1)Future undiscounted fixed minimum lease cost payments for non-cancelable operating leases, inclusive of escalation clauses and exclusive of lease incentive receivables and contingent lease cost payments, that have initial or remaining lease terms in excess of one year as of December 31, 2021. Excludes an additional $1.0 billion relating to executed non-cancelable leases that have not yet commenced as of December 31, 2021. See Note 17 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details.
(2)In the ordinary course of our business, we enter into certain agreements to purchase construction and related contracting services related to the build-outs of our locations that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms and the approximate timing of the purchase transaction. Our purchase orders are based on current needs and are fulfilled by the vendors as needed in accordance with our construction schedule.
(3)Certain lease agreements contain provisions that require us to remove leasehold improvements at the end of the lease term. When such an obligation exists, we record an asset retirement obligation at the inception of the lease at its estimated fair value. These obligations are recorded as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
(4)Primarily represents principal and interest payments on Senior Notes, LC Debt Facility and other loans as of December 31, 2021.
(5)Primarily represents principal and interest payments on SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes as of December 31, 2021.
(6)Represents the fair value as of December 31, 2021, of the Company's obligation to deliver 7,773,333 shares of the Company’s Private Placement Warrant, as defined and as further described in Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Lease Obligations
The future undiscounted fixed minimum lease cost payment obligations under operating and finance leases signed as of December 31, 2021 were $32.8 billion. A majority of our leases are held by individual special purpose subsidiaries, and as of December 31, 2021, the total security packages provided by the Company and its subsidiaries in respect of these lease obligations was approximately $6.0 billion in the form of corporate guarantees, outstanding standby letters of credit, cash security deposits to landlords
and surety bonds issued, representing less than 20% of future undiscounted minimum lease cost payment obligations. In addition, individual property lease security obligations on any given lease typically decrease over the life of the lease, although we may continue to enter into new leases in the ordinary course of our business.
Capital Expenditures and Tenant Improvement Allowances
Capital expenditures are primarily for the design and build-out of our spaces, and include leasehold improvements, equipment and furniture. Our leases often contain provisions regarding tenant improvement allowances, which are contractual rights to reimbursements paid by landlords for a portion of the costs we incur in designing and developing our workspaces. Tenant improvement allowances are reflected in the consolidated financial statements upon lease commencement as our practice and intent is to spend up to or more than the full amount of the tenant improvement allowance that is contractually provided under the terms of the contract.
Over the course of a typical lease with tenant improvement allowances, we incur certain capital expenditures that we expect to be reimbursed by the landlords pursuant to provisions in our leases providing for tenant improvement allowances but for which we have not yet satisfied all conditions for reimbursement and, therefore, the landlords have not been billed at the time of such capital expenditures. Thus, while such receivables are reflected in our consolidated financial statements upon lease commencement, the timing of the achievement of the applicable milestones and billing of landlords will impact when reimbursements for tenant improvement allowances will be received, which may impact the timing of our cash flows.
We monitor gross and net capital expenditures, which are primarily associated with our leasehold improvements, to evaluate our liquidity and workstation development efforts. We define net capital expenditures as the gross purchases of property and equipment, as reported in “cash flows from investing activities” in the consolidated statements of cash flows, less cash collected from landlords for tenant improvement allowances. While cash received for tenant improvement allowances is reported as “cash flows from operating activities” in the consolidated statements of cash flows, we consider cash received for tenant improvement allowances to be a reduction against our gross capital expenditures in the calculation of net capital expenditures.
As the payments received from landlords for tenant improvement allowances are generally received after certain project milestones are completed, payments received from landlords presented in the table below are not directly related to the cash outflows reported for the capital expenditures reported.
The table below shows our gross and net capital expenditures for the periods presented:
Our ability to negotiate lease terms that include significant tenant improvement allowances has been and may continue to be impacted by our expansion into markets where such allowances may be less common. Our capital expenditures have also been and may continue to be impacted by our focus on enterprise members, who generally require more customization than a traditional workspace, resulting in higher build-out costs. However, we expect any increase in build-out costs resulting from expansion of configured solutions for our growing enterprise member base to be offset by increases in committed revenue, as enterprise members often sign membership agreements with longer terms and for a greater number of memberships than our other members. Future decisions to enter into long-term revenue-sharing agreements with building owners, rather than more standard fixed lease arrangements, may also
impact future cash inflows relating to tenant improvement allowances and cash outflows relating to capital expenditures.
In the ordinary course of our business, we enter into certain agreements to purchase construction and related contracting services related to the build-outs of our operating locations that are enforceable, legally binding, and that specify all significant terms and the approximate timing of the purchase transaction. Our purchase orders are based on current needs and are fulfilled by the vendors as needed in accordance with our construction schedule. As of December 31, 2021, we have issued approximately $58.7 million in such outstanding construction commitments. As of December 31, 2021, we also had a total of $397.8 million in lease incentive receivables, recorded as a reduction of our long-term lease obligations on our consolidated balance sheet. Of the total $397.8 million lease incentive receivable, $308.7 million was accrued at the commencement of the respective lease but unbilled as of December 31, 2021.
Summary of Cash Flows
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
A summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is presented in the following table:
Operating Cash Flows
Cash used in operating activities consists primarily of the revenue we generate from our members and the tenant improvement allowances we receive offset by rent, real estate taxes, common area maintenance and other operating costs. In addition, uses of cash from operating activities consist of employee compensation and benefits, professional fees, advertising, office supplies, warehousing, utilities, cleaning, consumables, and repairs and maintenance related payments as well as member referral fees and various other costs of running our business.
The $1.1 billion increase in net cash used in operating activities from the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily attributable to the decrease in total revenues of $845.7 million due to the continued impact of COVID-19 in 2021. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was also driven by a decrease of $927.7 million in tenant improvement allowances received during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was partially offset by net savings achieved for the year ended December 31, 2021 through the continuation of our operational restructuring program and progress towards our efforts to create a leaner, more efficient organization which drove a decrease in location operating expenses, pre-opening location expenses, and SG&A expenses of $957.2 million, net of $238.6 million decrease in non-cash lease costs and $29.5 million
increase in Adjusted EBITDA addbacks discussed above in "-Key Performance Indicators - Adjusted EBITDA". Also partially offsetting the increase in net cash used in operating activities is a decrease of $45.0 million in cash payments made on restructuring liabilities.
Included in our cash flow from operating activities was $112.7 million of cash used by consolidated VIEs for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $35.7 million of cash used by consolidated VIEs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investing Cash Flows
The $96.8 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities from the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to $1.1 billion decrease in cash paid for purchases of property and equipment, a $72.4 million decrease in contributions to investments, and a decrease in the net cash deconsolidated totaling $54.5 million in connection with the October 2020 ChinaCo Deconsolidation. This decrease in net cash used in investing activities was partially offset by the divestiture proceeds of $1.2 billion received during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the sale of the 424 Fifth Property held by the 424 Fifth Venture and also including proceeds from the sale of Meetup, Managed by Q, Teem, SpaceIQ, Flatiron, and certain non-core corporate equipment, compared to no divestitures during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Cash Flows
The $2.4 billion net increase in cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to $1.2 billion of proceeds from Business Combination and PIPE financing, net of issuance costs paid. Also included in the increase in cash flows provided by financing activities is a $813.1 million debt repayment and $319.9 million distribution to noncontrolling interest holders during the year ended December 31, 2020, both primarily related to the sale of the 424 Fifth Property, with no comparable activity during the year ended December 31, 2021. These increases in cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, were partially offset by a $200.0 million decrease in proceeds received from draws on the SoftBank Senior Unsecured Notes.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019
A summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is presented in the following table:
N/M = Not meaningful
Operating Cash Flows
Cash used in operating activities consists primarily of the revenue we generate from our members and the tenant improvement allowances we receive offset by rent, real estate taxes, common area maintenance and other operating costs. In addition, uses of cash from operating activities consist of employee compensation and benefits, professional fees, advertising, office supplies, warehousing, utilities, cleaning, consumables, and repairs and maintenance related payments as well as member referral fees and various other costs of running our business.
The $408.8 million increase in net cash used in operating activities from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to increases in cash lease costs partially offset by increases in tenant improvement allowances received. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was also impacted by $379.2 million in cash payments made on restructuring liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $33.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was partially offset by net savings achieved in 2020 through our restructuring program and progress towards our efforts to create a leaner, more efficient organization which drove a decrease in pre-opening, sales and marketing, general administrative and sourcing, development and other expenses.
Included in our cash flow from operating activities was $35.7 million of cash used by consolidated VIEs for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $104.0 million of cash used by consolidated VIEs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Cash Flows
The $4.3 billion decrease in net cash used in investing activities from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the divestitures which occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020, with proceeds totaling $1.2 billion, primarily related to the sale of the 424 Fifth Property held by the 424 Fifth Venture and also including proceeds from the sale of Meetup, Managed by Q, Teem, SpaceIQ, Flatiron, and certain non-core corporate equipment as compared to cash used for acquisitions which occurred during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaling $1.0 billion, primarily related to the acquisition of the 424 Fifth Property by the 424 Fifth Venture. The remaining change in cash used in investing activities is primarily due to a $2.0 billion decrease in cash paid for purchases of property and equipment and a $140.6 million decrease in security deposits paid to landlords, with both declines relating to our slowed growth in 2020 as compared to the growth experienced in 2019, partially offset by the deconsolidation of net cash totaling $54.5 million in connection with the October 2020 ChinaCo Deconsolidation.
Financing Cash Flows
The $5.3 billion net decrease in cash flows from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to $4.0 billion in proceeds from the issuance of convertible related party liabilities during 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $4.0 billion in proceeds from the draw down on the Amended 2018 Warrant and 2019 Warrant (each as described and defined in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K), compared to the $1.2 billion drawn on the Softbank Senior Unsecured Notes during 2020. The decrease was also driven by a $810.1 million increase in debt repayments and a $279.9 million increase in distributions to noncontrolling interest holders during 2020 both primarily related to the sale of the 424 Fifth Property. We also collected $321.1 million less in member service retainers and returned $78.2 million more in member service retainers during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The year ended December 31, 2019 also included $662.4 million in loan proceeds primarily from the 424 Fifth Venture Loans and $538.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of noncontrolling interests primarily associated with the 424 Fifth Venture and the Creator Fund compared to $100.6 million in proceeds from the issuance of noncontrolling interests during 2020 (primarily JapanCo) which combined drove a decrease of $1.1 billion in net cash provided by financing activities period over period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Except for certain letters of credit and surety bonds entered into as security under the terms of several of our leases, our unconsolidated investments, and the unrecorded construction and other commitments set forth above, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. Our unconsolidated investments are discussed in Note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates, Significant Accounting Policies and New Accounting Standards
Our preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures. Management considers an accounting policy estimate to be critical if: (1) we must make assumptions that were uncertain when the estimate was made; and (2) changes in the estimate, or selection of a different estimate methodology could have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations or financial condition. While we believe that our estimates, assumptions and judgments are reasonable, they are based on information available when the estimate or assumption was made. Actual results may differ significantly. Additionally, changes in our assumptions, estimates or assessments due to unforeseen events or otherwise could have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
As the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected and may continue to adversely affect our revenues and expenditures, the extent and duration of restrictions and the overall macroeconomic impact of the pandemic will have an effect on estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements. This includes the net operating income assumptions in our long-lived asset impairment testing, the ultimate collectability of accounts receivable due to the effects of COVID-19 on the financial position of our members, the timing of capital expenditures and fair value measurement changes for assets and liabilities that the Company measures at fair value.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe to have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below. See Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information related to critical accounting estimates and significant accounting policies, including details of recent accounting pronouncements that were adopted and not yet adopted as of December 31, 2021.
Leases
At lease commencement, we recognize a lease obligation and corresponding right-of-use asset based on the initial present value of the fixed lease payments using our incremental borrowing rates for our population of leases. The incremental borrowing rate represents the rate of interest we would have to pay to borrow over a similar term, and with a similar security, in a similar economic environment, an amount equal to the fixed lease payments. The commencement date is the date we take initial possession or control of the leased premise or asset, which is generally when we enter the leased premises and begin to make improvements in preparation for its intended use.
Our leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit discount rate. Therefore, management estimates the incremental borrowing rate used to discount the lease payments based on the information available at lease commencement. We utilized a model consistent with the credit quality for our outstanding debt instruments to estimate our specific incremental borrowing rates that align with applicable lease terms.
Renewal options are typically solely at our discretion and are only included within the lease obligation and right-of-use asset when we are reasonably certain that the renewal options would be exercised.
Variable lease payments that depend on an index or rate are included in lease payments and are measured using the prevailing index or rate at lease inception or the measurement date. Changes to the index or rate are recognized in the period of change.
We evaluate our right-of-use assets for recoverability when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset may have been impaired. In evaluating an asset for recoverability, we consider the future cash flows expected to result from the continued use of the asset and the eventual disposition of the asset. If the sum of the expected future cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the asset is recognized.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Certain lease agreements contain provisions that require us to remove leasehold improvements at the end of the lease term. When such an obligation exists, we record an asset retirement obligation at the inception of the lease at its estimated fair value. The associated asset retirement costs are capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the leasehold improvements and depreciated over their useful lives. The asset retirement obligation is accreted to its estimated future value as interest expense using the effective-interest rate method.
Impairment of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the fair value of the assets acquired less liabilities assumed in connection with the acquisition. Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter of each year as of October 1 at each reporting unit level, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired, and is required to be written down when impaired.
The guidance for goodwill impairment testing begins with an optional qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. The Company is not required to perform a quantitative impairment test unless it is determined, based on the results of the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. The quantitative impairment test is prepared at the reporting unit level. In performing the impairment test, management compares the estimated fair values of the applicable reporting units to their aggregate carrying values, including goodwill. If the carrying amounts of a reporting unit including goodwill were to exceed the fair value of the reporting unit, an impairment loss is recognized within our consolidated statements of operations in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
The process of evaluating goodwill for impairment requires judgments and assumptions to be made to determine the fair value of the reporting unit, including discounted cash flow calculations, assumptions market participants would make in valuing each reporting unit and the level of the Company’s own share price. We completed our annual assessment of goodwill in the October 2021 and determined that there was no impairment of goodwill.
An unfavorable change in our expectations for the financial performance of our reporting unit, particularly long-term growth and profitability, would reduce the fair value of our reporting unit. The continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has been unpredictable and may continue to result in slower than expected timing of recovery as companies and individuals may defer returning back to the office until a future time or consider remote and hybrid office space strategies. This continued impact may have a negative impact to the valuation assumptions which may reduce the fair value of our reporting unit. Should such events occur and it becomes more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value has fallen below its carrying value, we will perform an interim goodwill impairment test(s), in addition to the annual impairment test. Future impairment tests may result in a goodwill impairment, depending on the outcome of the quantitative impairment test. We would include goodwill impairment charges in impairment/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment, right-of-use assets, capitalized software, and other finite-lived intangible assets, are evaluated for recoverability when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset may have been impaired. In evaluating an asset for recoverability, the Company considers the future cash flows expected to result from the continued use of the asset and the eventual disposition of the asset. If the sum of the expected future cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the asset is recognized.
In connection with operational restructuring program described in Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K and related changes in the Company's leasing plans and planned or completed disposition of certain non-core operations, as well as the impact to the Company's business as a result of COVID-19, the Company has also recorded various other non-routine write-offs, impairments and gains on sale of goodwill, intangibles and various other assets. These non-routine charges totaled $870.0 million, $1,355.9 million and $335.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are included as impairment/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
An unfavorable change in our expectations for the financial performance of our long-lived assets, particularly the expected future cash flows either a result of a potential termination or impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, would reduce the fair value of our long-lived assets. We will perform quarterly long-lived asset impairment tests and future impairment tests may result in a further impairment. We would include goodwill impairment charges in impairment/(gain on sale) of goodwill, intangibles and other assets in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes, Deferred Taxes and Valuation Allowance
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Accordingly, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amount of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period the tax rates are enacted. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits for which future realization is uncertain. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a deferred tax assets of $8.4 billion, partially offset by a valuation allowance of $5.8 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $2.6 billion.
We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets and establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset may not be realized. The Company has recorded a full valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets in most jurisdictions, however in certain jurisdictions, the Company did not record a valuation allowance where the Company had profitable operations, or the Company recorded only a partial valuation allowance due to the existence of deferred tax liabilities that will partially offset the Company’s deferred tax assets in future years. As of December 31, 2021, we concluded, based on the weight of all available positive and negative evidence, that a portion of our deferred tax assets are not more likely than not to be realized. As such a valuation allowance in the amount of $5.8 billion has been recognized on the Company’s deferred tax assets. The net change in valuation allowance for 2021 was an increase of $1.7 billion.
See Note 18 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details regarding income taxes.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense attributable to equity awards granted to employees and non-employees is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. For employee awards, the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for awards that actually vest, which is generally the period from the grant date to the end of the vesting period. For non-employee awards, the expense for awards that actually vest is recognized based on when the goods or services are provided.
We expect to continue to grant stock-based awards in the future, and, to the extent that we do, our stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely continue to represent a significant expense.
We estimate the fair value of stock option awards granted using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing formula (the “Black-Scholes Model”) and a single option award approach. This model requires various significant judgmental assumptions in order to derive a final fair value determination for each type of award, including the expected term, expected volatility, expected dividend yield, risk-free interest rate, and fair value of our stock on the date of grant. The expected option term for options granted is calculated using the “simplified method.” This election was made based on the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. The simplified method defines the expected term as the average of the contractual term and the vesting period. Estimated volatility is based on similar entities whose stock is publicly traded. We use the historical volatilities of similar entities due to the lack of sufficient historical data for our common stock price. Dividend yields are based on our history and expected future actions. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield curve of a zero coupon U.S. Treasury bond on the date the stock option award was granted with a maturity equal to the expected term of the stock option award. All grants of stock options generally have an exercise price equal to or greater than the fair market value of such common stock on the date of grant.
The Company estimated the fair value of the WeWork Partnerships Profits Interest Units awards in connection with the modification of the original stock options using the Hull-White model and a binomial lattice model in order to apply appropriate weight and consideration of the associated distribution threshold and catch-up base amount. The Hull-White model requires similar judgmental assumptions as the Black-Scholes Model used for valuing the Company's options.
Because there has historically been no public market for our stock, the fair value of our equity has historically been approved by our board of directors or the compensation committee thereof as of the date stock-based awards were granted. In estimating the fair value of stock, we use the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist and considered factors we believe are material to the valuation process, including but not limited to, the price at which recent equity was issued by us to independent third parties or transacted between third parties, actual and projected financial results, risks, prospects, economic and market conditions, and estimates of weighted average cost of capital. We believe the combination of these factors provides an appropriate estimate of our expected fair value and reflects the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date.
Subsequent to executing the Merger Agreement through the Business Combination (as defined in Note 3 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K), we determined the value of our common stock based on the observable daily closing price of BXAC's stock (ticker symbol "BOWX") multiplied by the exchange ratio in effect for such transaction date. Subsequent to the Business Combination, we determined the value of our common stock based on the observable daily closing price of WeWork's stock (ticker symbol "WE").
We have elected to recognize forfeitures of stock-based awards as they occur. Recognition of any compensation expense relating to stock grants that vest contingent on the completion of an initial public offering or "Acquisition" (as defined in the 2015 Plan detailed in Note 21 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) was deferred until the consummation of such offering or Acquisition. These performance-based vesting conditions (based upon the occurrence of
a liquidity event (as defined in the 2015 Plan and related award agreements) were deemed satisfied upon the closing of the Business Combination.
Other Fair Value Measurements
Other critical accounting estimates include the valuation of our warrant liabilities which are remeasured to fair value on a recurring basis, with the corresponding gain or loss included in our gain (loss) from change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The warrant liabilities as of December 31, 2021, were valued using the level 2 input of the fair value of our public warrants traded on the NYSE under the ticker "WEWS".
See Note 15 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details regarding fair value measurements.
Consolidation and Variable Interest Entities
We are required to consolidate entities deemed to be VIEs in which we are the primary beneficiary. We are considered to be the primary beneficiary of a VIE when we have (i) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses or receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under the five-step model required under ASC 606, which requires us to identify the relevant contract with the member, identify the performance obligations in the contract, determine the transaction price, allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations identified and recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our members to make required payments. If the financial condition of a specific member were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of its ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required.