Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” should be read for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our fiscal year end is September 30, and our fiscal quarters end on December 31, March 31, June 30, and September 30. Our fiscal years ended September 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020 are referred to herein as Fiscal Year 2022, Fiscal Year 2021 and Fiscal Year 2020, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in “Risk Factors.”
Economic Conditions
Demand for our products is significantly affected by a number of economic factors impacting our customers and consumers, such as the availability of credit, consumer confidence and spending, demographic trends, employment levels and other macroeconomic factors (e.g., lockdowns, government mandates, etc.) that may influence the extent to which consumers invest in household products such as grills and associated accessories, consumables and services. In recent months, there has been a slowdown in retail traffic, both in-store and online, which the Company believes is due to rising inflation, supply chain constraints, higher fuel prices and geopolitical uncertainty. These market factors are expected to continue and therefore continue to have a material adverse impact on our results of operation.
The Company continues to monitor developments in Russia and Ukraine as well as financial and economic sanctions imposed by the U.S. and other countries. In March 2022, the Company suspended operations in Russia, including cessations of imports into Russia, sales to retailers in Russia and e-commerce activity in Russia. During the fourth quarter of Fiscal Year 2022, the Company commenced activities to liquidate its on-hand inventory. While the conflict has negatively impacted our results of operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, the Company's net sales and total assets in Russia represented less than 1% of our total consolidated net sales and total assets.
Impact of Inflation
Changing costs of inbound freight, materials, components, equipment, labor and other inputs used to manufacture and sell our products and logistics costs, in particular, have impacted and may in the future impact operating costs and, accordingly, may affect the prices of our products. We are involved in continuing programs to mitigate the impact of cost increases through identification of sourcing and manufacturing efficiencies where possible. However, we may not be able to fully mitigate or pass through the increases in our operating costs, and rising prices could also affect demand for our products. Additionally, rising inflation has negatively impacted retail traffic and may continue to do so in the future. Global inflation has increased significantly over the past year. For example, in the U.S., the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers increased 8.2% to 296.8 at September 30, 2022 from 274.3 at September 30, 2021, as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Impact of Foreign Exchange Rates
We conduct business in various locations throughout the world and are subject to market risk due to changes in value of foreign currencies in relation to our reporting currency, the U.S. dollar. The functional currencies of our foreign operating locations are generally the local currency in the respective country, however, our results of operations and assets and liabilities are reported in U.S. dollars and thus will fluctuate with changes in exchange rates between such local currencies and the U.S. dollar. Additionally, because our consolidated financial results are reported in U.S. dollars, the translation of sales or earnings generated in other currencies into U.S. dollars can result in a significant increase or decrease in the amount of those sales or earnings in our financial statements, which also affects the comparability of our results of operations and cash flows between financial periods.
Seasonality/Weather
Although we generally have demand for our products throughout the year, our sales have historically experienced some seasonality. We have typically experienced our highest level of sales of our products in the second and third fiscal quarters as retailers across North America and Europe change over their floor sets, build inventory and fulfill consumer demand for outdoor cooking products. Sales are typically lower during our first and fourth fiscal quarters, with the
exception of our Australia/New Zealand business, which is counter-seasonal to the balance of our business. We have a long track record of investing in our business throughout the year, including in operating expenses, working capital and other growth initiatives. Unfavorable weather during our higher sales season can also have a material adverse impact on our results, and can cause shifts in sales across fiscal quarters.
Impact of Pandemic
The severity, magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain. We continue to actively monitor the pandemic and adjust our mitigation strategies as necessary to address any changing health, operational or financial risks that may arise. After the onset of the pandemic, we experienced a significant increase in demand for our grills and accessories. While this demand has since moderated, we will continue to manage our production capacity during this period of volatility. We continue to monitor the business for adverse impacts of the pandemic, including volatility in the foreign exchange markets, supply chain disruptions in certain markets and potential disruptions in certain countries. In the event we experience adverse impacts from the above or other factors, we would also evaluate the need to perform interim impairment tests for our goodwill, intangible assets and property, equipment and leasehold improvements. There can be no assurance that volatility and/or disruption in the global capital and credit markets will not impair our ability to access these markets on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
Components of our Operating Results
We consider a variety of financial and operating measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key U.S. GAAP measures we use are net sales, gross profit, income from operations and net income.
Net Sales
We offer a broad range of products that consist of grills, accessories and consumables. We recognize product sales upon the transfer of products to customers at a point in time, which is upon shipment or upon delivery depending upon the written sales terms with the customer. Sales are recorded net of related discounts, allowances and taxes to be submitted to third parties. We discuss the net sales of our products in our three reportable segments, as defined below.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes the cost of direct materials, labor, purchased finished products and components, inbound freight, packaging, warranty and depreciation and amortization. Cost of goods sold is recognized primarily using the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method of accounting for the inventory sold.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is calculated by taking net sales less cost of goods sold. Gross profit is generally impacted by purchased finished product and component costs, material/commodity costs, labor economics, product pricing, product mix and changes in foreign currencies. Gross margin is defined as gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of research and development, marketing, advertising and selling costs, non-manufacturing employee compensation and benefit costs, transportation costs of delivering our product to customers and the costs associated with a network of warehousing facilities to house inventory until the point of sale, outside services and fees, legal, insurance, accounting, audit and other administrative expenses, stock-based compensation expense and general corporate infrastructure costs.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest on our borrowings, including our credit facilities (term loans and revolving facility), foreign currency revolving and overdraft facility, and charges for limited standby letters of credit. Interest expense, net also includes the amortization of deferred financing costs associated with our credit facilities, current year impacts of interest rate swap transactions, as well as interest resulting from a financing obligation under a sale-leaseback arrangement. Interest expense is offset by our interest income, consisting of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents, as well as interest on member notes.
Reportable Segments
We operate and manage our business in three reportable segments: the Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”) and Asia-Pacific (“APAC”). We identify our reportable segments based on the information used by the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) to monitor performance and allocate resources. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our reportable segments.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to the U.S. GAAP results provided in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we provide supplemental non-GAAP measures to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business and assist us in making strategic decisions. Our management team utilizes a combination of GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate business results, to make decisions regarding the future direction of our business, and allocate resources. As a result, we believe the presentation of both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with increased transparency into the financial measures used by our management team and improves investors’ understanding of our underlying operating performance and analysis of ongoing operating trends. All historic non-GAAP financial measures have been reconciled with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. The use of non-GAAP measures should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, the comparable U.S. GAAP measures. In addition, because our non-GAAP measures are not determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, they are susceptible to differing calculations, and not all comparable or peer companies may calculate their non-GAAP measures in the same manner. Our non-GAAP measures are adjusted (loss) income from operations, adjusted net (loss) income, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted (Loss) Income from Operations and Adjusted Net (Loss) Income
Adjusted (loss) income from operations and adjusted net (loss) income are (loss) income from operations and net (loss) income, respectively, adjusted for stock/unit-based compensation expense, restructuring costs, business transformation costs, operational transformation costs, financing and IPO costs, COVID-19 costs and gain on disposal of assets held for sale. Adjusted (loss) income from operations also reflects an adjustment for foreign currency (loss) gain. Adjusted net (loss) income reflects each of the above adjustments, except for foreign currency (loss) gain, as well as adjustments for gain on Tax Receivable Agreement liability remeasurement, loss from early extinguishment of debt, other expense and the tax impact of all adjustments.
We use adjusted (loss) income from operations and adjusted net (loss) income as indicators of the productivity of our business and our ability to manage expenses, after adjusting for certain expenses that we view as not indicative of regular operations. Adjusted (loss) income from operations and adjusted net (loss) income are not calculated in the same manner by all companies and, accordingly, are not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is net (loss) income before interest expense, net, income taxes and depreciation and amortization.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key metric used by management and our Board to assess our financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA is also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, when considered alongside other U.S. GAAP measures. We use Adjusted EBITDA to supplement U.S. GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, make budgeting decisions and compare our performance against that of other companies using similar measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA adjusted for stock/unit-based compensation expense, restructuring costs, business transformation costs, operational transformation costs, financing and IPO costs, COVID-19 costs, gain on Tax Receivable Agreement liability remeasurement, loss from early extinguishment of debt, gain on disposal of assets held for sale and other expense. Adjusted EBITDA is not calculated in the same manner by all companies and, accordingly, is not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indicator of a company’s operating performance in isolation from, or as a substitute for, net (loss) income, cash flows from operations or cash flow data, all of which are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA solely as supplemental disclosure because we believe it allows for a more complete analysis of results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to represent, and should not be considered more meaningful than, or as an alternative to, measures of operating performance as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these items.
The following table reconciles (loss) income from operations to adjusted (loss) income from operations; net (loss) income to adjusted net (loss) income; net (loss) income to EBITDA; and EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
______________
(1)Adjusted (loss) income from operations includes foreign currency (loss) gain in order to align adjusted (loss) income from operations with Adjusted EBITDA, with the exception of depreciation and amortization and (gain) loss from investments in unconsolidated affiliates.
(2)See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
(3)“Restructuring costs” are costs associated with the Company's restructuring plan that was implemented in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022, which included the termination of certain senior executives, a workforce reduction of non-manufacturing and distribution headcount, the termination of certain contracts and the disposal of certain other assets.
(4)“Business transformation costs” are costs for business transformation initiatives, including consulting costs and personnel-related costs, to address public company requirements and the changing business environment.
(5)“Operational transformation costs” are defined as transformation initiatives related to supply chain, operational moves and startups that are designed to support future production and drive future operating efficiencies. These costs also include significant non-capitalizable systems integration costs, primarily related to the Company’s implementation of a global SAP/S4 HANA ERP platform, as well as certain plant shutdown and closure costs.
(6)“Financing and IPO costs” include non-capitalizable costs relating to the Company’s Secured Credit Facility, the Company's IPO and other financing costs.
(7)During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, the Company incurred costs related to the global COVID-19 pandemic. These costs primarily related to expedited freight costs to fulfill significant unexpected demand increases driven by stay-at-home orders in many of our key markets, overtime costs and the impacts of enhanced employee safety and social distancing protocols. These costs normalized in Fiscal Year 2021.
(8)“Tax impact of adjusting items” represents the Company's effective tax rate for the periods presented applied to the adjusting items.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this 2022 Form 10-K. For further discussion regarding operating and financial data for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
______________
(1)Amounts include share/unit-based compensation as follows:
______________
(2)Amounts includes depreciation expense as follows:
(3)See the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Measures.”
(4)“N/M” indicates that variance as a percentage is not meaningful.
Net Sales. Net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $395.9 million, or 20%, to $1,586.5 million from $1,982.4 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was attributable to lower revenues as consumer traffic, both in-store and online, slowed due to the macroeconomic factors described in the section titled "Economic Conditions," in comparison to the high demand realized during the same period last year. Net sales were also adversely impacted during the first half of fiscal year 2022 by certain product availability resulting from global supply chain disruptions. These decreases in sales volume were partially offset by certain pricing actions. Fluctuation in foreign exchange rates also decreased net sales by $65.3 million, particularly the Euro as compared to the U.S. dollar. Excluding the $65.3 million unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by 17%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased in the Americas by 26%, in EMEA by 16% and were flat in APAC as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $4.8 million, or 0.4%, to $1,152.4 million from $1,157.2 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to the lower sales volume, and was partially offset by higher inbound freight and commodity costs.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin. Gross profit for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $391.1 million, or 47%, to $434.1 million from $825.2 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Gross margin decreased by 1,427 basis points to 27% during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease in gross profit and gross margin was primarily due to higher inbound freight costs, higher commodity costs, unfavorable foreign exchange impacts and lower sales volume.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $154.2 million, or 21%, to $584.6 million from $738.8 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily driven by reductions in advertising and corporate marketing expense of $43.6 million, lower incentive compensation expense of $28.6 million and lower stock/unit-based compensation expense of $88.4 million, which was primarily due to the forfeitures of certain stock awards and fewer unvested profits interest awards in the current year period.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 increased by $3.4 million to $20.6 million from $17.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The increase in amortization of intangible assets was primarily driven by the amortization of assets related to the June and RMC acquisitions.
Restructuring Costs. The Company incurred restructuring costs of $22.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 resulting from a cost-saving plan that was approved by the Board to preserve liquidity, expand gross margins and reduce selling, general and administrative costs. The plan included the termination of certain senior
executives, a workforce reduction of non-manufacturing and distribution headcount, the termination of certain contracts and the disposal of certain other assets. Of these total charges, $12.8 million relates to severance and other termination-related benefits, $5.2 million relates to contract termination costs and $4.4 million relates to certain asset disposals.
Gain on Disposal of Assets Held For Sale. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, the Company disposed of a manufacturing site that was previously considered to be assets held for sale and recognized a gain of $5.2 million.
Foreign Currency Loss (Gain). The impact of foreign exchange resulted in a loss of $31.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 relative to an immaterial gain for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 due to the foreign exchange rate impacts on transactions with Weber affiliates conducted in foreign currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The loss in the current year period primarily related to Euro-denominated transactions.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net increased by $9.7 million, or 15%, to $75.6 million from $65.9 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, due to increased borrowings under the Revolving Loan during the current year period and the commencement of the Incremental Term Loan in March 2022 as well as higher interest rates.
Gain on Tax Receivable Agreement Liability Remeasurement. The Gain on Tax Receivable Agreement liability remeasurement of $9.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 resulted from remeasuring the liability to zero after the Company concluded that making a payment under the agreement was not probable.
Loss from Early Extinguishment of Debt. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, the Company retired its existing senior credit facility and entered into a new credit facility. In connection with this transaction, the Company recorded a $5.4 million loss from early extinguishment of debt, representing a write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs.
Other Expense. Other expense of $0.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 represents the Company's loss on sale of receivables to a third party financial institution.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense increased by $34.6 million to $37.6 million from $3.0 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, primarily due to the noncontrolling interest tax adjustment whereby the Company removes U.S. pre-tax book loss not attributable to Weber Inc. that resulted in income tax expense of $49.7 million and the establishment of a valuation allowance to reduce the net deferred tax assets at Weber Inc. that resulted in income tax expense of $21.8 million, which were partially offset by the income tax benefit generated by the Company's pre-tax loss.
(Gain) Loss from Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates. No gain or loss from investments in unconsolidated affiliates was recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 as the Company completed its acquisition of June in January 2021. The fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 reflects a gain from investments in unconsolidated affiliates of $5.5 million, which resulted from a $6.9 million gain from the remeasurement of the existing equity interest in June to fair value at the time of acquisition, offset by a $1.4 million loss recorded for Weber’s share of June’s losses in the first quarter of Fiscal Year 2021.
Net (Loss) Income. Net (loss) income decreased by $335.5 million to a net loss of $330.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 from net income of $5.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The primary drivers of the decline were lower net sales of $395.9 million, higher restructuring costs of $22.4 million, higher foreign currency losses of $31.9 million and higher income taxes of $34.6 million, which were partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses of $154.2 million.
Segment Information
We operate and manage our business in three reportable segments: Americas, EMEA and APAC. We identify our reportable segments based on the information used by the CODM to monitor performance and allocate resources. See Note 15 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our reportable segments.
Net sales by reportable segment is summarized as follows:
Adjusted income from operations by reportable segment is summarized as follows:
The following table reconciles segment adjusted income from operations to (loss) income from operations for the periods presented:
_____________
(1)“Corporate and supply chain costs” consists primarily of corporate general and administrative costs as well as certain unallocated supply chain costs.
(2)See “Non-GAAP Measures-adjusted (loss) income from operations” for descriptions of reconciling items from (loss) income from operations to adjusted (loss) income from operations.
Americas
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to the Americas segment results that have been derived from our consolidated financial statements:
Total Segment Net Sales. Total segment net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $282.6 million, or 26%, to $819.7 million from $1,102.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was attributable to lower revenues in the U.S. and Canada as consumer traffic, both in-store and online, slowed due to the macroeconomic factors described in the section titled “Economic Conditions,” in comparison to the high demand realized during the same period last year. Additionally, certain product availability was adversely impacted by extended inventory transit times resulting from global supply chain disruptions and the startup of new production lines. These decreases were partially offset by pricing actions. Unfavorable foreign exchange rates reduced net sales by $2.0 million,
primarily driven by the Canadian dollar as compared to the U.S. dollar. Excluding the $2.0 million unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, Americas net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by 25%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Segment Adjusted Income from Operations. Segment adjusted income from operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $156.4 million, or 77%, to $47.3 million from $203.7 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was attributed to lower sales volumes in the U.S., higher inbound freight costs and increased product material costs, which was partially offset by pricing actions, reduced advertising costs and lower incentive compensation expense.
EMEA
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to the EMEA segment results that have been derived from our consolidated financial statements:
Total Segment Net Sales. Total segment net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $113.1 million, or 16%, to $613.0 million from $726.1 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to slowed consumer purchases due to the macroeconomic factors described in the section titled “Economic Conditions,” and unfavorable foreign exchange rates, which reduced net sales by $55.8 million, primarily driven by the Euro as compared to the U.S. dollar. These decreases were partially offset by pricing actions. Excluding the $55.8 million unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, EMEA net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by 8%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Segment Adjusted Income from Operations. Segment adjusted income from operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $106.2 million, or 48%, to $114.9 million from $221.1 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower sales volume, higher inbound freight and higher product material costs, all of which were partially offset by pricing actions, reduced advertising costs and lower incentive compensation expense.
APAC
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to the APAC segment results that have been derived from our consolidated financial statements:
Total Segment Net Sales. Total segment net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $0.3 million, or 0.2%, to $153.7 million from $154.0 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Unfavorable foreign exchange rates reduced net sales by $7.5 million. Excluding the $7.5 million unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, APAC net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 increased by 5%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by higher sales in New Zealand.
Segment Adjusted Income from Operations. Segment adjusted income from operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by $11.0 million, or 31%, to $24.5 million from $35.4 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, higher inbound freight and increased commodity costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary working capital requirements are to fund our daily operational activities like purchasing raw materials and component parts to manufacture products, and making payments to suppliers for goods and services. Our working capital requirements fluctuate during the year, driven primarily by the seasonality of market demand and the timing of inventory manufacturing and purchases, as well as the timing of cash receipts for products sold to customers. Our business is seasonal in nature with the highest level of sales of products occurring in the second and third fiscal quarters; accordingly, we historically borrowed under our short-term revolving credit facility in the first and second fiscal quarters to fund working capital for building up inventory in anticipation of the higher demand in the second and third fiscal quarters. Our capital expenditures are primarily related to growth initiatives and operational spending, including investments related to new product development, manufacturing and operational activities and investments in technology systems. In addition, in the future we may allocate capital to strategic acquisitions.
Generally, we fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures, payments related to acquisitions and debt service requirements with a combination of both cash on hand and the borrowing capacity under the Secured Credit Facility, as discussed below. The Company considers all investments with initial maturities of three months or less to be cash and cash equivalents, which consist primarily of demand deposits with major financial institutions in the U.S. and in countries where the Company’s subsidiaries operate. As of September 30, 2022, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $24.6 million, and we had $128.0 million of borrowings available under the revolving facility.
In March 2022, the Company entered into an agreement to sell certain trade accounts receivable to a third party financial institution (“Receivables Purchase Agreement”). The Receivables Purchase Agreement results in the transfer of the trade accounts receivable and associated risks to the third party and provides the third party with the full benefits and burdens of ownership in exchange for cash proceeds to the Company. The trade accounts receivable transferred were accounted for as sales of receivables as they had satisfied the required criteria under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 860, Transfers and Servicing, and were de-recognized from the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The maximum receivables that may be sold under the Receivables Purchase Agreement at any time was $235.0 million. As of September 30, 2022, the third party under the Receivables Purchase Agreement informed the Company that, as permitted by the terms of the agreement, it would not be purchasing trade accounts receivable for an unspecified period of time. There can be no assurance that the third party will begin purchasing trade accounts receivable in the near term, or at all.
We believe we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents, including availability under the Secured Credit Facility and new Unsecured Loan Agreements discussed below, to fund our operations, capital expenditures and debt service through fiscal year 2023.
Secured Credit Facility
The Company has a credit facility arrangement with a term loan of $1,250.0 million and a revolving credit facility with a maximum commitment of $300.0 million (the “Secured Credit Facility”). The term loan matures on October 30, 2027 and the revolving facility matures by October 30, 2025. Borrowings under the credit facilities bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (i) LIBOR for the relevant interest period, adjusted for statutory reserve requirements (subject to a floor of 0.00% per annum for all revolving loans and a 0.75% floor for the term loans), plus an applicable margin or (ii) a base rate equal to the highest of (a) the rate of interest publicly announced from time to time by the administrative agent as its “prime rate”, (b) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (c) adjusted LIBOR for an interest period of one month plus 1.00% (subject to a floor of 0.00% per annum), in each case, plus an applicable margin. As of September 30, 2022, we were in compliance with the financial covenants of the Secured Credit Facility.
On March 2, 2022, the Company exercised its right under the Secured Credit Facility to borrow $250.0 million of incremental term loans (the “Incremental Term Loan”). The Incremental Term Loan matures on October 30, 2027. Principal payments on the Incremental Term Loan commenced on June 30, 2022, and are payable quarterly at scheduled amounts, with the balance due at maturity. At the Company’s option, the Incremental Term Loan interest rate is based on either (a) Term secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”) for the applicable interest period (subject to a floor of 0.75%) plus an applicable margin or (b) base rate equal to the highest of (i) the rate of interest publicly announced from time to time by the administrative agent as its “prime rate”, (ii) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (iii) Term SOFR for an interest period of one month plus 1.00% (subject to a floor of 0.75% per annum), in each case, plus an applicable margin. As of September 30, 2022, the interest rate on the Incremental Term Loan was SOFR plus 4.25%. Interest is payable on the last business day of the month for the relevant interest period selected.
As of September 30, 2022, we were in compliance with the covenants of the Secured Credit Facility.
Unsecured Loan Agreements
Unsecured 12% Term Loan
On November 8, 2022, the Company entered into a loan agreement with BDT Capital Partners Fund I, L.P. and BDT Capital Partners Fund I-A, L.P. The loan agreement provides for an unsecured term loan facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of $61.2 million (the “Unsecured 12% Term Loan”). The loan agreement provides for additional unsecured term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $150.0 million.
The Unsecured 12% Term Loan bears interest at a fixed annual rate equal to 12.0%, payable in kind or in cash, at the election of the Company, on a quarterly basis (and, in the absence of such election, interest will be paid in kind). An upfront fee of 2.0% of the principal amount was paid in kind upon funding of the Unsecured 12% Term Loan. The loan agreement contains no negative covenants and no financial maintenance covenant. The loan agreement with BDT Capital Partners Fund I, L.P. and BDT Capital Partners Fund I-A, L.P. is considered a related party transaction.
On December 11, 2022, the loan agreement with BDT Capital Partners Fund I, L.P. and BDT Capital Partners Fund I-A, L.P. was amended to extend the maturity of the Unsecured 12% Term Loan, as well as any additional unsecured term loans to be entered into under the loan agreement, from January 29, 2026 to January 29, 2028.
Unsecured Credit Facility
On December 11, 2022 the Company entered into a credit facility with Ribeye Parent, LLC (“the Unsecured Credit Facility”), which provides for an unsecured delayed draw term loan of $120.0 million (the “Unsecured 15% Term Loan”) and an unsecured revolving credit facility with an initial aggregate commitment of $230.0 million (the “Unsecured Revolving Loan”). The Unsecured 15% Term Loan and Unsecured Revolving Loan may be drawn down subject to customary closing conditions no later than December 31, 2023.
Borrowings under the Unsecured Credit Facility mature on December 31, 2023 and bear interest at a fixed annual rate equal to 15%, payable in kind or in cash, at the election of the Company, on a quarterly basis (and, in the absence of such election, interest will be paid in kind). An upfront fee of 2.0% of the principal amount shall be payable in kind or in cash upon funding of the Unsecured 15% Term Loan, and a commitment fee of 0.5% per annum or average daily unused commitments under the Unsecured Credit Facility shall also be payable in kind or in cash on a quarterly basis. The Unsecured Credit Facility contains no negative covenants and no financial maintenance covenant. The credit facility with Ribeye Parent, LLC is considered a related party transaction.
Summary of Cash Flows
A summary of our cash flows (used in) provided by operating, investing and financing activities is presented in the following table:
Cash (Used In) Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased to $363.1 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 from net cash provided by operating activities of $54.1 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, a decrease of $417.2 million or 771%. The increase in net cash used in operating activities is primarily due to lower operating results. Additionally, there were unfavorable impacts from accounts payable balances driven by lower purchases in the current year period and the timing of payments.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $100.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 from $178.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, a decrease of $77.1 million or 43%. In the prior year period the Company acquired the June business for net cash payments of $102.2 million and the RMC business for cash payments of $26.3 million, for total cash payments of $128.5 million. This was partially offset by cash proceeds of $14.0
million from the sale of assets in the prior year period. Capital expenditures were $37.4 million higher in Fiscal Year 2022 as compared to the prior year period, primarily related to the Company’s implementation of a global SAP/S4 HANA ERP platform, building improvements for the global headquarters office in the U.S. and capital for the Europe Manufacturing Facility in Poland.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $358.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to $109.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
During Fiscal Year 2022, the Company received proceeds of $250.0 million from the issuance of the Incremental Term Loan, net proceeds of $167.0 million from borrowings of the Revolving Loan, $11.3 million for the issuance of capital and $4.9 million from other borrowings. The Company paid dividends of $6.4 million and member distributions of $34.5 million as well as made term loan repayments of $13.8 million, paid debt issuance costs of $9.7 million and paid interest rate swap settlement payments of $5.9 million.
Fiscal Year 2021 reflects proceeds from debt refinancing of $1,250.0 million, of which $616.6 million was used to the payoff the previous credit facility. The Company paid a total of $27.7 million of costs associated with the debt refinancing and amendments. In addition, during Fiscal Year 2021, $9.4 million was repaid on the term loan based on the payment schedule. The Company paid member distributions of $315.5 million, repurchased certain members’ interests for cash payments of $188.9 million and paid interest rate swap settlement payments of $5.4 million. These transactions were partially offset by proceeds of $13.1 million for issuance of capital.
Additionally, during Fiscal Year 2021, the Company received proceeds of $237.5 million from its IPO and used the proceeds to repay $220.1 million of the outstanding borrowings under our Secured Credit Facility and certain IPO-related costs of $7.0 million. Subsequently, the Company received proceeds of $35.6 million from the Greenshoe option, which were used to repurchase $35.6 million of Class A shares and LLC units.
Dividends/Distributions
On July 25, 2022, the Company announced that the Weber Inc. Board suspended the quarterly cash dividend.
Credit Rating
Effective July 2022, the S&P credit rating for Weber Inc. was CCC+.
Contractual Obligations
As of September 30, 2022, significant contractual obligations related to debt were $1,428.7 million of borrowings and $413.5 million of interest for our term loans, which become due through 2027. Projected interest costs on variable rate instruments were calculated using market rates at September 30, 2022. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. We also have contractual obligations for leases, including machinery and equipment, vehicles, IT assets, office equipment, real estate and other assets. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Other Information
As of September 30, 2022, $22.7 million of our $24.6 million in cash and cash equivalents was held in jurisdictions outside of the U.S. Cash held outside the U.S. may be repatriated, subject to certain limitations, and would be available to be used to fund our domestic operations. However, repatriation of funds may result in additional tax liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on historical results and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable, all of which form the basis for making estimates concerning the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect the most significant estimates and management judgments used in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue transactions associated with the sale of grills and related accessories comprise a single performance obligation, which consists of the transfer of products to customers at a point in time. Substantially all of the Company’s revenues relate to the sales of grills and accessories.
The Company satisfies the performance obligation and records revenues for grills and accessories when control has passed to the customer, based on the terms of sale. Transfer of control passes to customers at a point in time, that point in time generally being upon shipment or upon delivery of the performance obligation, depending on the written sales terms with the customer.
The Company’s purchase orders from customers for specific products represent its contracts and include all key terms and conditions related to the sale of products. For all sales, no significant uncertainty exists surrounding the customers’ obligation to pay for grills and accessories. Customers’ obligations to pay are generally under normal commercial terms, with payment terms typically being 30-60 days upon completion of the performance obligation. As payment terms are less than one year from the satisfaction of performance obligation, our sales do not include any significant financing components. Consideration promised in the Company’s contracts with customers is variable due to anticipated reductions, such as cash discounts and customer incentives (volume rebates and advertising programs). The transaction price is determined based upon the invoiced sales price, less anticipated reductions. The cost of these discounts and incentives are estimated at the inception of the contract based on the Company’s annual incentive programs with customers and recognized as a reduction to revenue at the time of sale. Subsequent adjustments to discounts or incentive programs are recognized to revenue in the period the adjustment is determinable.
The Company offers warranties on most of its products, which are considered assurance type warranties and, therefore, are not accounted for as a separate performance obligation.
Accordingly, all shipping and handling activity costs are recognized as selling, general and administrative expenses at the time the related revenue is recognized. Amounts invoiced to customers for shipping and handling are recorded in net sales. Any taxes collected on behalf of government authorities are excluded from net sales. The Company has elected to account for shipping and handling activities as a fulfillment cost.
Inventories
Inventories include finished products and work-in-process and materials associated with production and are recorded at standard cost, which approximates actual cost, primarily using the first-in, first-out method. Inventory costs include those costs directly attributable to products, including all manufacturing overhead, but excluding costs to distribute. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value), including appropriate consideration given to obsolescence, excessive inventory levels, product deterioration and other factors.
Impairment of Goodwill, Indefinite-Lived Intangibles and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of consideration transferred over the estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We evaluate goodwill for possible impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. To analyze goodwill for impairment, we must assign our goodwill to individual reporting units. Our reporting units for goodwill impairment testing purposes are Americas, EMEA and APAC.
For goodwill, we may first make a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value. The qualitative impairment assessment includes considering various factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and any reporting unit specific events. If it is determined through the qualitative assessment that the reporting unit’s fair value is more likely than not greater than its carrying value, the quantitative impairment assessment is not required. If the qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s fair value is not greater than its carrying value, we must perform a quantitative impairment assessment. If it is determined a quantitative assessment is necessary, we would compare the fair value of the reporting unit to the respective carrying value, which includes goodwill.
To determine the fair value of a reporting unit as part of our quantitative test, we use the income approach. The income approach uses a discounted cash flow analysis, which involves applying appropriate discount rates to estimated future cash flows based on forecasts of sales, costs and capital requirements. The most significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach are the enterprise value based on the estimated present value of future net cash flows the business is expected to generate over a forecasted period and an estimate of the present value of cash flows beyond that period, which is referred to as the terminal value. The estimated present value is calculated using a discount rate known as
the weighted-average cost of capital, which accounts for the time value of money and the appropriate degree of risks inherent in the business. We estimate future sales growth using a number of critical factors, including among others, our nature and our history, financial and economic conditions affecting us, our industry and the general company, past results and our current operations and future prospects. Forecasts of future operations are based, in part, on operating results and our expectations as to future market conditions. We deem the discount rate used in our analysis to be commensurate with the underlying uncertainties associated with achieving the estimated cash flows we project. This analysis contains uncertainties because it requires us to make assumptions and to apply judgments to estimate industry economic factors and the profitability of future business strategies. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material.
The Company evaluates goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for possible impairment during the fourth quarter of the Company's fiscal year or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable.
During the quarter ended June 30, 2022, the Company determined that a triggering event had occurred given the negative impact to its operating results from the current macroeconomic environment, including inflation, foreign exchange fluctuations, supply chain disruptions and higher freight and fuel costs. Accordingly, the Company performed a quantitative assessment for all reporting units, which compared the reporting units’ fair values to their respective carrying values. The assessment included estimates of future revenue, future cash flows and applicable discount rates. The Company determined that no impairment charge was required with respect to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets as a result of this quantitative assessment and for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022. Additionally, no indicators of impairment for other intangible assets subject to amortization were identified during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022.
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, the Company performed a qualitative assessment of its goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and noted no impairment. Additionally, no indicators of impairment for other intangible assets subject to amortization were identified during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
Our trademark, Weber, has been assigned an indefinite life as we currently anticipate that this trademark will contribute cash flows to us indefinitely. We evaluate whether the trademark continues to have an indefinite life on an annual basis. The trademark is reviewed for impairment at least annually and may be reviewed more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. Conditions that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, a product recall or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. We perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that the trademark’s fair value is less than its carrying value. The qualitative impairment assessment includes various factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and any reporting unit specific events. Impairment losses are recorded to the extent that the carrying value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value. No impairment charge for our trademark was recorded for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
Long-Lived Assets
A long-lived asset (including amortizable identifiable intangible assets) or asset group is tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. Conditions that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, a product recall or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. When indicators of impairment are present, the Company evaluates the carrying value of the long-lived assets in relation to the operating performance and future undiscounted cash flows of the underlying assets. The Company adjusts the net book value of the long-lived assets to fair value if the sum of the expected future cash flows is less than book value. No impairment charge for our long-lived assets was recorded for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
Equity Based Compensation
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures stock-based compensation at fair value on the grant date, or modification date if applicable, of the award. For equity awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of service requirements, compensation expense is measured based on the fair value of the award on the date of grant and expense is recognized over the service period of the awards based on the graded-vesting method. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. Stock-based compensation expense is classified in the consolidated statements of operations based on the function to which the related
services are provided. The costs of equity awards are recorded to Additional paid-in capital on the consolidated balance sheets.
Unit-Based Compensation
Prior to the Company's IPO, the Company granted unit-based awards to certain employees, including profits interest units and Pre-IPO Management Incentive Compensation Plan (“Legacy LTIP”) awards. As described within the Change in Accounting Principle section below, the Company changed its methodology for valuing the profits interest units and Legacy LTIP awards from the intrinsic value methodology to fair value during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Both awards were also modified from liability-based awards to equity-based awards during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, and the awards were remeasured on the modification date with any changes in fair value recognized in compensation expense. No subsequent remeasurement will be performed unless additional modifications are made to the awards. Compensation expense associated with the awards is recognized over the service period of the awards based on the graded-vesting method.
The fair value of the profits interest units was estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing valuation model. The determination of fair value using an option-pricing model is affected by the Company’s enterprise value as well as assumptions pertaining to several variables, including expected volatility, the expected term of the unit and the risk-free rate of interest. In the option-pricing model for the Company’s profits interest units, expected volatility was based on an analysis of reported data for a group of guideline publicly traded companies. The expected term of the unit was based on expected exercise patterns of unit holders and the risk-free rate of interest was based on U.S. Treasury yields.
The value of the Legacy LTIP awards prior to modification was based on achievement of performance metrics established by the Compensation Committee of the Board and was remeasured at each reporting period. As the units issued were based on performance metrics, the expense was adjusted for the ultimate number of units expected to be issued as of the end of each reporting period prior to the IPO.
Product Warranty
The Company offers warranties on most of its products. The specific terms and conditions of the warranties offered by the Company vary depending upon the product sold. The Company estimates the costs that may be incurred under its warranty plans and the period for which claims are honored, and records a liability in the amount of such costs at the time product revenue is recognized. Factors that affect the Company’s warranty liability include the number of units sold, the type of products sold, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims and cost per claim. The Company periodically assesses the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.
Change in Accounting Principle
In anticipation of becoming a public company, as defined in ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, the Company changed its methodology for valuing the profits interest units and Legacy LTIP awards during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Profits interest units and Legacy LTIP awards historically were accounted for as liability compensatory awards under ASC 710, Compensation-General, and valued using the intrinsic value method, as permitted by ASC 718 for nonpublic entities. The change resulted in additional compensation expense of $12.5 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The effect of the change represents the difference in compensation costs measured using the intrinsic value method and the fair value method. The Legacy LTIP awards were not impacted by the change in valuation methods due to the nature of the grant terms and underlying calculation.