ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) summarizes the financial statements from management’s perspective with respect to our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and other factors that may affect actual results. The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
•Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
•Business Acquisitions
•Overview
•COVID-19
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Estimates
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements:
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains historical information and forward-looking statements based on information currently available to our management. The forward-looking statements in this report, including those made in this Item 7 (Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations), are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, as amended. These safe harbor provisions encourage reporting companies to provide prospective information to investors. Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of certain words, such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “project,” and other similar terms and language. We believe the forward-looking statements are reasonable based on currently available information. However, forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, whether known or unknown, that could cause our actual results, business, financial condition and cash flows to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. A discussion of important factors relating to forward-looking statements is included in Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Form 10-K. Readers should not unduly rely on the forward-looking statements included in this Form 10-K because such statements speak only to the date they were made. Unless otherwise required by applicable securities laws, we undertake no obligation or duty to update or revise any forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect subsequent events or circumstances or the occurrence of unanticipated events.
Business Acquisitions:
ECM Acquisition
On July 1, 2021, we acquired an 80% equity ownership interest in ECM for a cash purchase price of $141.3 million after net working capital changes and net of cash acquired. ECM achieved revenues of $108 million in 2020 with an operating margin of 19.8%. ECM consists of ECM Transport and MCS, which are regional truckload carriers that together operate nearly 500 trucks and 2,000 trailers in the Mid-Atlantic, Ohio and Northeast regions of the U.S. with low driver turnover. Revenues generated by ECM Transport and MCS are reported in One-Way Truckload within our TTS segment.
We financed the transaction through a combination of cash on hand, existing credit facilities and a new $100.0 million unsecured fixed-rate term loan maturing in May 2024 with BMO Harris Bank N.A., one of our two lead banks. The remaining 20% ownership interest in ECM is retained by Ed Meier, founder and President of ECM.
NEHDS Acquisition
On November 22, 2021, we acquired 100% of the equity interests in NEHDS for a cash purchase price of $63.1 million after including the impacts of contingent consideration, net working capital changes and cash acquired. We financed the transaction through a combination of cash on hand and existing credit facilities. NEHDS achieved revenues of $71 million for the 12-month period ended September 2021 and produced an average annual revenues growth rate of 27% over the last three years. NEHDS is a final mile residential delivery provider with access to a network of 400 final mile delivery trucks serving customers primarily in the Northeast and Midwest U.S. markets. Revenues generated by NEHDS are reported in Final Mile within our Werner Logistics segment.
Additional information regarding the ECM and NEHDS acquisitions is included in Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10-K.
Overview:
We have two reportable segments, TTS and Werner Logistics, and we operate in the truckload and logistics sectors of the transportation industry. In the truckload sector, we focus on transporting consumer nondurable products that generally ship more consistently throughout the year. In the logistics sector, besides managing transportation requirements for individual
customers, we provide additional sources of truck capacity, alternative modes of transportation, a North American delivery network and systems analysis to optimize transportation needs. Our success depends on our ability to efficiently and effectively manage our resources in the delivery of truckload transportation and logistics services to our customers. Resource requirements vary with customer demand, which may be subject to seasonal or general economic conditions. Our ability to adapt to changes in customer transportation requirements is essential to efficiently deploy resources and make capital investments in tractors and trailers (with respect to our TTS segment) or obtain qualified third-party capacity at a reasonable price (with respect to our Werner Logistics segment). We may also be affected by our customers’ financial failures or loss of customer business.
Revenues for our TTS segment operating units (Dedicated and One-Way Truckload) are typically generated on a per-mile basis and also include revenues such as stop charges, loading and unloading charges, equipment detention charges and equipment repositioning charges. To mitigate our risk to fuel price increases, we recover additional fuel surcharge revenues from our customers that generally recoup a majority of the increased fuel costs; however, we cannot assure that current recovery levels will continue in future periods. Because fuel surcharge revenues fluctuate in response to changes in fuel costs, we identify them separately and exclude them from the statistical calculations to provide a more meaningful comparison between periods. The key statistics used to evaluate trucking revenues, net of fuel surcharge, are (i) average revenues per tractor per week, (ii) average percentage of empty miles (miles without trailer cargo), (iii) average trip length (in loaded miles) and (iv) average number of tractors in service. General economic conditions, seasonal trucking industry freight patterns and industry capacity are important factors that impact these statistics. Our TTS segment also generates a small amount of revenues categorized as non-trucking revenues, which consist primarily of the intra-Mexico portion of cross-border shipments delivered to or from Mexico where the TTS segment utilizes a third-party capacity provider. We exclude such revenues from the statistical calculations.
Our most significant resource requirements are company drivers, independent contractors, tractors and trailers. Independent contractors supply their own tractors and drivers and are responsible for their operating expenses. Our financial results are affected by company driver and independent contractor availability and the markets for new and used revenue equipment. We are self-insured for a significant portion of bodily injury, property damage and cargo claims; workers’ compensation claims; and associate health claims (supplemented by premium-based insurance coverage above certain dollar levels). For that reason, our financial results may also be affected by driver safety, medical costs, weather, legal and regulatory environments and insurance coverage costs to protect against catastrophic losses.
The operating ratio is a common industry measure used to evaluate our profitability and that of our TTS segment operating fleets. The operating ratio consists of operating expenses expressed as a percentage of operating revenues. The most significant variable expenses that impact the TTS segment are driver salaries and benefits, fuel, fuel taxes (included in taxes and licenses expense), payments to independent contractors (included in rent and purchased transportation expense), supplies and maintenance and insurance and claims. As discussed further in the comparison of operating results for 2021 to 2020, several industry-wide issues have caused, and could continue to cause, costs to increase in future periods. These issues include shortages of drivers or independent contractors, changing fuel prices, compliance with new or proposed regulations and tightening of the commercial truck liability insurance market. Our main fixed costs include depreciation expense for tractors and trailers and equipment licensing fees (included in taxes and licenses expense). The TTS segment requires substantial cash expenditures for tractor and trailer purchases. We fund these purchases with net cash from operations and financing available under our existing credit facilities, as management deems necessary.
We provide non-trucking services primarily through the three operating units within our Werner Logistics segment (Truckload Logistics, Intermodal, and Final Mile). In first quarter 2021, we completed the previously-announced sale of the Werner Global Logistics (“WGL”) freight forwarding services for international ocean and air shipments to Scan Global Logistics Group. WGL had annual revenues of $53 million in 2020, and we realized a $1.0 million gain from the sale in first quarter 2021. Unlike our TTS segment, the Werner Logistics segment is less asset-intensive and is instead dependent upon qualified associates, information systems and qualified third-party capacity providers. The largest expense item related to the Werner Logistics segment is the cost of purchased transportation we pay to third-party capacity providers. This expense item is recorded as rent and purchased transportation expense. Other operating expenses consist primarily of salaries, wages and benefits, as well as depreciation, supplies and maintenance, and other general expenses. We evaluate the Werner Logistics segment’s financial performance by reviewing operating expenses and operating income expressed as a percentage of revenues. Purchased transportation expenses as a percentage of revenues can be impacted by the rates charged to customers and the costs of securing third-party capacity. We have a mix of contracted long-term rates and variable rates for the cost of third-party capacity, and we cannot assure that our operating results will not be adversely impacted in the future if our ability to obtain qualified third-party capacity providers changes or the rates of such providers increase.
At the end of 2021, we believe we are well positioned with a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity. Our debt is at $428 million, or a net debt ratio of 0.6 times earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had available liquidity of $169 million, considering cash on hand and available credit facilities of $115 million. We also have sufficient cushion with our debt covenants. We currently plan to continue paying our quarterly dividend,
which we have paid quarterly since 1987. This cash outlay currently results in slightly less than $8 million per quarter. Net capital expenditures (primarily revenue equipment) in 2022 currently are expected to be in the range of $275 million to $325 million.
COVID-19:
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the U.S. and global economies and has resulted in ongoing supply chain challenges. During the pandemic, the transportation industry has been designated by the U.S. government as an essential industry for keeping the U.S. supply chain moving. We are monitoring and reacting to the evolving nature of the pandemic, governmental responses, and their impacts on our business, including employee availability. We are working hard to stay healthy while safely delivering our customers’ freight on time. Throughout our offices and terminal network, we are closely following the safety guidelines set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and World Health Organization (WHO).
Over the past several years, we have repositioned Werner to increase our ability to execute through different macroeconomic environments. We believe our freight base, which is heavily weighted toward customers delivering essential products that are continually being restocked in today’s economy, enabled us to more effectively manage through the difficult economic environment created by the pandemic. While there remain significant uncertainties related to COVID-19 and its effect on the economy, we believe that demand for our services will be strong in 2022.
Results of Operations:
The following table sets forth the consolidated statements of income in dollars and as a percentage of total operating revenues and the percentage increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items compared to the prior year.
The following tables set forth the operating revenues, operating expenses and operating income for the TTS segment and certain statistical data regarding our TTS segment operations, as well as statistical data for the One-Way Truckload and Dedicated operating units within TTS.
(1)Net of fuel surcharge revenues
The following tables set forth the Werner Logistics segment’s revenues, purchased transportation expense, other operating expenses (primarily salaries, wages and benefits expense), total operating expenses, and operating income, as well as certain statistical data regarding the Werner Logistics segment.
2021 Compared to 2020
Operating Revenues
Operating revenues increased 15.3% in 2021 compared to 2020. When comparing 2021 to 2020, TTS segment revenues increased $201.9 million, or 11.0%. Revenues for the Werner Logistics segment increased $152.7 million or 32.5%.
Freight demand was strong throughout 2021 in our Dedicated and One-Way Truckload fleets. Freight demand has continued to be strong during the first two months of 2022.
Trucking revenues, net of fuel surcharge, increased 7.3% in 2021 compared to 2020 due to a 4.3% increase in average revenues per tractor per week, net of fuel surcharge and a 2.9% increase in the average number of tractors in service. The increase in average revenues per tractor was due primarily to improved pricing in both Dedicated and One-Way Truckload, partially offset by a decline in miles per tractor caused by tractors down due to equipment parts shortages, more drivers unavailable to work due to COVID quarantine protocols, a 2% shorter average loaded length of haul for the TTS segment, and other factors. We currently expect average revenues per total mile, net of fuel surcharge, for the One-Way Truckload fleet to remain strong for the first half of 2022 and to increase in a range of 16% to 19% when compared to the first half of 2021, and we expect Dedicated average revenues per tractor per week, net of fuel surcharge, to increase in a range of 3% to 5% in 2022 compared to 2021.
The average number of tractors in service in the TTS segment increased 2.9% to 7,982 in 2021 compared to 7,757 in 2020. We ended 2021 with 8,340 tractors in the TTS segment, a year-over-year increase of 510 tractors, primarily resulting from the nearly 500 tractors acquired in the ECM acquisition. Our Dedicated unit ended 2021 with 5,235 tractors (or 63% of our total TTS segment fleet) compared to 4,945 tractors at the end of 2020. We currently expect our fleet size at the end of 2022 to be in a range of 2% to 5% higher when compared to the fleet size at the end of 2021, subject to driver availability and timing of delivery of new tractors from our equipment manufacturers. We cannot predict whether future driver shortages, if any, will adversely affect our ability to maintain our fleet size. If such a driver market shortage were to occur, it could result in a fleet size reduction, and our results of operations could be adversely affected.
Trucking fuel surcharge revenues increased 47.6% to $234.2 million in 2021 from $158.6 million in 2020 due primarily to higher average diesel fuel prices, partially offset by fewer miles in 2021. These revenues represent collections from customers for the increase in fuel and fuel-related expenses, including the fuel component of our independent contractor cost (recorded as rent and purchased transportation expense) and fuel taxes (recorded in taxes and licenses expense), when diesel fuel prices rise. Conversely, when fuel prices decrease, fuel surcharge revenues decrease. To lessen the effect of fluctuating fuel prices on our margins, we collect fuel surcharge revenues from our customers for the cost of diesel fuel and taxes in excess of specified base fuel price levels according to terms in our customer contracts. Fuel surcharge rates generally adjust weekly based on an independent U.S. Department of Energy fuel price survey which is released every Monday. Our fuel surcharge programs are designed to (i) recoup higher fuel costs from customers when fuel prices rise and (ii) provide customers with the benefit of lower fuel costs when fuel prices decline. These programs generally enable us to recover a majority, but not all, of the fuel price increases. The remaining portion is generally not recoverable because it results from empty and out-of-route miles (which are not billable to customers) and tractor idle time. Fuel prices that change rapidly in short time periods also impact our recovery because the surcharge rate in most programs only changes once per week.
Werner Logistics revenues are generated by its three operating units, following the sale of its WGL freight forwarding services for international ocean and air shipments in first quarter 2021. Werner Logistics revenues exclude revenues for full truckload shipments transferred to the TTS segment, which are recorded as trucking revenues by the TTS segment. Werner Logistics also recorded revenue and brokered freight expense of $0.9 million in 2021 and $0.1 million in 2020 for movements performed by the TTS segment (also recorded as trucking revenue by the TTS segment), primarily related to Intermodal drayage, and these transactions between reporting segments are eliminated in consolidation. Werner Logistics revenues increased 32.5% to $622.5 million in 2021 from $469.8 million in 2020 due primarily to higher pricing and volume growth in Truckload Logistics and Intermodal, and an $8.8 million increase in Final Mile revenues primarily due to the impact of NEHDS acquired in November 2021. Truckload Logistics revenues (68% of total Logistics revenues) increased 58% due to 29% higher revenues per shipment and a 23% increase in volume. Intermodal revenues (26% of total Logistics revenues) increased 37% due to 35% higher revenues per shipment and a 1% increase in volume. Werner Logistics operating income increased to $27.9 million in 2021 compared to $6.0 million in 2020, due to revenue growth and a 320 basis point expansion of operating margin percentage in a strong freight market. The Werner Logistics operating margin percentage increased to 4.5% in 2021 from 1.3% in 2020. We expect Werner Logistics to achieve continued revenue and operating income growth in 2022.
Operating Expenses
Our operating ratio (operating expenses expressed as a percentage of operating revenues) was 88.7% in 2021 compared to 90.4% in 2020. Expense items that impacted the overall operating ratio are described on the following pages. The tables on pages 17 through 19 show the consolidated statements of income in dollars and as a percentage of total operating revenues and the percentage increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items compared to the prior year, as well as the operating ratios, operating margins and certain statistical information for our two reportable segments, TTS and Werner Logistics.
Salaries, wages and benefits increased $99.2 million or 12.5% in 2021 compared to 2020 and decreased 0.9% as a percentage of operating revenues. The higher dollar amount of salaries, wages and benefits expense in 2021 was due primarily to increased driver pay, including: (i) driver pay rate increases, (ii) incentive recruiting bonuses, and (iii) minimum pay guarantees, and higher benefits expense, including group health insurance. These increases were partially offset by 20.5 million fewer company tractor miles during 2021. In January 2021, we implemented driver pay increases of approximately $10 million annually in our One-Way Truckload fleet, and another pay increase in August of approximately $11 million annually. Within Dedicated, we continue to implement pay increases as needed. As a result, driver pay per company driver mile increased 15% in 2021. Non-driver salaries, wages and benefits in our non-trucking Werner Logistics segment increased 4.1%.
We renewed our workers’ compensation insurance coverage on April 1, 2021. Our coverage levels are the same as the prior policy year. We continue to maintain a self-insurance retention of $2.0 million per claim. Our workers’ compensation insurance premiums for the policy year beginning April 2021 are $0.3 million higher than the premiums for the previous policy year.
Strong consumer demand combined with a severely constrained driver market is presenting labor challenges for customers and carriers alike and became more challenging in 2021, as the strong freight market caused increased competition for the finite number of experienced drivers that meet our hiring standards. Several ongoing market factors persisted including a declining number of, and increased competition for, driver training school graduates, aging truck driver demographics and increased truck safety regulations. We continue to take significant actions to strengthen our driver recruiting and retention as we strive to be the truckload employer of choice, including raising driver pay, providing a modern tractor and trailer fleet with the latest safety equipment and technology, investing and expanding our driver training school network and offering a wide variety of driving positions including daily and weekly home time opportunities. We are unable to predict whether we will experience future driver shortages or maintain our current driver retention rates. If such a driver shortage were to occur and additional driver pay rate increases became necessary to attract and retain drivers, our results of operations would be negatively impacted to the extent that we could not obtain corresponding freight rate increases.
Fuel increased $88.7 million or 56.5% in 2021 compared to 2020 and increased 2.4% as a percentage of operating revenues due to higher average diesel fuel prices, partially offset by 20.5 million fewer company tractor miles in 2021. Average diesel fuel prices, excluding fuel taxes, for the full year 2021 were 85 cents per gallon higher than the full year 2020, a 64% increase.
We continue to employ measures to improve our fuel mpg such as (i) limiting tractor engine idle time, (ii) optimizing the speed, weight and specifications of our equipment and (iii) implementing mpg-enhancing equipment changes to our fleet including new tractors, more aerodynamic tractor features, idle reduction systems, trailer tire inflation systems, trailer skirts and automated manual transmissions to reduce our fuel gallons purchased. However, fuel savings from mpg improvement is partially offset by higher depreciation expense and the additional cost of diesel exhaust fluid. Although our fuel management programs require significant capital investment and research and development, we intend to continue these and other environmentally conscious initiatives, including our active participation as an EPA SmartWay Transport Partner. The SmartWay Transport Partnership is a national voluntary program developed by the EPA and freight industry representatives to reduce greenhouse gases and air pollution and promote cleaner, more efficient ground freight transportation.
Through February 18, the average diesel fuel price per gallon in 2022 was approximately $1.03 higher than the average diesel fuel price per gallon in the same period of 2021 and approximately 88 cents higher than the average for first quarter 2021.
Shortages of fuel, increases in fuel prices and petroleum product rationing can have a material adverse effect on our operations and profitability. We are unable to predict whether fuel price levels will increase or decrease in the future or the extent to which fuel surcharges will be collected from customers. As of December 31, 2021, we had no derivative financial instruments to reduce our exposure to fuel price fluctuations.
Supplies and maintenance increased $30.9 million or 17.5% in 2021 compared to 2020 and increased 0.2% as a percentage of operating revenues. The higher dollar amount of supplies and maintenance expense was due primarily to higher equipment maintenance costs, driver lodging expenses and driver sourcing costs. Our driver sourcing costs were higher due to startup costs for our new and planned driving school location additions.
Insurance and claims decreased $11.2 million or 10.2% in 2021 compared to 2020 and decreased 1.0% as a percentage of operating revenues, due primarily to lower expense for new large dollar claims and a lower amount of unfavorable development on large dollar claims, partially offset by higher liability insurance premiums of $7.7 million. In January 2020, one of our tractors was involved in a serious accident. We self-insure for the first $10.0 million of liability coverage for this policy period, and have appropriate excess liability coverage with insurance carriers above that amount. As a result, we recorded $10.0 million of insurance and claims expense in first quarter 2020 for this accident. We also incurred insurance and claims expense of $5.1 million and $4.9 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, for accrued interest related to a previously-disclosed adverse jury verdict rendered on May 17, 2018, which we are appealing (see Note 12 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Part II of this Form 10-K). Interest is accrued at $0.4 million per month, until such time as the outcome of our appeal is finalized. The majority of our insurance and claims expense results from our claim experience and claim development under our self-insurance program; the remainder results from insurance premiums for claims in excess of our self-insured limits.
We renewed our liability insurance policies on August 1, 2021 and are responsible for the first $10.0 million per claim on all claims with an annual $10.0 million aggregate for claims between $10.0 million and $15.0 million. For the policy year that began August 1, 2020, we were responsible for the first $10.0 million per claim with no aggregates. We maintain liability insurance coverage with insurance carriers in excess of the $10.0 million per claim. Our liability insurance premiums for the policy year that began August 1, 2021 are $7.0 million higher than premiums for the previous policy year.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $4.4 million or 1.7% in 2021 compared to 2020 and decreased 1.3% as a percentage of operating revenues due primarily to depreciation and amortization on tangible and intangible assets recorded in the ECM and NEHDS acquisitions, partially offset by the impact of a change in accounting estimate that was made in the first quarter 2020, which increased depreciation expense by $9.6 million in 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, we changed the estimated life of certain tractors expected to be sold in 2020 to more rapidly depreciate these tractors to their estimated residual values due to the weak used tractor market. These tractors continued to depreciate at the same higher rate per tractor until all were sold in 2020. This change in accounting estimate had no effect on 2021.
The average age of our tractor fleet remains low by industry standards and was 2.2 years as of December 31, 2021, and the average age of our trailers was 4.5 years. We continued to invest in new tractors and trailers and our terminals in 2021 to improve our driver experience, increase operational efficiency and more effectively manage our maintenance, safety and fuel costs. We currently intend to maintain the average age of our tractor and trailer fleet at or near current levels in 2022, subject to timing of delivery of new tractors and trailers from our equipment manufacturers.
Rent and purchased transportation expense increased $122.0 million or 23.5% in 2021 compared to 2020 and increased 1.5% as a percentage of operating revenues. Rent and purchased transportation expense consists mostly of payments to third-party capacity providers in the Werner Logistics segment and other non-trucking operations and payments to independent contractors in the TTS segment. The payments to third-party capacity providers generally vary depending on changes in the volume of services generated by the Werner Logistics segment. Werner Logistics purchased transportation expense increased $128.1 million as a result of higher logistics revenues, and decreased to 86.0% as a percentage of Werner Logistics revenues in 2021 from 86.7% in 2020.
Rent and purchased transportation expense for the TTS segment decreased $6.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020. This decrease is due primarily to lower payments to independent contractors in 2021 compared to 2020, resulting from 22.6 million fewer independent contractor miles driven in 2021. Higher average diesel fuel prices in 2021 also resulted in a higher per-mile settlement rate for independent contractors. Independent contractor miles as a percentage of total miles were 5.8% in 2021 and 8.3% in 2020. Because independent contractors supply their own tractors and drivers and are responsible for their operating expenses, the decrease in independent contractor miles as a percentage of total miles shifted costs from the rent and purchased transportation category to other expense categories, including (i) salaries, wages and benefits, (ii) fuel, (iii) depreciation, (iv) supplies and maintenance and (v) taxes and licenses.
Challenging operating conditions continue to make independent contractor recruitment and retention difficult. Such conditions include inflationary cost increases that are the responsibility of independent contractors and a shortage of financing available to independent contractors for equipment purchases. Historically, we have been able to add company tractors and recruit additional company drivers to offset any decrease in the number of independent contractors. If a shortage of independent contractors and company drivers occurs, further increases in per-mile settlement rates (for independent contractors) and driver pay rates (for company drivers) may become necessary to attract and retain these drivers. This could negatively affect our results of operations to the extent that we would not be able to obtain corresponding freight rate increases.
Other operating expenses decreased $52.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020 and decreased 2.0% as a percentage of operating revenues. Gains on sales of assets (primarily used tractors and trailers) are reflected as a reduction of other operating expenses and are reported net of sales-related expenses (which include costs to prepare the equipment for sale). Gains on sales of assets were $61.5 million in 2021, compared to $11.3 million in 2020. In 2021, we sold fewer tractors and trailers than in 2020. We realized substantially higher average gains per tractor and trailer sold in 2021 due to significantly improved pricing in the market for our used equipment, which we believe is a result of increased demand for previously used equipment because of production delays limiting availability of new equipment in the industry.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expense (income) decreased $39.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to a $40.3 million net unrealized gain recognized on our investments in equity securities (see Note 7 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Part II of this Form 10-K).
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased $28.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020, due to higher pre-tax income, partially offset by a slightly lower effective income tax rate (income taxes expressed as a percentage of income before income taxes) in 2021 of 24.4% compared to 24.8% in 2020. We currently estimate our full year 2022 effective income tax rate to be approximately 24.5% to 25.5%.
2020 Compared to 2019
For a comparison of the Company’s results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 24, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
We closely manage our liquidity and capital resources. Our liquidity requirements depend on key variables, including the level of investment needed to support business strategies, the performance of the business, capital expenditures, borrowing arrangements, and working capital management. Capital expenditures, stock repurchases, and dividend payments are components of our cash flow and capital management strategy, which to a large extent, can be adjusted in response to economic and other changes in the business environment. Management’s approach to capital allocation focuses on investing in key priorities that support our business and growth strategies and providing shareholder returns, while funding ongoing operations.
Management believes our financial position at December 31, 2021 is strong. As of December 31, 2021, we had $54.2 million of cash and cash equivalents and over $1.3 billion of stockholders’ equity. Cash is invested primarily in government portfolio money market funds. In addition, we have a $300.0 million and a $200.0 million credit facility, for which our total available borrowing capacity was $115.1 million as of December 31, 2021 (see Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10-K for information regarding our credit agreements). We believe our liquid assets, cash generated from operating activities, and borrowing capacity under our existing credit facilities will provide sufficient funds to meet our cash requirements and our planned shareholder returns for the foreseeable future.
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
•Debt Obligations and Interest Payments - As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding debt with an aggregate principal amount of $427.5 million, with $5.0 million payable within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with our debt obligations are estimated to be $14.6 million through 2024, with $6.2 million payable within 12 months. See Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10-K for further detail of our debt and the timing of expected future principal payments.
•Operating Leases - We have entered into operating leases primarily for real estate. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $32.1 million, with $7.0 million payable within 12 months. See Note 5 in the Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10-K for further detail of our lease obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
•Purchase Obligations - As of December 31, 2021, we have committed to property and equipment purchases of approximately $163.2 million within the next 12 months.
In addition to our cash requirements, the Board of Directors has authorized us to deliver value to shareholders through stock repurchases and quarterly cash dividends. The stock repurchase program does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares. We plan to continue paying a quarterly dividend, which currently results in a cash outlay of slightly less than $8 million per quarter.
Cash Flows
We generated cash flow from operations of $332.8 million during 2021 compared to $445.9 million during 2020. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to working capital changes resulting from changes in accounts receivable, higher federal and state estimated income tax payments, and the deferral of 2020 employer payroll tax payments as permitted under the CARES Act. We were able to make net capital expenditures, repay debt, pay dividends, and repurchase stock with the net cash provided by operating activities and existing cash balances, supplemented by borrowings under our existing credit facilities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $397.3 million during 2021 compared to $263.3 million during 2020. Net cash invested in our ECM and NEHDS acquisitions during 2021 was $201.8 million. Net property additions (primarily revenue equipment) were $193.0 million for during 2021 compared to $266.2 million during 2020. We currently estimate net capital expenditures (primarily revenue equipment) in 2022 to be in the range of $275 million to $325 million. We intend to fund these net capital expenditures through cash flows from operations and financing available under our existing credit facilities, if necessary.
Net financing activities provided $89.7 million during 2021 and used $186.0 million during 2020. We had net borrowings of $227.5 million during 2021, bringing our outstanding debt at December 31, 2021 to $427.5 million. The proceeds were primarily used to finance our ECM and NEHDS acquisitions. During 2020, we repaid $100.0 million of debt, net of borrowings. We paid dividends of $29.1 million during 2021 and $24.9 million during 2020. We increased our quarterly dividend rate by $0.01 per share, or 11%, beginning with the quarterly dividend paid in May 2021, and we increased our quarterly dividend rate by $0.02 per share, or 20%, beginning with the dividend paid in July 2021.
Financing activities for 2021 also included common stock repurchases of 2,297,911 shares at a cost of $104.4 million. We repurchased 1,482,992 shares during 2020 at a cost of $56.5 million. The Company has repurchased, and may continue to repurchase, shares of the Company’s common stock. The timing and amount of such purchases depends upon economic and stock market conditions and other factors. On November 9, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program under which the Company is authorized to repurchase up to 6,000,000 shares of its common stock. On the same day, our Board of Directors withdrew the previous stock repurchase authorization, which had 1,496,983 shares remaining available for repurchase. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had purchased 977,886 shares pursuant to the new authorization and had 5,022,114 shares remaining available for repurchase.
Critical Accounting Estimates:
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the (i) reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and (ii) reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis as events and circumstances change, utilizing historical experience, consultation with experts and other methods considered reasonable in the particular circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates and may significantly impact our results of operations from period to period. It is also possible that materially different amounts would be reported if we used different estimates or assumptions.
Estimates of accrued liabilities for insurance and claims for bodily injury, property damage and workers’ compensation is a critical accounting estimate that requires us to make significant judgments and estimates and affects our financial statements. The accruals for bodily injury, property damage and workers’ compensation (current and non-current) are recorded at the estimated ultimate payment amounts and are based upon individual case estimates and actuarial estimates of loss development for reported losses and incurred-but-not-reported losses using loss development factors based upon past experience. In order to determine the loss development factors, we make judgments relating to the comparability of historical claims to current claims. These judgments consider the nature, frequency, severity, and age of claims, and industry, regulatory, and company-specific trends impacting the development of claims. An independent actuary reviews our calculation of the undiscounted self-insurance reserves for bodily injury and property damage claims and workers’ compensation claims at year-end. The actual cost to settle our self-insured claim liabilities can differ from our reserve estimates because of a number of uncertainties, including the inherent difficulty in estimating the severity of a claim and the potential amount to defend and settle a claim. We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology or assumptions used to calculate our accrued liabilities for insurance and claims for bodily injury, property damage, and workers’ compensation during the past three years. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accrual of $309.8 million and $308.6 million, respectively, for estimated insurance and claims for (i) cargo loss and damage, (ii) bodily injury and property damage, (iii) group health, and (iv) workers’ compensation claims not covered by insurance. A 10% change in actuarial estimates at December 31, 2021, would have changed our insurance and claims accrual by approximately $29.3 million.