Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
As used in this item, “Weatherford”, “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Weatherford International plc, a public limited company organized under the laws of Ireland, and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in “Item 8. - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Our discussion includes various forward-looking statements about our markets, the demand for our products and services and our future results. These statements include certain risks and uncertainties. For information about these risks and uncertainties, refer to the section entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and the section entitled “Item 1A. - Risk Factors.” As described in “Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” references to “Predecessor” relate to the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the period from January 1, 2019 through and including the adjustments from the application of Fresh Start Accounting on December 13, 2019 (“Predecessor Period”). References to “Successor” relate to the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the period from December 14, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (“2021 Successor Period, 2020 Successor Period and 2019 Successor Period”, respectively) and are not comparable to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Predecessor Period as indicated by the “black line” division in the financials and footnote tables, which emphasizes the lack of comparability between amounts presented.
References and comparisons to results for the year ended December 31, 2019 relate to the combined Successor and Predecessor Period (“2019 Combined Period”) as the 18 days of the Successor Period is not a significant period of time impacting the combined results.
Consolidated Revenues, Expenses and Operating Income Overview
2021 vs 2020
Revenues totaled $3.65 billion in 2021, a decline of 1% compared to 2020. We experienced significant declines in activity after the start of the pandemic in March of 2020 and although revenues are slightly lower in 2021, our revenues in 2021 reflect the ongoing recovery in business activity. Revenues in 2021 reflect a 5% increase in service revenues, which was offset by a 10% decline in product revenues. The revenue increases were related to higher demand for Drilling and Evaluation (“DRE”) and Production and Intervention (“PRI”) businesses, primarily for managed pressure drilling, wireline, intervention and pressure pumping services. These improvements were partially offset by lower demand for products from our Well Construction and Completions (“WCC”), primarily for cementation products and liner hangers, and a decline in demand for the artificial lift within our PRI business.
Cost of services and products of $2.72 billion decreased $91 million, or 3%, compared to 2020, primarily due to cost improvement initiatives that were implemented during 2020 and early 2021. Our costs declined despite higher service activity and increased cost for supplies and logistics. Our cost of products and services as a percentage of revenues was 74.5% in 2021, an improvement compared to 76.2% in 2020, reflecting our cost initiative improvements and operational efficiency gains.
Selling, general, administrative and research and development costs of $823 million decreased $111 million, or 12%, due to cost improvement initiatives to reduce overhead and corporate costs that were implemented during 2020 and early 2021. These costs as a percentage of revenues were 22.6% in 2021, an improvement compared to 25.3% in 2020, reflecting our cost initiative improvements.
Operating income of $116 million improved $1.6 billion in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily from the absence of impairment and restructuring charges, the decline in cost of services and products as well as the decline in selling, general and administrative, corporate, and research and development expense. The improvement in operating income was driven by increased service activity levels, increased service versus product mix, higher adoption of our technology offerings and increased demand in our DRE and PRI businesses primarily for managed pressure drilling, wireline, intervention, pressure pumping services. Our exit of certain drilling services in North America in the fourth quarter of 2020 also positively contributed to the improvement.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 22
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
2020 vs 2019 Combined Period
Revenues totaled $3.7 billion in 2020, a decline of 29% compared to the 2019 Combined Period, as the unprecedented global health and economic crisis sparked by the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted industry activity. The lower demand for oil and gas together with uncertainty around the extent and timing for an economic recovery, caused significant reductions to the capital spending plans of exploration and production companies. Our revenue decline was predominantly driven by lower activity levels impacting all our product line segments, with revenue declines of 29% in DRE, 37% in PRI and 15% in WCC. Revenue declined in North America as a result of lower demand for our products and services in the United States, but was also impacted by declines in activity internationally, primarily in Latin America, the Middle East, North Africa and Russia. The pandemic had an immediate negative impact beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in the North America while taking longer to significantly impact our business internationally.
Operating loss of $1.5 billion worsened 26% in 2020 compared to the 2019 Combined Period, primarily from the decline in business demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, long-lived assets impairment charges, goodwill impairment, and inventory charges.
Business Outlook
We expect continued improvements in our customer activity levels with the relaxing of COVID-19 restrictions globally and improved macroeconomic conditions generally, all of which are expected to provide a measured pathway to energy demand recovery in 2022. We believe that industry activity will continue to recover and our 2022 consolidated revenues are anticipated to increase by high single to low double digits above 2021.
We continue to closely monitor the ongoing global impacts surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, including operational and manufacturing disruptions, escalating costs, logistical constraints and travel restrictions. The energy services industry growth is highly dependent on many external factors, such as the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our customers’ capital expenditures, environmental, social and governance (“ESG”) driven changes, world economic and political conditions, the price of oil and natural gas, member-country quota compliance within the OPEC+, weather conditions and other factors.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impacts
We continue to experience impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including inflationary pressures and delays and supply shortages when sourcing raw materials and services as everyone manages through the challenges around reopening and returning to work. Shipping and other logistic activities are experiencing tight availability for carriers, containers and shipping materials, exacerbating the delays and lack of availability of key components. In addition, we continue to experience certain customer restrictions that prevent access to their sites, community measures to contain the spread of the COVID-19 virus, and changes to our policies that have both restricted and changed the way our employees work.
We strive to continuously improve crew rotations and management practices to minimize our employees’ risk of exposure to the COVID-19 virus while at customer facilities. We are also constantly refining and updating our identification and management of COVID-19 cases through the development of updated protocols, advanced testing and response procedures consistent with the latest guidance, from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization. Faced with these challenges in 2020 and 2021, we evolved our product and services offerings, increasing the breadth of our digital portfolio and enhancing our applications to offer more fully integrated digital energy services solutions. We also increased our offerings of automated well construction and remote monitoring and predictive analytics related to our product offerings.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 23
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
Opportunities and Challenges
As production decline rates persist and reservoir productivity complexities increase, our customers continue to face challenges in balancing the cost of extraction activities with securing desired rates of production while achieving acceptable rates of return on investment. These challenges increase our customers’ requirements for technologies that improve productivity and efficiency and pressures us to deliver our products and services at competitive rates. In addition, as consolidation of the energy services industry continues due to market conditions, there has been an increased demand for companies to provide specialized products, services and technologies. We believe we are well positioned to satisfy our customers’ needs, but the level of improvement in our businesses in the future will depend heavily on pricing, volume of work, our ability to offer technology solutions to more efficiently extract oil and gas while controlling costs, and our success in penetrating new and existing markets with our newly developed technologies. Over the long-term, we expect the world’s demand for energy to continue to rise and require more advanced technology from the energy service industry. We remain focused on delivering innovative and cost-efficient solutions for customers to assist them in achieving their operational, safety and environmental objectives.
Our challenges also include market conditions that could make it more difficult to obtain our targeted cost reduction benefits and to recruit, motivate and retain employees, including key personnel. Increasing investor and government focus on ESG factors, the cyclicality of the energy industry and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact demand for our products and services. We are following our long-term strategy aimed at achieving sustainable profitability in our businesses, servicing our customers and creating value for our shareholders. Our long-term success will be determined by our ability to manage effectively the cyclicality of our industry, including potential prolonged industry downturns, our ability to respond to industry demands in periods of over-supply or uncertain oil prices, and ultimately to generate consistent positive cash flow and positive returns on the invested capital.
Exchange Listing
On June 1, 2021, NASDAQ approved our application for the listing of our ordinary shares. In connection with the listing, we became subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act. Our ordinary shares began trading on The Nasdaq Global Select Market on June 2, 2021 under the ticker symbol “WFRD”.
Industry Trends
The level of spending in the energy industry is heavily influenced by the current and expected future prices of oil and natural gas, but is also impacted by ESG initiatives and ongoing supply chain shortages. These factors result in an increase or decrease in demand for our products and services. Rig count is an indicator of the level of spending for the exploration and production of oil and natural gas reserves.
The table below shows the average oil and natural gas prices for West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) and Brent North Sea (“Brent”) crude oil and Henry Hub natural gas during years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Commodity prices increased during 2021 due to demand outpacing supply as demand recovery built toward pre-pandemic levels with increased vaccination rates and global economic activity. Average oil prices for 2021 were approximately 73% higher than the average oil prices for 2020 and natural gas prices increased by 92% over the same period.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 24
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
North America and International average rig counts were well below pre-pandemic levels. The historical average rig counts based on the weekly Baker Hughes Company rig count information were as follows:
As of December 31, 2021, the North America and International Rig counts totaled 676 and 834, respectively.
Significant Financing Transactions
For additional details on the recap provided below, see “Note 2 - Emergence from Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings”, “Note 3 - Fresh Start Accounting”, “Note 13 - Borrowings and Other Debt Obligations” and “Loss on Extinguishment of Debt and Bond Redemption Premium” on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
2030 Senior Notes Issuance and Exit Notes Partial Redemption
On October 27, 2021, we issued the 2030 Senior Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $1.6 billion and a stated interest rate of 8.625% per annum due in 2030. We redeemed $1.6 billion in principal amount of our Exit Notes plus interest with net proceeds from the 2030 Senior Notes and cash on hand. We paid and recognized a $103 million bond redemption premium and recognized a $2 million noncash loss on extinguishment of debt related to the unamortized debt issuance costs.
In addition, on October 20, 2021, we redeemed $200 million of our Exit Notes and paid a bond redemption premium of $6 million.
Subsequent to the partial redemption, $300 million in aggregate principal of our Exit Notes remains unpaid.
2028 Senior Secured Notes Issuance and 2024 Senior Secured Notes Redemption
On September 30, 2021, we issued the 2028 Senior Secured Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $500 million and a stated interest rate of 6.5% per annum due in 2028. We repaid our 2024 Senior Secured Notes with net proceeds from the issuance of the 2028 Senior Secured Notes and cash on hand. We paid and recognized a $22 million bond redemption premium and recognized a $37 million noncash loss on extinguishment of debt related to the unamortized debt issuance costs and original issue discount.
2024 Senior Secured Notes Issuance in 2020
On August 28, 2020, we issued the 2024 Senior Secured Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $500 million and a stated interest rate of 8.75% per annum due 2024 and repaid in full on September 30, 2021 with the issuance of the 2028 Senior Secured Notes and cash on hand.
LC Credit Agreement
We have a senior secured letter of credit agreement (the “LC Credit Agreement”) in an aggregate amount of $215 million maturing on May 29, 2024, which is used by the Company and certain of its subsidiaries for the issuance of bid and performance letters of credit. We amended certain provisions and covenants of our LC Credit Agreement on September 20, 2021.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 25
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
2019 Emergence from Bankruptcy Proceedings and Fresh Start Accounting
On July 1, 2019 (the “Petition Date”), Weatherford and two of our subsidiaries (collectively, the “Weatherford Parties” ) commenced voluntary reorganization proceedings (the “Cases”), including under Chapter 11 of Title 11 (“Chapter 11”) of the United States Bankruptcy Code in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas (the “Bankruptcy Court”), with ancillary proceedings filed in Ireland and Bermuda. The plan of reorganization (as amended, the “Plan”), together with the schemes of arrangement in Ireland and Bermuda, became effective on December 13, 2019 (the “Effective Date”) and the Weatherford Parties emerged from Chapter 11 and adopted fresh start accounting (“Fresh Start Accounting”), which reflected all our assets and liabilities at fair value. These events resulted in several financing activities, later discussed under the caption “Liquidity and Capital Resources”. For additional details regarding the Chapter 11, see “Note 2 - Emergence from Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings” and “Note 3 - Fresh Start Accounting”.
Our emergence from bankruptcy and the adoption of Fresh Start Accounting resulted in a new reporting entity, referred to herein as the “Successor,” for financial reporting purposes. To facilitate discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, we refer to the reorganized Weatherford Parties as the Successor for periods subsequent to December 13, 2019 and as the “Predecessor” for periods on or prior to December 13, 2019. As a result of the adoption of Fresh Start Accounting and the effects of the implementation of the Plan, our consolidated financial statements subsequent to December 13, 2019 are not comparable to our consolidated financial statements on or prior to December 13, 2019, and as such, “Black-line” financial statements are presented to distinguish between the Predecessor and Successor companies.
Reportable Segments
The Company's chief operating decision maker (“CODM”), our chief executive officer, regularly reviews information to make operating decisions, allocate resources and assess performance of the business. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the CODM changed the information regularly reviewed to be aligned with how we offer our services and technologies in relation to the well life cycle and we have realigned our reportable segments to reflect the change. We now have three reportable segments: (1) Drilling and Evaluation (2) Well Construction and Completions, and (3) Production and Intervention. Previously we had two geographic based reportable segments, Western Hemisphere and Eastern Hemisphere.
Total revenues are from external customers and segment revenues are specific to our three reportable segments and all other revenues are specific to our non-operating segment revenues. Revenues are further described in “Note 5 - Revenues.”
Additionally, we have changed our primary measure of segment profitability to segment adjusted EBITDA, which is based on segment earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, share-based compensation expense and other adjustments. Research and development expenses are included in segment adjusted EBITDA. Corporate and other includes business activities related to all other segments (profit and loss), corporate and other expenses (overhead support and centrally managed or shared facilities costs) that do not individually meet the criteria for segment reporting. We have revised our segment reporting to reflect our current management approach and recast prior periods to conform to the current segment presentation.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 26
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
Segment Results of Operations
The following table shows our consolidated results of operations and financial information for the referenced periods. The 2021, 2020 and 2019 Successor Periods are distinct reporting periods from the 2019 Predecessor Period as a result of our emergence from bankruptcy on December 13, 2019. We have combined results (“2019 Combined Period”) for the 2019 Successor and Predecessor Periods which are not presented according to generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) and no comparable GAAP measure is presented, however, management believes that providing the combined financial information may be useful for making certain year-to-date comparisons.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 27
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
Segment Revenues
2021 vs 2020
Revenues totaled $3.65 billion in 2021, a decline of 1% compared to 2020 and reflected in our segment revenues as follows:
DRE revenues of $1.1 billion in 2021, increased 2% compared to 2020 primarily due to higher demand for managed pressure drilling and and wireline services and products, partially offset by a decline in drilling services and drilling fluids. The year-over-year improvement was driven by increased activity levels, an increase in services versus product mix, and higher adoption of our technology offerings internationally. The decline in drilling services revenue reflects the exit of certain drilling services in North America in the fourth quarter of 2020.
WCC revenues of $1.4 billion in 2021, decreased 4% compared to 2020 primarily due to lower activity for cementation products, liner hangers and tubular running services. Internationally we experienced lower well construction and completions activity in the Middle East and Russia, which was partially offset by higher activity in North America and Latin America.
PRI revenues of $1.1 billion in 2021, increased 2% compared to 2020 primarily due to higher demand for pressure pumping, intervention services & drilling tools, and production automation & software, partially offset by a decline in demand for artificial lift services. The year-over-year improvement was driven by increased activity levels, increase in services versus product mix, higher adoption of our technology offerings and greater demand for our services.
2020 vs 2019 Combined Period
Revenues totaled $3.7 billion in 2020, a decline of 29% compared to the 2019 Combined Period, as the unprecedented global health and economic crisis sparked by the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted industry activity. The lower demand for oil and gas together with uncertainty around the extent and timing for an economic recovery, caused significant reductions to the capital spending plans of exploration and production companies. The impact was seen across all segment divisions, with revenue declines of 29% in DRE, 37% in PRI and 15% in WCC. Revenue declined in North America as a result of lower demand for our products and services in the United States, but was also impacted by declines in activity internationally, primarily in Latin America, the Middle East, North Africa and Russia. The pandemic had an immediate negative impact beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in North America while taking longer to significantly impact our business internationally.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
2021 vs 2020
Segment adjusted EBITDA was $633 million in 2021, an increase of 13% compared to 2020 which is reflected in our segments as follows:
DRE segment adjusted EBITDA of $186 million in 2021, increased 41% compared to 2020 primarily due to higher demand for managed pressure drilling and wireline services and products and lower operating costs as a result of cost improvement initiatives that were implemented during 2020 and early 2021, partially offset by a decline in drilling fluids. Positively impacting DRE segment adjusted EBITDA was the exit of certain drilling services in North America in the fourth quarter of 2020. The year-over-year segment adjusted EBITDA improvement was driven by increased activity levels, increase in services versus product mix, higher adoption of our technology offerings and greater demand for services globally.
WCC segment adjusted EBITDA of $256 million in 2021, decreased 6% compared to 2020 primarily due to lower activity for cementation products, liner hangers and tubular running services, which was partially offset by improvements in completions margins and cost efficiencies as a result of initiatives implemented during 2020 and early 2021. Internationally we experienced lower well construction and completions activity in the Middle East and Russia resulting in decrease segment profit, which was partially offset by higher margin activity in North America and Latin America.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 28
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
PRI segment adjusted EBITDA of $191 million in 2021, increased 24% compared to 2020 primarily due to to higher demand for intervention services & drilling tools, pressure pumping and production automation & software services, and lower operating costs as a result of cost improvement initiatives that were implemented during 2020 and early 2021, partially offset by a decline in artificial lift services. The year-over-year segment adjusted EBITDA improvement was driven by increased activity levels, increase in services versus product mix, higher adoption of our technology offerings and greater demand for services and products.
2020 vs 2019 Combined Period
Operating loss of $1.5 billion worsened 26% in 2020 compared to the 2019 Combined Period, primarily from the decline in business demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, long-lived assets impairment charges, goodwill impairment, and inventory charges.
Successor segment adjusted EBITDA was $559 million in 2020, a decrease of 20% compared to the 2019 Combined Period, driven primarily from the decline in business demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic in DRE of 39% and PRI of 35%, partially offset by a 12% increase in WCC. Segment adjusted EBITDA declined in North America as a result of lower demand for our products and services in the United States, but was also impacted by declines in activity internationally, primarily in Latin America, the Middle East, North Africa and Russia. The pandemic had an immediate negative impact beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in North America while taking longer to significantly impact our business internationally.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to the decrease in carrying value of assets after impairments taken in 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization in 2020 compared to the 2019 Combined Period was due to the initial increase in carrying value of assets after a fair value adjustment at fresh start, coming out of bankruptcy on December 13, 2019.
Shared-based Compensation
We record shared-based compensation in “Selling, General and Administrative” on the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations. We recognized $25 million, an immaterial amount and zero in the 2021, 2020 and 2019 Successor Periods, respectively. During the 2019 Predecessor Period, we recognized $46 million, of which $24 million was recorded in “Selling, General and Administrative” and the remainder in“Other Charges (Credits), Net” to include $24 million related to the acceleration of share-based compensation at Fresh Start offset by $2 million in terminated executive forfeitures.
Other Adjustments
Other adjustments include goodwill and long-lived asset impairments, restructuring charges, prepetition charges, gain on sale of businesses and other charges and credits, net as applicable to the periods presented. See “ Note 6 - Impairments and Other Charges, Net”, “Note 7 - Long-Lived Assets Impairment”, “Note 11 - Goodwill and Intangibles, Net”, “ Note 8 - Restructuring Charges”, and “Note 2 - Emergence from Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings” for additional information. In the 2020 Successor and 2019 Predecessor Periods, the segment adjusted EBITDA of Well Construction and Completions includes $12 million and $15 million, respectively, of gains on sales of operational assets.
Non-Operating Expenses
Reorganization Items
Reorganization items in the 2019 Predecessor Period were directly related to bankruptcy and included the $4.3 billion gain on settlement of liabilities subject to compromise, $1.4 billion gain on revaluation of the Company’s assets and liabilities, and $346 million of charges for debt issuance write-offs, debt discount write-offs, backstop commitment fees, DIP financing fees and professional fees related to bankruptcy matters.
Reorganization items in the 2020 and 2019 Successor Periods totaled $9 million and $4 million, respectively.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 29
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $260 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and primarily represented interest on our Exit Notes and 2024 Senior Secured Notes, and a portion from our 2028 Senior Secured Notes and 2030 Senior Notes, newly issued later in the year. The $251 million of interest expense, net for year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represented interest on our Exit Notes and later in the year, the 2024 Senior Secured Notes.
The $12 million for the 2019 Successor Period represented interest expense on our Exit Notes and the $362 million for the 2019 Predecessor Period represented a half year of interest expense on the Predecessor’s debt. Upon filing for Chapter 11 cases, which began July 1, 2019, we no longer recognized interest expense on Predecessor debt in accordance with ASC 852.
See “Note 13 - Borrowings and Other Debt Obligations” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt and Bond Redemption Premium
During 2021, we repaid and refinanced certain of our debt obligations and recognized a $170 million loss on extinguishment of debt and bond redemption premium for the repayment of our 2024 Senior Secured Notes, the repayment of $200 million of Exit Notes and the refinancing of $1.6 billion of Exit Notes. This loss was comprised of a $39 million loss on extinguishment of debt related to unamortized debt issuance costs and discount and a $131 million bond redemption premium on the early redemption of debt, which is presented as “Loss on Extinguishment of Debt and Bond Redemption Premium” on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See “Note 13 - Borrowings and Other Debt Obligations” for additional details.
Loss on Termination of ABL Credit Agreement
On December 13, 2019, we entered into a senior secured asset-based lending agreement in an aggregate amount of $450 million (the “ABL Credit Agreement”) which was terminated on August 28, 2020. Upon its termination, we recorded $15 million of noncash “Loss on Termination of ABL Credit Agreement” on our Consolidated Financial Statements related to unamortized deferred debt issuance costs.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $29 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $53 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other expense is comprised of letter of credit fees, other financing charges and foreign exchange losses, primarily attributed to currency losses in countries with no or limited markets to hedge. The year-over-year improvement was primarily due to lower currency volatility in 2021 compared to the significant volatility in the same period in the prior year following the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Successor other expense was $53 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to Predecessor other expense of $26 million in 2019. Other expense was primarily driven by foreign currency exchange losses of $34 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $14 million for the 2019 Combined Period. The unfavorable change primarily relates to the weakening of foreign currencies following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Other expense also includes letter of credit fees and other financing fees.
In 2019, other expense was primarily driven by foreign currency exchange losses, letter of credit fees, other financing fees and non-service periodic pension and other post-retirement benefit expenses. Foreign exchange losses are typically due to the strengthening U.S. dollar compared to our foreign denominated operations.
Income Taxes
We provide for income taxes based on the laws and rates in effect in the countries in which operations are conducted, or in which we or our subsidiaries are considered resident for income tax purposes. The relationship between our pre-tax income or loss from continuing operations and our income tax benefit or provision varies from period to period as a result of various factors, which include changes in total pre-tax income or loss, the jurisdictions in which our income is earned, the tax laws in those jurisdictions, the impacts of tax planning activities and the resolution of tax audits. On September 26, 2019, our parent company ceased to be a Swiss tax resident and became an Irish tax resident subject to tax under the Irish tax regime. As a result, our effective rate differs from the Irish statutory tax rate as the majority of our operations are taxed in jurisdictions with different tax rates. In addition, we are unable to recognize tax benefit on our losses.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 30
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
We record deferred tax assets for net operating losses and temporary differences between the book and tax basis of assets and liabilities that are expected to produce tax deductions in future periods. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those deferred tax assets would be deductible. The Company assesses the realizability of its deferred tax assets each period by considering whether it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The Company considers all available evidence (both positive and negative) when determining whether a valuation allowance is required, with emphasis on our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years and our forecast of near-term taxable income. The Company evaluates possible sources of taxable income that may be available to realize the benefit of deferred tax assets, including projected future taxable income, the reversal of existing temporary differences, taxable income in carryback years and available tax planning strategies, and the impact of Fresh Start Accounting in making this assessment. The realizability of the deferred tax assets is dependent upon judgments and assumptions inherent in the determination of future taxable income, including factors such as future operation conditions (particularly as related to prevailing oil prices and market demand for our products and services). The Company concluded it was not able to realize the benefit of its deferred tax assets and has established a valuation allowance. Continued performance improvement in certain jurisdictions could result in a change in our realization of deferred tax asset assessment in the near future, which would release valuation allowance.
The income tax provision and respective effective tax rate was $86 million and (25)%, $85 million and (5)%, $9 million and (60)%, and $135 million and 3%, for the 2021, 2020, 2019 Successor Periods and 2019 Predecessor Period, respectively.
Our income tax provisions in 2021 and 2020 are primarily driven by income in certain jurisdictions, deemed profit countries and withholding taxes on intercompany and third-party transactions that do not directly correlate to ordinary income or loss. Impairments and other charges recognized do not result in significant tax benefit as a result of our inability to forecast realization of the tax benefit of such losses.
Our results for the 2019 Predecessor period include $32 million of tax expense related to the Fresh Start Accounting impacts and $14 million of tax benefit primarily related to goodwill and other asset impairments and write-downs. We also recognized $4.3 billion gain on Settlement of Liabilities Subject to Compromise as a result of the bankruptcy (See “Note 3 - Fresh Start Accounting”) with no tax impact due to it being attributed to Bermuda, which has no income tax regime, and the U.S., which resulted in the reduction of our U.S. unbenefited net operating losses carryforward under the operative tax statute and applicable regulations offset by the release of a similar amount of valuation allowance. Prepetition charges (charges prior to Petition Date) and reorganization items (charges after Petition Date) had no significant tax impact.
We are continuously under tax examination in various jurisdictions. We cannot predict the timing or outcome regarding resolution of these tax examinations or if they will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, we anticipate that it is reasonably possible that the amount of our uncertain tax positions of $235 million may decrease by up to $1 million in the next twelve months due to expiration of statutes of limitations, settlements and/or conclusions of tax examinations.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries have enacted tax relief measures to provide aid and economic stimulus to companies impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. For the Successor years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no material tax impacts to our financial statements as it relates to COVID-19 tax relief measures.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 31
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had total cash and cash equivalents plus restricted cash of $1.1 billion, of which $162 million was restricted cash, compared to $1.3 billion at December 31, 2020, of which $167 million was restricted cash. The following table summarizes cash provided by (used in) each type of business activity in the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities in 2021 was $322 million. The primary sources of cash from operating activities were from higher operating income and lower accounts payable spend partially offset by higher interest payments.
Cash provided by operating activities was $210 million and $61 million during the 2020 and 2019 Successor Periods. The primary sources of cash from operating activities were collections on our accounts receivables, partially offset by payments for interest and severance.
Cash used in operating activities was $747 million in the 2019 Predecessor Period. The primary uses of cash from operating activities were driven by working capital needs, payments for debt interest, and severance and other restructuring and transformation costs. In addition, there were also payments for reorganization items and prepetition charges primarily for professional and other fees related to the Cases as well as payments for retention and certain bonuses.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities in 2021 was $83 million. The primary uses of cash from investing activities were for capital expenditures of $85 million and investments in marketable securities in Argentina of $39 million. The primary source of cash from investing activities was $41 million of proceeds from asset dispositions. The amount we spend for capital expenditures varies each year and is based on the types of contracts into which we enter, our asset availability and our expectations with respect to activity levels.
Cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $75 million. The primary uses of cash from investing activities were for capital expenditures of $154 million. The primary sources of cash from investing activities were $22 million from asset dispositions and $50 million from the maturity of our Angolan government bonds.
Cash used in investing activities in the 2019 Successor Period was $14 million primarily for capital expenditures of $20 million.
Cash provided by investing activities in the 2019 Predecessor Period was $149 million. The primary uses of cash from investing activities were for capital expenditures of $250 million and $13 million to acquire intellectual property and other intangibles. The primary sources of cash from investing activities were $328 million of proceeds from divestitures (from our rigs, laboratory services and surface data logging businesses) and $84 million from asset dispositions.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities in 2021 was $403 million. The primary uses of cash from financing activities were repayments of long-term debt of $2.3 billion associated with the partial redemption of our Exit Notes and full redemption of our 2024 Senior Secured Notes as well as finance lease obligations. Other primary uses of cash from financing activities were $131 million in bond redemption premium payments as a result of the early redemptions and $28 million primarily for dividends to
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 32
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
noncontrolling interests. The primary sources of cash from financing activities were net proceeds of $2.1 billion from the issuance of our 2030 Senior Notes and 2028 Senior Secured Notes.
Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $348 million, primarily sourced from borrowings of long-term debt of $453 million related to the net proceeds from the issuance of our 2024 Senior Secured Notes. The primary uses of cash from financing activities were $24 million of deferred consideration for the 2018 acquisition of our Qatari joint venture $27 million repayments of short-term debt and $45 million primarily for dividends to noncontrolling interests.
Cash provided by financing activities was $749 million during the 2019 Predecessor Period. The primary sources of cash from financing activities were net proceeds of $1.6 billion on our Exit Notes issued upon emergence and $1.5 billion on the DIP Credit Agreement issued between the petition date and emergence. The primary uses of cash from financing activities were (i) the $1.5 billion repayment in full of the DIP Credit Agreement upon emergence (ii) net short-term debt repayments of $347 million primarily from the borrowings and repayments of our Predecessor Revolving Credit Agreements, including the repayment of our 364-Day Credit Agreement (iii) long-term debt repayments of $318 million related to our Predecessor Term Loan Agreement and financed leases and (iv) $137 million in DIP financing fees and payments on a backstop agreement.
For additional details on our financing activities see Significant Financing Transactions section, “Note 2 - Emergence from Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings” and “Note 13 - Borrowings and Other Debt Obligations”
Sources of Liquidity
Our sources of available liquidity include cash generated by our operations, cash and cash equivalent balances, and accounts receivable factoring. From time to time, we may enter into transactions to dispose of businesses or capital assets that no longer fit our long-term strategy. We historically have accessed banks for short-term loans and the capital markets for debt and equity offerings. Based upon current and anticipated levels of operations and our recent refinancing transactions, we expect to have sufficient cash from operations and cash on hand to fund our cash requirements (discussed below) and financial obligations, both in the short-term and long-term.
Our total cash and cash equivalents plus restricted cash of $1.1 billion remain our primary source of funds to manage any liquidity event risks. An agreement for a new corporate revolving credit facility at terms and conditions acceptable to us would further enhance our liquidity.
LC Credit Agreement
We have a LC Credit Agreement in an aggregate amount of $215 million maturing on May 29, 2024, which is used by the Company and certain of its subsidiaries for the issuance of bid and performance letters of credit.
On September 20, 2021, certain provisions and covenants of the LC Credit Agreement were amended as follows:
•Permit the borrowing of up to an additional $400 million of secured indebtedness under an asset-based lending facility or a revolving credit facility upon compliance with certain conditions;
•Removed the minimum secured liquidity requirement;
•Increased the minimum aggregate liquidity requirement from $175 million to $300 million;
•Decreased the minimum aggregate book value of certain pledged assets requirement from $1.25 billion to $1 billion; and
•Increased the ability to redeem debt to $500 million subject to a minimum aggregate liquidity of $400 million at the time of redemption.
The outstanding amount of each letter of credit under the LC Credit Agreement bears interest at London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin of 350 basis points per annum. We expect LIBOR to continue to be published until June 2023, and expect to transition to an alternative to LIBOR prior to that termination date. The LC Credit Agreement currently contains provisions allowing the Administrative Agent to replace LIBOR with an alternate benchmark rate (including any mathematical or other adjustments to the benchmark (if any) incorporated therein) that has been broadly accepted by the syndicated loan market in the United States in lieu of LIBOR. The LC Credit Agreement includes (i) a 12.5 basis point per annum fronting fee on the outstanding amount of each such letter of credit and (ii) an unused commitment fee in respect of the unutilized commitments at a rate of 50 basis point per annum on the average daily unused commitments under the LC Credit Agreement.
The LC Credit Agreement is secured by substantially all the personal assets and properties of certain subsidiaries of the Company (including a first lien on the priority collateral for the LC Credit Agreement and a second lien on the priority collateral
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 33
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
for Senior Secured Notes, in each case, subject to permitted liens). The LC Credit Agreement is also guaranteed on an unsecured basis by certain other subsidiaries of the Company.
Ratings Services’ Credit Ratings
Our credit ratings at December 31, 2021 were maintained or improved since December 31, 2020:
•Moody’s Investors Service (“Moody’s”) maintained our corporate family rating at B2, our senior unsecured notes rating at B3, and our senior secured notes and LC Credit Agreement ratings at Ba3. The outlook was upgraded from negative to stable.
•Standard and Poor’s (“S&P”) upgraded our corporate family and senior unsecured notes ratings from CCC to B-, and upgraded our senior secured notes and LC Credit Agreement ratings from B- to B+. The outlook was upgraded from negative to stable.
Cash Requirements
Our cash requirements will continue to include payments for capital expenditures, payments for short-term working capital needs, interest payments on our long-term debt, repayment on finance leases, operating costs associated with our business and restructuring payments. During 2020, we accumulated working capital due to the sharp decrease in demand from the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, operating cash flow benefited from the monetization of working capital accumulated in 2020. As business activity rises to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels we expect that we will utilize cash to invest in capital assets and inventory. Our cash requirements may also include awards under our employee incentive programs and other amounts to settle litigation related matters.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding debt $300 million in aggregate principal amount maturing on December 1, 2024 for our Exit Notes, $500 million in aggregate principal amount for our 2028 Senior Secured Notes and $1.6 billion in aggregate principal amount of the 2030 Senior Notes. Please see “Note 13 - Borrowings and Other Obligations” for additional details.
Our capital spending for 2022 is projected to be between $175 million to $225 million. Capital expenditures are expected to be used primarily to support the ongoing activities and commitments in our core business. We expect to make $215 million in interest payments in 2022 and approximately $204 million in interest payments annually until the maturity of our long-term debt obligations. Our payments on operating leases and operating purchase obligations in the upcoming year are expected to be approximately $74 million and $177 million, respectively. See “Note 12 - Leases” for details of our lease obligations by year.
Cash and cash equivalents plus restricted cash of $162 million (which primarily includes $158 million in cash collateral on our letters of credit) totaled $1.1 billion at December 31, 2021 and are held by subsidiaries outside of Ireland. At December 31, 2021 we had approximately $167 million of our cash and cash equivalents that cannot be immediately repatriated from various countries due to country central bank controls or other regulations. Based on the nature of our structure, other than the restrictions noted above, we foresee we will be able to redeploy cash with minimal to no incremental tax.
Customer Receivable
We may experience delayed customer payments and payment defaults due to, among other reasons, a weaker economic environment, reductions in our customers’ cash flow from operations, our customers’ inability to access credit markets, as well as unsettled political conditions.
Accounts Receivable Factoring
From time to time, we participate in factoring arrangements to sell accounts receivable to third-party financial institutions for cash proceeds net of discount and hold-back. The programs we factor under are uncommitted and thus we cannot assure they will be available as a source of liquidity. During the 2021 Successor Period, we sold accounts receivable balances of $100 million and received cash proceeds of $85 million. During the 2020 Successor Period, we sold accounts receivable balances of $90 million and received cash proceeds of $79 million. During the 2019 Combined Period, we sold accounts receivable of $206 million and received cash proceeds of $193 million. Our factoring transactions were recognized as sales, and the proceeds are included as operating cash flows in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 34
Table of Contents Item 7 | MD&A
Derivative Instruments
We enter into contracts to hedge our exposure to currency fluctuations in various foreign currencies. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had outstanding foreign currency forward contracts with notional amounts aggregating to $349 million and $337 million, respectively. The notional amounts of our foreign currency forward contracts do not generally represent amounts exchanged by the parties and thus are not a measure of the cash requirements related to these contracts or of any possible loss exposure. The amounts actually exchanged at maturity are calculated by reference to the notional amounts and by other terms of the derivative contracts, such as exchange rates. Our foreign currency derivatives are not designated as hedges under ASC 815, and the changes in fair value of the contracts are recorded in each period in “Other Income (Expense), Net” on the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations. See “Note 15 - Derivative Instruments” for additional information.
Guarantees
Weatherford International plc, the ultimate parent of the Weatherford group, guarantees the obligations of its subsidiaries - Weatherford International Ltd., a Bermuda exempted company (“Weatherford Bermuda”), and Weatherford International, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Weatherford Delaware”), including the notes and credit facilities listed below.
Our Exit Notes, 2024 Senior Secured Notes (before repayment in 2021), 2028 Senior Secured Notes and 2030 Senior Notes were issued by Weatherford Bermuda and guaranteed by Weatherford International plc and Weatherford Delaware and other subsidiary guarantors party thereto.
Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
As of December 31, 2021, we had $342 million of letters of credit outstanding, consisting of $181 million under the LC Credit Agreement and $161 million under various uncommitted facilities (of which there was $158 million in cash collateral held and recorded in “Restricted Cash” on the Consolidated Balance Sheets).
In Latin America we utilize surety bonds as part of our customary business practice. As of December 31, 2021, we had surety bonds outstanding of $293 million. Any of our outstanding letters of credit or surety bonds could be called by the beneficiaries should we breach certain contractual or performance obligations. If the beneficiaries were to call the letters of credit under our LC Credit Agreement or surety bonds, our available liquidity would be reduced by the amount called.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operation is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements. We prepare these consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. As such, we are required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. We base our estimates on historical experience and available information and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The accounting policies we believe require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments and are the most critical to our reporting of results of operations and financial position are as follows:
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 35
Table of Contents Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”), definite-lived intangibles and right of use assets, comprise a significant amount of our assets. The carrying value of our long-lived assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $1.8 billion and $2.2 billion, respectively. The cost of the long-lived assets is then amortized over its expected useful life. A change in the estimated useful lives of our long-lived assets would have an impact on our results of operations. We estimate the useful lives of our long-lived asset groups as follows:
In estimating the useful lives of our PP&E, we rely primarily on our actual experience with the same or similar assets. The useful lives of our intangible assets are determined by the years over which we expect the assets to generate a benefit based on legal, contractual or regulatory terms.
Long-lived assets to be held and used by us are reviewed to determine whether any events or changes in circumstances, known as triggering events, indicate that we may not be able to recover the carrying amount of the asset or asset group. Triggering events include, but are not limited to, reduced or expected sustained decreases in cash flows generated by an asset or asset group, negative changes in industry conditions (such as global rig count, commodity prices, and the global economy), a significant change in the long-lived assets’ use or physical condition, the introduction of competing technologies, and legal and regulatory challenges. The Company groups individual assets at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows and, if impairment triggers are present, performs an undiscounted cash flow analysis to identify assets or asset groups that may not be recoverable. If the undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value of the long-lived asset group, the asset group is not recoverable and impairment is recognized to the extent the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset group. A fair value assessment is performed on assets or asset groups identified as not being recoverable using a discounted cash flow analysis to determine if an impairment has occurred. If an impairment has occurred, the Company recognizes a loss for the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset or asset group. The discounted cash flow analysis consists of estimating the future cash flows that are directly associated with, and are expected to arise from, the use and eventual disposition of the asset over its remaining useful life. These estimated discounted cash flows are inherently subjective and includes significant assumptions, specifically the forecasted revenue, forecasted operating margins, and the discount rate assumptions and require estimates based upon historical experience and future expectations. The fair value of the asset or asset group is measured using market prices, or in the absence of market prices, is based on an estimate of discounted cash flows. Cash flows are discounted at an interest rate commensurate with our weighted average cost of capital for a similar asset.
We generally group operating assets by product line of the respective region. We have long-lived assets, such as facilities, utilized by multiple operating divisions that do not have identifiable cash flows and impairment testing for these long-lived assets is based on the consolidated entity.
The unprecedented global economic and industry conditions resulting from the decline in demand and impact from the COVID-19 pandemic were identified as impairment indicators. As a result, we performed impairment assessments quarterly in 2020 through analysis of the undiscounted cash flow of our asset groups, which include property, plant and equipment, definite-lived intangible assets, goodwill and right of use assets. As of March 31, 2020, and as of June 30, 2020, we identified that impairment occurred in certain asset groups and with the assistance of third-party valuation advisors we determined the fair value of those asset groups. Based on our impairment tests, we determined the carrying amount of certain long-lived asset groups exceeded their respective fair values and we recognized of long-lived asset impairments in “Impairments and Other Charges” on the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations during the year ended December 31, 2020. See “Note 7 - Long-Lived Assets Impairment”, “Note 11 - Goodwill and Intangibles, Net” and “Note 14 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments, Assets and Other Assets” for additional information regarding the impairment and the fair value determination used in the impairment calculation.
The fair values of our long-lived assets were determined using discounted cash flow or Level 3 fair value analyses. The unobservable inputs to the income approach included the estimated discounted future cash flows by asset group and significant
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 36
Table of Contents Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
assumptions, specifically the forecasted revenue, forecasted operating margins, and discount rate assumptions used to determine the fair value of certain asset groups.
The 2019 impairments were due to the sustained downturn in the energy services industry that resulted in us having to reassess our disposal groups for our land drilling rigs. The change in our expectations of the market’s recovery, in addition to successive negative operating cash flows in certain disposal asset groups represented an indicator that those assets will no longer be recoverable over their remaining useful lives. The Level 3 fair values of the long-lived assets were determined using a combination of the market approach and the income approach. The market approach considered market sales values for similar assets. The unobservable inputs to the income approach included the assets’ estimated future cash flows and estimates of discount rates commensurate with the assets’ risks. See “Note 14 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments, Assets and Other Assets” for additional information regarding the fair value determination used in the impairment calculation.
The decline and its impact on demand represent a significant adverse change in the business climate and an indication that some of our long-lived assets may not be recoverable. Based on the impairment indicators noted we performed an analysis of our long-lived assets in 2020 and 2019 and recorded long-lived and other asset impairment charges to adjust to fair value. See “Note 7 - Long-Lived Assets Impairment” for additional information regarding the long-lived assets impairment.
Management cannot predict the occurrence of future impairment-triggering events, so we continue to assess whether indicators of impairment to long-lived assets exist due to the current business conditions in the energy services industry.
Income Taxes
We take into account the differences between the financial statement treatment and tax treatment of certain transactions. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date. See “Note 21 - Income Taxes” for detailed discussion of results.
We recognize the impact of an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return in the financial statements at the largest amount that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the relevant taxing authority.
We operate in approximately 75 countries through hundreds of legal entities. As a result, we are subject to numerous tax laws in the jurisdictions, and tax agreements and treaties among the various taxing authorities. Our operations in these jurisdictions in which we operate are taxed on various bases: income before taxes, deemed profits (which is generally determined using a percentage of revenues rather than profits), withholding taxes based on revenue, and other alternative minimum taxes. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves consideration of uncertainties in the application and interpretation of complex tax regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. We recognize potential liabilities and record tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in the tax jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. The tax liabilities are reflected net of realized tax loss carryforwards. We adjust these reserves upon specific events; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities.
If our estimate of tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, an additional charge to expense would result. If payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be less than the recorded amounts, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when the contingency has been resolved and the liabilities are no longer necessary. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact upon the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 37
Table of Contents Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Valuation Allowance for Deferred Tax Assets
We record a valuation allowance to reduce the carrying value of our deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will expire before realization of the benefit. The ultimate realization of the deferred tax assets depends on the ability to generate sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character and in the related jurisdiction in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider the available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years and our forecast of near-term future taxable income. The assessment requires significant judgment.
We have considered various tax planning strategies that we would implement, if necessary, to enable the realization of our deferred tax assets; however, when the likelihood of the realization of existing deferred tax assets changes, adjustments to the valuation allowance are charged to our income tax provision in the period in which the determination is made. The Company concluded it was not able to realize the benefits of its deferred tax assets and has established a valuation allowance. Our valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets was $1.4 billion at December 31, 2021.
Inventory Reserves
Inventory represents a significant component of current assets and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value using either the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) or average cost method. To maintain a book value that is the lower of cost or net realizable value, we maintain reserves for excess, slow moving and obsolete inventory. To determine these reserve amounts, we review inventory quantities on hand, future product demand, market conditions, production requirements and technological obsolescence. This review requires us to make judgments regarding potential future outcomes. Our estimates included assessing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting impact to our business forecast. Our assessment of our inventory specifically identified inventory in which we could not forecast demand and excess and obsolete inventory. At December 31, 2021, inventory reserves of $159 million represented 19% of gross inventory and at December 31, 2020 inventory reserves of $119 million represented 14% of gross inventory. We believe that our inventory reserves as of December 31, 2021 are adequate to properly state inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. See “Note 9 - Inventories, Net” for further details.
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 38
Table of Contents Forward-Looking Statements
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains various statements relating to future financial performance and results, business strategy, plans, goals and objectives, including certain projections, business trends and other statements that are not historical facts. These statements constitute forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” “budget,” “strategy,” “plan,” “guidance,” “outlook,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “will,” “would,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely result,” and similar expressions, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words.
Forward-looking statements reflect our beliefs and expectations based on current estimates and projections. While we believe these expectations, and the estimates and projections on which they are based, are reasonable and were made in good faith, these statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, our actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what we have expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to correct, update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise, except to the extent required under federal securities laws. The following, together with disclosures under “Part I - Item 1A. - Risk Factors”, sets forth certain risks and uncertainties relating to our forward-looking statements that may cause actual results to be materially different from our present expectations or projections:
•risks associated with disease outbreaks and other public health issues, including COVID-19, their impact on the global economy and the business of our company, customers, suppliers and other partners, changes in, and the administration of, treaties, laws, and regulations, including in response to such issues and the potential for such issues to exacerbate other risks we face, including those related to the factors listed or referenced below;
•further spread and potential for a resurgence of COVID-19 in a given geographic region and related disruptions to our business, employees, customers, suppliers and other partners and additional regulatory measures or voluntary actions that may be put in place to limit the spread of COVID-19, including vaccination requirements and the associated availability of vaccines, restrictions on business operations or social distancing requirements, and the duration and efficacy of such restrictions;
•the price and price volatility of, and demand for, oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids;
•member-country quota compliance within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”);
•our ability to realize expected revenues and profitability levels from current and future contracts;
•our ability to generate cash flow from operations to fund our operations;
•our ability to comply with, and respond to, climate change, environmental, social and governance and other “sustainability” initiatives and future legislative and regulatory measures both globally and in the specific geographic regions in which we and our customers operate;
•our ability to effectively and timely address the need to conduct our operations and provision of services to our customers more sustainably and with a lower carbon footprint;
•our ability to effectively and timely adapt our technology portfolio, products and services to address and participate in changes to the market demands for the transition to alternate sources of energy such as geothermal, carbon capture and responsible abandonment, including our digitalization efforts;
•global political, economic and market conditions, political disturbances, war, terrorist attacks, changes in global trade policies, weak local economic conditions and international currency fluctuations;
•increases in the prices and lack of availability of our procured products and services;
•our ability to timely collect from customers;
•our ability to realize cost savings and business enhancements from our revenue and cost improvement efforts;
•our ability to attract, motivate and retain employees, including key personnel;
•our ability to access to capital markets on terms that are commercially acceptable to the Company;
•our ability to manage our workforce, supply chain and business processes, information technology systems and technological innovation and commercialization, including the impact of our organization restructure, business enhancements, improvement efforts and the cost and support reduction plans;
•our ability to service our debt obligations;
•potential non-cash asset impairment charges for long-lived assets, intangible assets or other assets;
•adverse weather conditions in certain regions of our operations; and
•failure to ensure on-going compliance with current and future laws and government regulations, including but not limited to environmental and tax and accounting laws, rules and regulations.
Many of these factors are macro-economic in nature and are, therefore, beyond our control. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, affect us in ways or to an extent that we currently do not expect or consider to be significant, or
Weatherford International plc - 2021 Form 10-K | 39
Table of Contents Forward-Looking Statements
should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results, performance or achievements may vary materially from those described in this annual report as anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, planned or projected.
Finally, our future results will depend upon various other risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those detailed in our other filings with the SEC under the Exchange Act and the Securities Act of 1933 (as amended, the “Securities Act”). For additional information regarding risks and uncertainties, see our other filings with the SEC.