Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Unless otherwise noted, transactions and other factors significantly impacting our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity are discussed in order of magnitude. Our MD&A is presented in five sections:
•Overview
•Results of Operations
•Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•New Accounting Pronouncements
Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The year-over-year comparisons in this MD&A are as of and for the fiscal years ended August 27, 2022 and August 28, 2021, unless stated otherwise. The discussion of Fiscal 2020 results and related year-over-year comparisons as of and for the fiscal years ended August 28, 2021 and August 29, 2020 are found in Item 7 of Part II of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 28, 2021.
Overview
Winnebago Industries, Inc. is one of the leading North American manufacturers of recreation vehicles ("RV"s) and marine products with a diversified portfolio used primarily in leisure travel and outdoor recreational activities. We produce our motorhome units in Iowa and Indiana; our towable units in Indiana; and our marine units in Indiana and Florida. We distribute our RV and marine products primarily through independent dealers across the U.S. and Canada, who then retail the products to the end consumer. We also distribute our marine products internationally through independent dealers, who then retail the products to the end consumer.
Macroeconomic Events
In February 2022, the United States announced targeted economic sanctions on Russia in response to the military conflict in Ukraine. As described in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our business may be sensitive to economic conditions such as the adverse impact of global tensions, which could impact input costs, consumer spending, and fuel prices. As our operations are primarily in North America, we have no direct exposure to Russia and Ukraine. However, we are actively monitoring the broader economic impact of the crisis, especially the potential impact of rising commodity and fuel prices, and the potential decreased demand for our products.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in strong retail demand by consumers of RVs as a safe travel option, and of marine products as a safe way to experience the outdoors. However, the pandemic has also caused global supply chain disruption. Our production has experienced certain supply shortages, particularly within our Motorhome and Marine segments, as well as material and component cost inflation. If these disruptions continue, or if there are additional disruptions in our supply chain, it could materially or adversely impact our operating results and financial condition. Despite certain supply shortages and inflationary cost input pressures, we continue to operate and adapt to these temporary supply chain disruptions. Refer to the COVID-19 related risk factor disclosed in Item 1A of Part I in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Acquisition of Barletta
On August 31, 2021, we completed our acquisition of all the equity interests of Barletta for $286.3 million funded with cash payments of $240.1 million, $25.0 million in common stock issued to the sellers (subject to a 12% discount), and contingent consideration from earnout provisions. For further discussion regarding the acquisition, refer to Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The acquisition of Barletta resulted in a newly created Marine reportable segment effective as of the first quarter of Fiscal 2022. The Marine reportable segment consists of the Barletta and Chris-Craft operating segments.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This MD&A includes financial information prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), as well as certain adjusted or non-GAAP financial measures such as EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. EBITDA is defined as net income before interest expense, provision for income taxes, and depreciation and amortization expense. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income before interest expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, and other pretax
adjustments made in order to present comparable results from period to period.
These non-GAAP financial measures, which are not calculated or presented in accordance with GAAP, have been provided as information supplemental and in addition to the financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP. Such non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for, or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein. The non-GAAP financial measures presented may differ from similar measures used by other companies.
Included in "Results of Operations - Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021" is a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA from net income, the nearest GAAP measure. We have included these non-GAAP performance measures as a comparable measure to illustrate the effect of non-recurring transactions that occurred during the reported periods and to improve comparability of our results from period to period. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides meaningful supplemental information about our operating performance as this measure excludes amounts from net income that we do not consider part of our core operating results when assessing our performance. Examples of items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA include acquisition-related fair-value inventory step-up, acquisition-related costs, litigation reserves, restructuring expenses, gain or loss on sale of property, plant and equipment, contingent consideration fair value adjustment, and non-operating income or loss.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures (a) to evaluate our historical and prospective financial performance and trends as well as our performance relative to competitors and peers; (b) to measure operational profitability on a consistent basis; (c) in presentations to the members of our Board of Directors to enable our Board of Directors to have the same measurement basis of operating performance as used by management in its assessments of performance and in forecasting; (d) to evaluate potential acquisitions; and (e) to ensure compliance with covenants and restricted activities under the terms of our ABL Credit Facility and outstanding notes, as further described in Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in the industry.
Industry Trends
The RV and marine industries continue to experience shipping delays, and material and component cost inflation. In addition, both industries continue to experience supply chain disruptions and shortages, particularly within the Motorhome and Marine segments. While we continue to operate and adapt to these supply chain disruptions, they impacted our ability to increase production to meet existing demand during Fiscal 2022 and continuing in Fiscal 2023.
We believe field inventory for our Towable segment is returning to normalized levels to adequately serve end consumer demand, whereas field inventory for our Motorhome and Marine segments remains lower than desired by our dealer network, which indicates future strength in wholesale shipments. We continue to produce and ship in accordance with dealer demand as evidenced and requested by dealer orders.
RV industry retail sales have been softening compared to record high prior year levels; however, we still believe in the long-term health of consumer demand for RV and marine products. More people are pursuing outdoor activities, household penetration of RVs is increasing, and campers are more diverse than ever. According to statistics published by Kampgrounds of America, Inc., over 14 million households camped for the first time in 2020 and 2021, and combined with record levels of first-time buyers of RVs over the past two years, we believe a positive outlook exists for new product and upgrade-related sales. Despite these developments, current macroeconomic trends such as inflation, rising interest rates and low consumer sentiment, as well as global political tensions, contribute to reduced short-term consumer demand for large discretionary products such as RVs and Marine products, which could in turn impact our future revenue and profits.
Results of Operations - Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Consolidated Performance Summary
The following is an analysis of changes in key items included in the statements of operations for the fiscal year ended August 27, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended August 28, 2021:
(1) Percentages may not add due to rounding differences.
Net revenues increased primarily due to incremental sales from the acquisition of Barletta, price increases, and unit growth.
Gross profit as a percentage of revenue increased primarily due to improved operating leverage on higher revenues and price increases, partially offset by higher material and component costs, and production inefficiencies caused by supply constraints.
Operating expenses increased primarily due to higher operating expenses to support increased sales, acquisition-related costs, incremental operating expenses and amortization associated with the acquisition of Barletta, and higher incentive-based compensation related to operating performance.
Non-operating loss increased predominantly due to the contingent consideration fair value adjustment related to the acquisition of Barletta.
Our effective tax rate increased primarily due to the impact of consistent tax credits compared to the prior year over increased income in the current year and a net unfavorable expense in the current year related to nondeductible compensation.
Net income and diluted earnings per share increased primarily due to leverage gained on higher revenues, partially offset by increased operating expenses and higher income tax expense.
Non-GAAP Reconciliation
The following table reconciles net income to consolidated EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for Fiscal 2022 and 2021:
(1) Balance excludes depreciation expense classified as restructuring as the balance is already included in the EBITDA calculation.
Reportable Segment Performance Summary
Towable
The following is an analysis of key changes in our Towable segment for Fiscal 2022 and 2021:
(1) ASP excludes off-invoice dealer incentives.
(2) Percentages may not add due to rounding differences.
(3) Our backlog includes all accepted orders from dealers which generally have been requested to be shipped within the next six months. Orders in backlog can be cancelled or postponed at the option of the dealer at any time without penalty; therefore, backlog may not necessarily be an accurate measure of future sales.
Net revenues increased primarily due to price increases related to higher material and component costs.
Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to revenue growth, partially offset by higher operating expenses to support increasing sales.
Motorhome
The following is an analysis of key changes in our Motorhome segment for Fiscal 2022 and 2021:
(1) ASP excludes off-invoice dealer incentives.
(2) Percentages may not add due to rounding differences.
(3) Our backlog includes all accepted orders from dealers which generally have been requested to be shipped within the next six months. Orders in backlog can be cancelled or postponed at the option of the dealer at any time without penalty; therefore, backlog may not necessarily be an accurate measure of future sales.
Net revenues increased primarily due to price increases related to higher material and component costs, and unit growth.
Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to revenue growth, partially offset by higher material and component costs, and operating expenses.
Marine
The following is an analysis of key changes in our Marine segment for Fiscal 2022 and 2021:
(1) ASP excludes off-invoice dealer incentives.
(2) Our backlog includes all accepted orders from dealers which generally have been requested to be shipped within the next six months. Orders in backlog generally can be cancelled or postponed at the option of the dealer at any time without penalty; therefore, backlog may not necessarily be an accurate measure of future sales.
Net revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to the acquisition of Barletta at the beginning of the first quarter of Fiscal 2022.
Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from total operations for Fiscal 2022 and 2021:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 due to higher profitability, a $36.6 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities, and a $27.2 million increase in accounts payable to support the growth in the business, partially offset by a $171.3 million increase in inventory to support operational activities during a period impacted by continued supply chain challenges.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities increased in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to our acquisition of Barletta during the first quarter of Fiscal 2022.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities increased in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in stock repurchases in Fiscal 2022.
Debt and Capital
We maintain an ABL Credit Facility subject to certain factors which may accelerate the maturity date. On July 15, 2022, our ABL Credit Facility was amended and restated to, among other things, increase the commitments thereunder to $350.0 million, from $192.5 million, and extend the maturity date to July 15, 2027 from October 22, 2024. As of August 27, 2022, we had $282.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and no borrowings against the ABL Credit Facility. We continue to evaluate the financial stability of the counterparties and counterparty risk for the Convertible Notes, the Senior Secured Notes, and the ABL Credit Facility.
On July 8, 2020, we closed our private offering (the "Senior Secured Notes Offering") of $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.25% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the "Senior Secured Notes"). Refer to Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
On November 1, 2019, we issued $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.5% unsecured Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 ("Convertible Notes"), which were used to partially fund the Newmar acquisition. Refer to Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Our cash and cash equivalent balances consist of high quality, short-term money market instruments.
Other Financial Measures
Working capital as of August 27, 2022 and August 28, 2021 was $571.7 million and $651.6 million, respectively.
Capital Expenditures
We anticipate capital expenditures in Fiscal 2023 of approximately $75.0 million to $100.0 million. We will continue to support organic growth through capacity expansion in our facilities and make capital improvements as necessary. We believe cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and the borrowing capacity available under our ABL Credit Facility and other debt instruments will be sufficient to support our capital expenditures for the foreseeable future.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
We repurchase our common stock and pay dividends pursuant to programs approved by our Board of Directors. Our long-term capital allocation strategy is to first fund operations and investments in growth, maintain reasonable liquidity, maintain a leverage ratio that reflects a prudent capital structure in light of the cyclical industries we compete in, and then return excess cash over time to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. Refer to Item 5 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion about our share repurchase program and dividend declared on August 17, 2022.
Cash Requirements
Our cash requirements within the next twelve months include accounts payable, accrued expenses, purchase commitments and other current liabilities.
Our cash requirements greater than twelve months from various contractual obligations and commitments include:
Debt Obligations and Interest Payments
Refer to Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail of our debt and the timing of expected future principal and interest payments. Interest payments are based on fixed interest rates for the Senior Secured Notes and Convertible Notes.
Operating and Finance Leases
Refer to Note 10 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail of our lease obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
Deferred Compensation Obligations
Refer to Note 11 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail of our deferred compensation plans. We expect to pay $2.6 million in the next 12 months and $8.1 million beyond 12 months.
Contracted Services
Contracted services include agreements with third-party service providers for software, payroll services, equipment maintenance services, and audits for periods up to Fiscal 2025. We expect to pay $7.0 million beyond 12 months.
Contingent Repurchase Obligations
Refer to Note 12 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail of our contingent repurchase commitment and estimated obligation, most of which we expect to expire within one year.
We expect to satisfy our short-term and long-term obligations through a combination of cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and the borrowing capacity available under our ABL Credit Facility and other debt instruments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. In connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates, and judgments on historical experience, current trends, and other factors believed to be relevant at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. These estimates require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments because they relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. We have reviewed these critical accounting policies and estimates and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
We have not made any material changes during the past three fiscal years, nor do we believe there is a reasonable likelihood of a material future change to the accounting methodologies for the areas described below.
Accounting for Business Combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. This method requires the recording of acquired assets, including separately identifiable intangible assets, and assumed liabilities at their acquisition date fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash flows, discount rates, royalty rates and asset lives, among other items.
We used the income approach to value certain intangible assets. Under the income approach, an intangible asset’s fair value is equal to the present value of future economic benefits to be derived from ownership of the asset. We used the income approach known as the relief from royalty method to value the fair value of the trade names. The relief from royalty method is based on the hypothetical royalty stream that would be received if we were to license the trade name and was based on expected revenues. The fair value of the dealer network was estimated using an income approach known as the cost to recreate/cost savings method. This
method uses the replacement of the asset as an indicator of the fair value of the asset. The determination of the fair value of other assets acquired and liabilities assumed involves assessing factors such as the expected future cash flows associated with individual assets and liabilities and appropriate discount rates at the date of the acquisition.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We test goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets (trade names) for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter and more frequently if events or circumstances occur that would indicate a reduction in fair value. Our test of impairment begins by either performing a qualitative evaluation or a quantitative test:
•Qualitative evaluation - Performed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the carrying value of goodwill or the trade name exceeds the fair value of the asset. During our qualitative assessment, we make significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including, but not limited to, the macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance of the Company and the reporting units, changes in our share price, and relevant company-specific events. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the carrying value of goodwill exceeds the fair value of goodwill, we perform the quantitative test to determine the amount of the impairment.
•Quantitative test - Used to calculate the fair value of goodwill or the trade name. If the carrying value of the reporting unit or trade name exceeds the fair value, the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying value and fair value. Our goodwill fair value model uses a blend of the income (discounted future cash flow) and market (guideline public company) approaches, which includes the use of significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs). Our trade name fair value model uses the income (relief-from-royalty) approach, which includes the use of significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs). During these valuations, we make significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including current and projected future levels of income based on management’s plans, business trends, market and economic conditions, and market-participant considerations.
Actual results may differ from assumed and estimated amounts. No impairments were recorded in Fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020. For further information regarding goodwill and intangible assets, see Note 7 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Warranty
We provide certain service and warranty on our products. Estimated costs related to product warranty are accrued at the time of sale and are based upon past warranty claims and unit sales history. Estimates are adjusted as needed to reflect actual costs incurred as information becomes available.
In addition to the costs associated with the contractual warranty coverage provided on our products, we also occasionally incur costs as a result of additional service actions not covered by our warranties, including product recalls and customer satisfaction actions. Although we estimate and reserve for the cost of these service actions, there can be no assurance that expense levels will remain at current levels or such reserves will continue to be adequate.
A significant increase in dealership labor rates, the cost of parts, or the frequency of claims could have a material adverse impact on our operating results for the period or periods in which such claims or additional costs materialize. A hypothetical change of a 10% increase or decrease in our warranty liability as of August 27, 2022 would not have a material effect on our net income.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of new applicable accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8 of Part II in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.