ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations comparing the calendar years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This section should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto that are incorporated herein by reference and the other financial information included herein and the notes thereto.
OVERVIEW
The Company’s primary business is fashion model management and complementary business activities. The business of talent management firms, such as Wilhelmina, depends heavily on the state of the advertising industry, as demand for talent is driven by digital, mobile, print and television advertising campaigns for consumer goods, e-commerce, and retail clients. Wilhelmina believes it has strong brand recognition, which enables it to attract and retain top agents and talent to service a broad universe of clients. In order to take advantage of these opportunities and support its continued growth, the Company will need to continue to successfully allocate resources and staffing in a way that enhances its ability to respond to new opportunities. The Company continues to focus on tightly managing costs, recruiting top agents, and scouting and developing talent.
Although Wilhelmina has a large and diverse client base, it is not immune to global economic conditions, such as the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company closely monitors economic conditions, client spending, and other industry factors and continually evaluates opportunities to increase the market share of its existing boards and further expand its geographic reach. There can be no assurance as to the effects on Wilhelmina of future economic circumstances, technological developments, client spending patterns, client creditworthiness and other developments and whether, or to what extent, Wilhelmina’s efforts to respond to them will be effective.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, which spread rapidly throughout the United States and the world. As the global impact of COVID-19 continues, Wilhelmina’s first priority has been to protect the health and safety of its employees and talent. To help mitigate the spread of the virus and in response to health advisories and governmental actions and regulations, the Company has modified its business practices and has implemented health and safety measures that are designed to protect employees and represented talent.
The Company’s revenues are heavily dependent on the level of economic activity in the United States and the United Kingdom, particularly in the fashion, advertising and publishing industries, all of which have been negatively impacted by the pandemic and may not recover as quickly as other sectors of the economy. There have been mandates from federal, state, and local authorities requiring forced closures of non-essential businesses. As a result, beginning in March 2020, the Company saw a significant reduction in customer bookings, resulting in a negative impact to revenue and earnings. While bookings remained below pre-pandemic levels during 2021, bookings increased throughout the year.
In addition to reduced revenue, business operations have been adversely affected by reductions in productivity, limitations on the ability of customers to make timely payments, disruptions in talents’ ability to travel to needed locations, and supply chain disruptions impeding clothing or footwear wardrobe from reaching destinations for photoshoots and other bookings. Many of the Company’s customers are large retail and fashion companies, some of which have had to close stores in the United States and internationally due to the spread of COVID-19. Some of these customers have filed for bankruptcy and others may be unable to pay amounts already owed to the Company, resulting in increased future bad debt expense. These customers also may not emerge from the pandemic with the financial ability, or need, to purchase Wilhelmina’s services to the extent that they did in previous years. Some model talent have been quarantined far from the major cities where Wilhelmina’s offices are located, and also away from where most modeling jobs take place. Many U.S. and international airlines have decreased their flight schedules which, as economic activities resume and clients increase booking requests, may make it difficult for talent to be available when and where they are needed. The B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.617.2 (Delta), and B.1.1.529 (Omicron) variants of the COVID-19 virus, which are believed to spread easily and quickly, have resulted in increased local restrictions and mandates in the cities in which the Company operates. While these disruptions are currently expected to be temporary, there continues to be uncertainty around the duration.
Although some clients have increased activity and bookings recently, rising COVID-19 infection rates in cities where Wilhelmina operates could lead to a slower economic recovery in those markets, and possible additional business closings or local mandates that could slow the recovery in operations there. Since Wilhelmina extends customary payment terms to its clients, even as bookings resume, there is likely to be a lag in cash collections. In the meantime, the Company continues to have significant employee, office rent, and other expenses.
Reduced outstanding accounts receivable available as collateral under the Company’s credit agreement with Amegy Bank have limited its access to additional financing. Since the pandemic began, many stock markets, including Nasdaq Capital Market where Wilhelmina’s common stock is listed, have been volatile. A decline in the Company’s stock price would reduce its market capitalization and could require additional goodwill or intangible asset impairment writedowns.
The Company has taken the following actions to address the impact of COVID-19, in order to efficiently manage the business and maintain adequate liquidity and maximum flexibility:
-
In April 2020, obtained approximately $2.0 million in loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). In 2021, these loans were 100% forgiven.
-
Eliminated discretionary travel and entertainment expenses in 2020, increasing in 2021 as business conditions improved
-
Suspended share repurchases.
-
Did not renew the leases on three New York City model apartments when the terms ended in June and August, 2020.
-
Did not renew the lease on the Company’s New York City office when the term ended in February 2021, and required all New York based staff to work remotely.
-
Suspended efforts to fill two highly compensated executive roles following the resignation of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Vice President in early 2020.
-
Negotiated discounts with various vendors and service providers.
-
Effective July 1, 2020, implemented layoffs of approximately 36% of its staff, including employees at each of the Company’s five offices, and effected temporary salary reductions for the remaining staff through June 2021.
If quarantines and limitations on non-essential work are re-implemented, or persist for an extended period, the Company may need to implement additional cost savings measures.
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“CAA”) was signed into law. The CAA expanded eligibility for an employee retention payroll tax credit for companies impacted by the pandemic with fewer than five hundred employees and at least a twenty percent decline in gross receipts compared to the same quarter in 2019, to encourage retention of employees. This payroll tax credit was a refundable tax credit against certain employment taxes of up to $7 thousand per employee for eligible employers, equal to 70% of qualified wages paid to employees during a quarter, capped at $10 thousand of qualified wages per employee. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $1.3 million of Other Income for employee retention payroll tax credit. The Company has also benefitted from the CAA guidance to treat expenses associated with forgiven PPP loans as tax deductible.
BREXIT
On January 31, 2020, the United Kingdom (“UK”) withdrew from the European Union (“EU”). Effective January 1, 2021, new visa requirements and other restrictions limit the freedom of movement for British workers to travel to the EU for work, which may impact the ability of the Company’s London office to book modeling photoshoots that take place in the European Union. It may also be more difficult, in the future, for talent represented by Wilhelmina London, but based in the EU, to travel to London and other parts of the UK for photoshoots and campaign work. New immigration sponsorship or visa requirements could discourage fashion brands and other clients from booking as frequently in London, which has historically been an international fashion and modeling hub, and could impact the revenue of the Company’s London operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF THE COMPANY FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
In addition to net income, the key financial indicators that the Company reviews to monitor its business are revenues, model costs, operating expenses and cash flows.
The Company analyzes revenue by reviewing the mix of revenues generated by the different boards, by geographic locations and from significant clients. Wilhelmina’s primary sources of revenue include: (i) revenues from principal relationships where the gross amount billed to the client is recorded as revenue when earned and collectability is reasonably assured; and (ii) separate service charges, paid by clients in addition to the booking fees, which are calculated as a percentage of the models’ booking fees and are recorded as revenues when earned and collectability is reasonably assured. See “Critical Accounting Policies - Revenue Recognition.”
Wilhelmina provides professional services. Therefore, salary and service costs represent the largest part of the Company’s operating expenses. Salary and service costs are comprised of payroll and related costs and travel, meals and entertainment (“T&E”) to deliver the Company’s services and to enable new business development activities.
Analysis of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Service Revenues
The Company’s service revenues fluctuate in response to its clients’ willingness to spend on advertising and the Company’s ability to have the desired talent available. The increase of 36.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to increased bookings as the cities where Wilhelmina operates reopened and business activity increased as COVID-19 vaccination rates rose.
License Fees
License fees include franchise revenues from independently owned model agencies that use the Wilhelmina trademark and various services provided by the Company. License fees increased by 26.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the timing of income from licensing agreements.
Gross Profit Margin
Gross profit margins were relatively unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Salaries and Service Costs
Salaries and service costs consist of payroll related costs and T&E required to deliver the Company’s services to its clients and talents. The 5.4% decrease in salaries and service costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to employee layoffs in July 2020, temporary reductions in staff salaries, and the closure of the hair and makeup artist division in the second half of 2020, partially offset by new employee hires in 2021.
Office and General Expenses
Office and general expenses consist of office and equipment rents, advertising and promotion, insurance expenses, administration and technology cost. During the year ended December 31, 2021, office and general expenses decreased 17.6% when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to reduced rent expense, computer expense, utilities, and other office expenses, partially offset by an increase in legal expenses.
Amortization and Depreciation
Amortization and depreciation expense is incurred with respect to certain assets, including computer hardware, software, office equipment, furniture and certain finance lease assets. Amortization and depreciation expense decreased by 31.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to reduced depreciation of assets that became fully amortized in 2020. Fixed asset purchases (mostly related to technology and computer equipment) totaled approximately $19 thousand in 2021 and $0.2 million in 2020.
Goodwill Impairment
No goodwill impairment charges were incurred during 2021. In March 2020, the Company determined that declines in revenue, COVID-19 impacts on its retail clients, and declines in its stock price had triggered the requirement for goodwill impairment testing. The results of the impairment test indicated that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded its estimated fair value. As a result, during March 2020, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $0.8 million related to its goodwill. Further declines in the Company’s stock price could result in additional goodwill impairment charges.
Cybersecurity Incident Expenses
In November 2021, the Company determined that it had recently been the victim of criminal fraud known to law enforcement authorities as “business e-mail compromise fraud” which involved employee e-mail impersonation and fraudulent payment requests targeting the finance department of a division of the Company. The fraud resulted in unauthorized transfers of funds aggregating approximately $0.7 million, as well as approximately $10 thousand of professional service fees to address the fraud. The Company recovered $0.2 million in February 2022, which is included in accounts receivable on the Company’s balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. As a result, the Company recorded a charge of $0.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 within operating expenses on the consolidated statements of operations.
Loan Forgiveness and Employee Retention Credit
During 2021, the Company recorded a $2.0 million gain on forgiveness of its PPP loans obtained in 2020 and a $1.3 million employee retention payroll tax credit, both of which were the result of governmental actions to mitigate the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Management does not presently expect similar benefits to be available during 2022 and subsequent periods.
Corporate Overhead
Corporate overhead expenses include director and executive officer compensation, legal, audit and professional fees, corporate office rent, and travel. Corporate overhead increased by 1.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the timing of expenses incurred for the Company’s audit fees.
Operating Income and Operating Margin
Operating income of $2.2 million and operating margin of 3.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to operating loss of $4.0 million and negative operating margin of 9.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020. These improvements were primarily the result of increased revenue net of model costs and lower operating expenses, partially offset by cybersecurity incident expenses.
Foreign Currency Loss
The Company realized a loss of $80 thousand from foreign currency exchange during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to gain of $16 thousand from foreign currency exchange during the year ended December 31, 2020. Foreign currency gain and loss is due to fluctuations in currencies from Great Britain, Europe, and Latin America.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to accrued interest on term loans drawn during 2016 and 2018 and on finance leases. Interest expense decreased in 2021 due to the repayment of the balance on the Amegy term loan in August 2021. See, “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Income before Income Taxes
Income before income taxes of $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The pre-tax income in 2021 was primarily due to operating income, the gain on forgiveness of PPP loans, and employee retention payroll tax credits. The loss in 2020 was primarily due to operating losses and goodwill impairment expense.
Income Taxes
Generally, the Company’s combined effective tax rate is high relative to reported net income as a result of certain valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, amortization expense, foreign taxes, and corporate overhead not being deductible and income being attributable to certain states in which it operates. The Company operates in three states, which have relatively high tax rates: California, New York, and Florida. In addition, foreign taxes in the United Kingdom related to our London office are not deductible for U.S. federal taxes. The 15.4% effective tax rate during 2021 was lower than typical years due primarily to the non-taxability of the gain on forgiveness of the PPP loan and the benefit of the employee retention payroll tax credit.
The Company had income tax of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company reported income tax expense for 2020 despite a pre-tax loss due primarily to a $1.5 million valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance was the result of management’s assessment as of December 31, 2020 that the benefit of the Company’s deferred tax assets would not be realized primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business. Income tax expense for 2020 was also impacted by foreign taxes in the United Kingdom related to the Company’s London office that are not deductible for U.S. income tax purposes. In addition, the $0.8 million goodwill impairment recorded in 2020 resulted in only a $0.1 million tax benefit due to certain tax differences.
Net Income
The Company had net income of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss of $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the increase in operating income, gain on forgiveness of PPP loans, and employee retention payroll tax credits. As a result of the non-recurring nature of each of the cybersecurity incident, the PPP loan forgiveness and the employee retention payroll tax credit, management does not believe 2021 net income is necessarily indicative of future operating results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash balance increased to $10.3 million at December 31, 2021 from $5.6 million at December 31, 2020. The cash balance increased primarily as a result of $5.5 million net cash provided by operating activities partially offset by $0.8 million cash used in financing activities, and the $35 thousand adverse effect of exchange rate on cash flow.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $5.5 million was primarily the result of net income and increases in amounts due to models, deferred revenue, and accounts payable and accrued liabilities, partially offset by increases in accounts receivable and the noncash gain on forgiveness of PPP loans. The $19 thousand cash used in investing activities was attributable to purchases of property and equipment, including software and computer equipment. The $0.8 million of cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to principal payments on the Company’s Amegy Bank term loans and payments on finance leases.
The Company’s primary liquidity needs are for working capital associated with performing services under its client contracts. Generally, the Company incurs significant operating expenses with payment terms shorter than its average collections on billings. The COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the Company’s cash flows during 2021, primarily due to reduced bookings and modeling jobs compared to pre-pandemic periods. The Company has taken actions to address the impact of COVID-19 by reducing expenses and has the ability to implement more significant cost savings measures if the adverse effects of the pandemic persist for an extended period. Based on budgeted cash flow information, management believes that the Company has sufficient liquidity to meet its projected operational expenses and capital expenditure requirements for the next twelve months and beyond.
Amegy Bank Credit Agreement
The Company has a credit agreement with Amegy Bank which originally provided a $4.0 million revolving line of credit and up to a $3.0 million term loan which could be drawn through October 24, 2016. Amounts outstanding under the term loan reduced the availability under the revolving line of credit. The revolving line of credit is subject to a borrowing base derived from 80% of eligible accounts receivable (as defined) and the Company’s minimum net worth covenant. The revolving line of credit bears interest at prime plus 0.50% payable monthly. The Company previously had a $0.2 million irrevocable standby letter of credit outstanding under the revolving line of credit which terminated June 9, 2021, and had no letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2021. The Company had borrowing capacity of $3.0 million at December 31, 2021. The revolving line of credit expires October 24, 2022.
On August 16, 2016, the Company drew $2.7 million of the term loan and used the proceeds to fund the purchase of shares of its common stock in a private transaction. The term loan bore interest at 4.5% per annum and was payable in monthly payments of interest only until November, 2016, followed by 47 equal monthly payments of principal and interest computed on a 60-month amortization schedule. A final $0.6 million payment of principal and interest was paid on October 28, 2020.
On July 16, 2018, the Company amended its credit agreement with Amegy Bank to provide for an additional term loan of up to $1.0 million that could be drawn by the Company through July 12, 2019, for the purpose of repurchases of its common stock. The additional term loan was evidenced by a promissory note bearing interest at 5.15% per annum and was payable in monthly installments of interest only through July 12, 2019, followed by 47 equal payments of principal and interest computed on a 60-month amortization schedule.
On August 1, 2018, the Company drew $0.7 million of the additional term loan and used the proceeds to fund the purchase of 100,000 shares of its common stock in a private transaction. On December 12, 2018, the Company drew $0.3 million of the additional term loan and used the proceeds to partially fund a purchase of 50,000 shares of its common stock in a private transaction. On August 31, 2021, the Company prepaid, without penalty, the $0.6 million remaining balance of the additional term loan. As of December 31, 2021, there was no outstanding balance on the term loan.
On March 26, 2020, the Company entered into a Thirteenth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Thirteenth Amendment”) with Amegy Bank. The Thirteenth Amendment amended the minimum net worth covenant to require the Company to maintain tangible net worth (as defined therein) of $4.0 million, determined on a quarterly basis. Under the Thirteenth Amendment, Amegy Bank also waived an existing default caused by the Company’s failure to satisfy the previously required $20.0 million minimum net worth covenant as of December 31, 2019. On May 12, 2020, the Company entered into a Fourteenth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Fourteenth Amendment”) with Amegy Bank. The Fourteenth Amendment amended the line of credit to reduce the maximum borrowing capacity to $3.0 million. Under the Fourteenth Amendment, Amegy Bank also waived an existing default caused by the Company’s failure to satisfy both the minimum fixed charge coverage ratio through March 31, 2020 and the minimum tangible net worth as of March 31, 2020. The Company obtained waivers from Amegy Bank of its failures to satisfy the fixed charge coverage ratio, the minimum tangible net worth, and the borrowing base for the quarters ended June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020. On November 10, 2020, the Company entered into a Fifteenth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Fifteenth Amendment”) with Amegy Bank. The Fifteenth Amendment waived the minimum tangible net worth covenant until December 31, 2021, after which a minimum tangible net worth of $1.5 million will be required. The Fifteenth Amendment also revised the calculation of the fixed charge coverage ratio such that it was tested at December 31, 2020 based on the preceding six month period, tested at March 31, 2021 based on the preceding nine month period, and tested at June 30, 2021 and subsequent periods using a twelve month rolling period. The Company was in compliance with its bank covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
On April 15, 2020, Wilhelmina International, Ltd. (the “Borrower”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, executed a Business Loan Agreement and a Promissory Note each dated April 13, 2020 (collectively, the “Sub PPP Loan Documents”), with respect to a loan in the amount of $1.8 million (the “Sub PPP Loan”) from Amegy Bank. The Sub PPP Loan was obtained pursuant to the PPP. The Sub PPP Loan originally matured on April 13, 2022 and bore interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. As allowed under the Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act, the Sub PPP Loan was extended to mature on April 13, 2025. On March 27, 2021, the Company received notice from the SBA that the Sub PPP loan, including $17 thousand accrued interest, had been fully forgiven, resulting in $1.9 million of gain on forgiveness of loan recorded within other (income) expenses during the quarter ended March 31, 2021.
On April 18, 2020, the Company executed a Business Loan Agreement and a Promissory Note each dated April 17, 2020 (collectively, the “Parent PPP Loan Documents”), with respect to a loan in the amount of $128 thousand (the “Parent PPP Loan”) from Amegy Bank. The Parent PPP Loan was also obtained pursuant to the PPP. The Parent PPP Loan originally matured on April 17, 2022 and bore interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. As allowed under the Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act, the Parent PPP Loan was extended to mature on April 17, 2025. On April 3, 2021, the Company received notice from the SBA that the Parent PPP Loan, including $1 thousand accrued interest, had been fully forgiven, resulting in $0.1 million of gain on forgiveness of loan recorded within other (income) expense during the quarter ended June 30, 2021. Under the PPP, the SBA reserves the right to audit any PPP loan forgiveness application for a period of six years from the date of loan forgiveness.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements of the Company are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows may be affected.
The following items require significant estimation or judgement. For additional information about our accounting policies, refer to “Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the audited consolidated financial statements included herewith.
Revenue Recognition
The Company has adopted the requirements of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC 606”). ASC 606 establishes a principle for recognizing revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers, in an amount that reflects the expected consideration received in exchange for those goods or services.
Our revenues are derived primarily from fashion model bookings, and representation of social media influencers and actors for commercials, film, and television. Our performance obligations are primarily satisfied at a point in time when the talent has completed the contractual requirements.
A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The performance obligations for most of the Company’s core modeling bookings are satisfied on the day of the event, and the “day rate” total fee is agreed in advance when the customer books the model for a particular date. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation based on the estimated relative standalone selling price.
Amounts billed that have not yet met the applicable revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue.
Model Costs
Model costs include amounts owed to talent, including taxes required to be withheld and remitted directly to taxing authorities, commissions owed to other agencies, and related costs such as those paid for photography. Costs are accrued in the period in which the event takes place consistent with when the revenue is recognized. The Company typically enters into contractual agreements with models under which the Company is obligated to pay talent upon collection of fees from the customer.
Share Based Compensation
Share-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value as calculated by the Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recognized on a straight line basis as an expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. The determination of the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include the estimated volatility over the expected term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, risk-free interest rates, estimated forfeitures and expected dividends.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, the United Kingdom, and numerous local jurisdictions.
Deferred tax assets are recognized for unused tax losses, unused tax credits, and deductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which they can be used. Unused tax loss carry-forwards are reviewed at each reporting date and a valuation allowance is established if it is doubtful we will generate sufficient future taxable income to utilize the loss carry-forwards.
In determining the amount of current and deferred income tax, we take into account whether additional taxes, interest, or penalties may be due. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our income taxes, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome will not be materially different. To the extent that the final tax outcome is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are accounted for at net realizable value, do not bear interest and are short-term in nature. The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability to collect on accounts receivable. Based on management’s assessment, the Company provides for estimated uncollectible amounts through a charge to earnings and a credit to the allowance. Balances that remain outstanding after the Company has used reasonable collection efforts are written off through a charge to the allowance and a credit to accounts receivable. The Company generally does not require collateral.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairment Testing
The Company performs impairment testing at least annually and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. The Company sometimes utilizes an independent valuation specialist to assist with the determination of fair value. In accordance with ASU 2017-03, effective January 1, 2020, only a one-step quantitative impairment test is performed, whereby a goodwill impairment loss will be measured as the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill.
Whenever events or circumstances change, entities have the option to first make a qualitative evaluation about the likelihood of goodwill impairment. If impairment is deemed more likely than not, management would perform the goodwill impairment test. Otherwise, the goodwill impairment test is not required. In assessing the qualitative factors, the Company assesses relevant events and circumstances that may impact the fair value and the carrying amount of the reporting unit. The identification of relevant events and circumstances and how these may impact a reporting unit’s fair value or carrying amount involve significant judgments and assumptions. The judgment and assumptions include the identification of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, Company specific events and share price trends, an assessment of whether each relevant factor will impact the impairment test positively or negatively, and the magnitude of any such impact.