Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). These forward-looking statements are not historical facts but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections. We may use words such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “foresee,” “estimate” and variations of these words and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties, and other factors, some of which are beyond our control, are difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted. You should read this report completely and with the understanding that actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. The forward-looking statements included in this report are made as of the date of this report and should be evaluated with consideration of any changes occurring after the date of this Report. We will not update forward-looking statements even though our situation may change in the future and we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Results for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021
Operating Revenues
The Company had revenues of $1,045,890 and $1,394,149 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Cost of Revenues
The Company’s cost of revenues for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $568,409 and $869,450, respectively.
Gross Profit
The Company’s gross profit for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $477,481, and $524,699, respectively.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consisted primarily of consulting fees, professional fees, and legal and accounting expenses. For the year ended June 30, 2022, general and administrative expenses were $13,522,061 compared to $3,686,379 for the year ended 2021. The primary expenses for 2022 were salaries and wages totaling $11,375,405; the primary expenses for 2021 were salaries and wages and professional services totaling $2,452,018.
Other Income (Expense)
The Company had other income (expense) for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 of $(4,575) and $(151,326), respectively. Other income (expense) consisted primarily of a loss in fair value of derivative instrument of $213,053 and $11,003, gain on settlement of accounts payable of $156,616 and $-0-, and interest expense of $80,283 and $221,323, respectively.
Net loss
The net loss for the year ended June 30, 2022, was $13,049,155 compared to $3,316,006 for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan. Since its inception, the Company has been funded by related parties through capital investment and borrowing of funds.
At June 30, 2022, the Company had total current assets of $297,409 compared to $907,806 at June 30, 2021. Current assets consisted primarily of cash and prepaid inventory in 2022, and in 2021. At June 30, 2022, the Company had total current liabilities of $2,431,287 compared to $4,258,106 at June 30, 2021. Current liabilities consisted primarily of accounts payable, accrued liabilities, notes payable, and convertible notes payable with derivative liabilities. The decrease in our current liabilities was primarily attributed to the decrease in accounts payable and notes payable.
We had negative working capital of $2,133,878 as of June 30, 2022.
Cash flow from Operating Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2022, cash used in operating activities was $(3,107,177) compared to $(1,173,370) for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in the amounts of cash used in operating activities was primarily due to increased operating expenses and the paydown of accounts payable in 2022 as compared to 2021.
Cash flow from Financing Activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, cash provided by financing activity was $2,380,252 compared to $2,020,800 provided during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Going Concern
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to pursue any extensive business activities. For these reasons, we have included in our audited financial statements that there is substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern without further financing.
The Company is a going concern, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets, and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business.
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, the Company had a Shareholders’ Deficit at June 30, 2022, of $2,092,227 as its liabilities exceeded its assets. These factors among others raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Wearable Health Solutions provides mobile health (mHealth) products and services to approximately 200 dealers and distributors throughout the globe (mostly Canada, United States and New Zealand). As a provider of personal emergency response devices in the rapidly growing medical alarm device and eHealth sector, we provide innovative wearable healthcare products, tracking services, and turn-key solutions that enable our users to be proactive with their health, as well as safe and protected. According to the QYResearch report on Global PERS devices, MediPendant was the 17th largest global PERS company based on revenues in 2022 (“QYResearch Global PERs Devices Market Report, History and Forecast 2016-2027”). Our products and services are always state-of-the-art and cost effective. Through our culture, our drive, and the expertise of each individual employee, we are uniquely positioned to build shareholder value by setting the highest standards in service, reliability, and safety in our rapidly growing industry.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The Company has not yet established an ongoing source of revenues sufficient to cover its operating costs for the next fiscal year and allow it to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company obtaining adequate capital to fund operating losses until it becomes profitable. As of June 30, 2022, the Company has a net loss of $13,049,155, and if the Company is unable to obtain adequate capital, it could be forced to cease operations.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, Company has net cash used in operating activities of $3,107,177 as well as stock compensation non-cash expenses of $10,044,522 and a net loss of $13,049,155. The Company raised $2,380,252 from financing activities in the year ended June 30, 2022, which resulted in a negative working capital of $2,133,878 as of June 30, 2022. If the Company is unable to raise additional adequate capital, it could be forced to cease operations.
Future Financings
We will continue to rely on equity sales of the Company’s common shares in order to continue to fund business operations. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to existing shareholders. There is no assurance that the Company will achieve any additional sales of the equity securities or arrange for debt or other financing to fund our business plan of selling the iHelp MAX®.
Since inception, we have financed our cash flow requirements through issuance of common stock and loans from third parties. As we expand our activities, we may, and most likely will, continue to experience net negative cash flows from operations, pending receipt of revenues. Additionally, we anticipate obtaining additional financing to fund operations through common stock offerings, to the extent available, or to obtain additional financing to the extent necessary to augment our working capital. In the future we will need to generate sufficient revenues from sales in order to eliminate or reduce the need to sell additional stock or obtain additional loans. There can be no assurance we will be successful in raising the necessary funds to execute our business plan.
We anticipate that we will incur operating losses in the next twelve months. Our minimal operating history makes predictions of future operating results difficult to ascertain. Our prospects must be considered in light of the risks, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stage of development, particularly companies in new and rapidly evolving markets. Such risks for us include, but are not limited to, an evolving and unpredictable business model and the management of growth.
To address these risks, we must, among other things, obtain a customer base, implement and successfully execute our business and marketing strategy, continually develop and upgrade our products, business model and website, respond to competitive developments, and attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in addressing such risks, and the failure to do so can have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which supersedes the current accounting for leases and while retaining two distinct types of leases, finance and operating, (1) requires lessees to record a right of use asset and a related liability for the rights and obligations associated with a lease, regardless of lease classification, and recognize lease expense in a manner similar to current accounting, (2) eliminates most real estate specific lease provisions, and (3) aligns many of the underlying lessor model principles with those in the new revenue standard. Leases with a term of 12 months or less will be accounted for similar to existing guidance for operating leases today. For public companies, the new standard is effective for annual and interim periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018. For all other entities, including emerging growth companies, this standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 2020. Earlier application is permitted. The Company evaluated the impact on the financial statements and implemented the provisions of ASU 2016-02 for the annual financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2019.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, as part of its initiative to reduce complexity in accounting standards. The amendments in the ASU are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein. Early adoption of the standard is permitted, including adoption in interim or annual periods for which financial statements have not yet been issued. The Company is currently evaluating the effect, if any, that the ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (ASU 2020-06), which simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts in an entity’s own equity. Among other changes, ASU 2020-06 removes from U.S. GAAP the liability and equity separation model for convertible instruments with a cash conversion feature, and as a result, after adoption, entities will no longer separately present in equity an embedded conversion feature for such debt. Similarly, the embedded conversion feature will no longer be amortized into income as interest expense over the life of the instrument. Instead, entities will account for a convertible debt instrument wholly as debt unless (1) a convertible instrument contains features that require bifurcation as a derivative under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or (2) a convertible debt instrument was issued at a substantial premium. Among other potential impacts, this change is expected to reduce reported interest expense, increase reported net income, and result in a reclassification of certain conversion feature balance sheet amounts from shareholders’ equity to liabilities as it relates to the Company’s convertible senior notes. Additionally, ASU 2020-06 requires the application of the if-converted method to calculate the impact of convertible instruments on diluted earnings per share (EPS), which is consistent with the Company’s accounting treatment under the current standard. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and can be adopted on either a fully retrospective or modified retrospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the timing, method of adoption and overall impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
The Company reviewed all recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB (including its Emerging Issues Task Force), the AICPA and the SEC, and they did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company’s present or future financial statements.
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect. These pronouncements did not have any material impact on the financial statements unless otherwise disclosed, and the Company does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
In the ordinary course of our business, we are not exposed to market risk of the sort that may arise from changes in interest rates or foreign currency exchange rates, or that may otherwise arise from transactions in derivatives.
Contingencies
Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company’s management, in consultation with its legal counsel as appropriate, assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company, in consultation with legal counsel, evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims, as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein. If the assessment of a contingency indicates it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates a potentially material loss contingency is not probable, but is reasonably possible, or is probable, but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss, if determinable and material, would be disclosed. Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company,” we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future.
Seasonality
Our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to seasonal variations. This pattern may change, however, in the event that we succeed in bringing our planned products to market.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our financial statements. A complete summary of these policies is included in the notes to our financial statements. In general, management’s estimates are based on historical experience, on information from third party professionals, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of reporting within the statement of cash flows, our company considers all cash on hand, cash accounts not subject to withdrawal restrictions or penalties, and all highly liquid debt instruments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash and cash equivalents.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). ASU 2014-09 establishes a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from outside contracts with customers and supersedes most of the existing revenue recognition guidance and notes that lease contracts with customers are a scope exception. ASU 2014-09 requires an entity to recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services and also requires certain additional disclosures. On August 12, 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-14 to defer the effective date of ASU 2014-09. Public business entities may elect to adopt the amendments as of the original effective date; however, adoption is required for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017. The Company has adopted this pronouncement.
The Company’s revenues are derived principally from utilizing new technology in the medical alarm industry to provide 24-hour personal response monitoring services and related products to subscribers with medical- or age-related conditions. The Company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. For hardware sales, the Company recognizes revenues at a point in time when the product is shipped. Customers are billed on Net 30 terms. For service revenue, the Company recognizes revenues over the term of the service contract and when the services are rendered. For customers who pay several months at a time, the Company records revenues for the month’s services and the balance of funds to deferred revenues, and records the balance of revenues as they become current.
Share-based Compensation
Our company follows the provisions of FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, “Share-Based Payment” which requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the income statement based on their fair values. Equity instruments issued to non-employees for goods or services are accounted for at either the fair market value of the goods and services rendered or on the instruments issued in exchange for such services, whichever is more readily determinable, using the measurement date guidelines enumerated in ASC 505-50-30.
Loss per Common Share
Basic loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to the common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the year. Fully diluted loss per share is computed similar to basic loss per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. As our company has a loss for the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021 the potentially dilutive shares are anti-dilutive and therefore they are not added into the earnings per share calculation.
Income Taxes
Our company accounts for income taxes pursuant to ASC 740. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the bases of certain assets and liabilities for income tax and financial reporting purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified according to the financial statement classification of the assets and liabilities generating the differences. Our company maintains a valuation allowance with respect to deferred tax assets. Our company establishes a valuation allowance based upon the potential likelihood of realizing the deferred tax asset and taking into consideration our financial position and results of operations for the current year. Future realization of the deferred tax benefit depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income within the carry forward year under the Federal tax laws. Changes in circumstances, such as our company generating taxable income, could cause a change in judgment about the realization of the related deferred tax asset. Any change in the valuation allowance will be included in income in the year of the change in estimate.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” (ASC 820) defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy that distinguishes between (1) market participant assumptions developed based on market data obtained from independent sources (observable inputs) and (2) a reporting entity’s own assumptions about market participant assumptions developed based on the best information available in the circumstances (unobservable inputs). The fair value hierarchy consists of three broad levels, which gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described below:
Level 1 - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, including quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability (e.g., interest rates); and inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
Level 3 - Inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable. Our company estimates the fair value of financial instruments using the available market information and valuation methods. Considerable judgment is required in estimating fair value. Accordingly, the estimates of fair value may not be indicative of the amounts our company could realize in a current market exchange. As of June 30, 2022, and 2021, the carrying value of accounts payable and loans that are required to be measured at fair value, approximated fair value due to the short-term nature and maturity of these instruments.
Patent and Intellectual Property
Our company expenses the costs associated with obtaining a patent or other intellectual property purchased for research and development and has no alternative future use. For the periods ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, no events or circumstances occurred for which an evaluation of the alternative future use of patent or intellectual property was required.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Our company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets and the related estimated remaining lives when events or circumstances lead management to believe that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. For the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, no events or circumstances occurred for which an evaluation of the recoverability of long-lived assets was required.
Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are prepared on the basis of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and are not required to provide the information under this item.