ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For discussion related to changes in financial condition and the results of operations for fiscal year 2019-related items, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal year 2020, which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 1, 2021.
Overview and 2021 Highlights
We are a technology company with a vision to pioneer the transition to zero-emission commercial vehicles. Our primary focus is to provide sustainable and cost-effective solutions to the commercial transportation sector. We design and manufacture all-electric delivery trucks and drone systems, including the technology that optimizes the way these vehicles operate. We are focused on our core competency of bringing our electric delivery vehicle platforms to market.
During 2021, we were focused on bringing our existing C-1000 vehicles into full compliance with Federal Motor Safety Vehicle Standards (“FMVSS”), increasing our vehicle production and capacity, increasing the affordability of our vehicles, and developing and introducing our next generation of products. We continue to focus on product quality, manufacturing capacity and operational planning, and engineering and design to enable increased deliveries and deployments of our products and future revenue growth.
During the period, we began development of a revised strategic product roadmap for our electric vehicle delivery offerings. The foundation of this plan is the development of two new truck chassis platforms, the W56 and W34, which we intend to replace the C-1000 for most applications. The W56, based on long-standing Company know-how in the Class 5 and 6 truck chassis market is expected to begin production in 2023. The W34 platform will be our second generation, low floor, advanced feature set offering for the Class 3 and 4 truck chassis market and is expected to begin production in 2024.
We continue to seek out opportunities to grow the business organically, and by expanding relationships with existing customers and by seeking out new business. We believe we are well positioned to take advantage of long-term opportunities and continue our efforts to bring product innovations to-market. Some of our recent strategic developments include:
•The appointment of our new executive leadership team, which supports go-forward operating and commercial plans and executes on our plan to transition from an advanced technology start-up to an efficient manufacturing company.
•Our relationship with Amerit Fleet Solutions, a provider of customized fleet maintenance and repair programs nationwide, demonstrates our ability to provide maintenance service programs for electric and clean fuel technologies by integrating operational, maintenance and fleet data into an accessible portal, allowing for real-time tracking and expedited response times.
Management Opportunities, Challenges and Risks and 2022 Outlook
Commercial Vehicles
We announced the development of the C-Series electric delivery truck in 2017, a vehicle aimed at the Class 3 truck market and which leverages an ultra-low floor delivery vehicle platform. We utilized our extensive customer experience gained from working with our E-Series customers to design this product.
During the third quarter of 2021, we announced our decision to suspend deliveries of our C-1000 vehicles and recall the 41 vehicles we have already delivered to customers when management determined that additional testing and modifications to existing vehicles are required to bring the C-1000 vehicles into full compliance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (“FMVSS”). We further announced the Company filed a report with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”) regarding the need for additional testing and vehicle modifications to bring our C-1000 vehicles into full compliance with FMVSS. We indicated our previous statements related to the C-1000’s compliance with NHTSA standards cannot be relied upon and so notified the Securities and Exchange Commission. For further discussion on this matter, please see Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Current Report on Form 10-K.
In connection with the recall, we recorded a $2.4 million refund liability in our consolidated balance sheets for the purchase price of the vehicles to be refunded to customers as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we also recorded a $1.6
million asset for recovery, the value of which was determined by adjusting the former carrying amount of the vehicles being returned for expected costs to recover and complete necessary repairs and modifications.
We also began extensive testing on the C-1000 vehicles during the fourth quarter of 2021, which included brake testing, analytical load testing, durability, and review of the field data on our electric powertrain. The goal of this testing was to determine the viability of the C-Series product line. Upon completion of this testing in the first quarter of 2022, the C-1000 platform was determined to be a low-volume, limited cargo capacity vehicle. We expect to transition manufacturing to the W56 and W34 platforms in the near future, as described below.
In connection with our decision to limit future production of the C-Series vehicles, we recorded reserves for any excess or obsolete inventories exceeding our planned production volume. We also recorded reserves for inventories that had net realizable values less than their carrying value. The total inventory reserve as of December 31, 2021 was $77.0 million, as compared to $2.0 as of December 31, 2020.
Additionally, we recorded an impairment of approximately $6.8 million for certain assets such as tooling and machinery related to the production of the C-Series vehicles that are no longer intended to be used.
We also recorded a reserve for prepaid purchases of approximately $23.9 million related to deposits made on planned future purchases of inventory used in the production of the C-Series vehicles.
Product Roadmap
Workhorse has developed a revised strategic product roadmap for our electric vehicle delivery offerings. The foundation of this plan is the development of two new truck chassis platforms, the W56 and W34. The W56, based on long-standing Company know-how in the Class 5 and 6 truck chassis market, is expected to begin production in 2023. The W34 platform will be our second generation, low floor, advanced content offering for the Class 3 and 4 truck chassis market and is expected to begin production in 2024.
In order to accelerate time-to-market for customers seeking delivery of electric vehicles during 2022, we entered into a strategic supply agreement (the “Supply Agreement”) with GreenPower Motor Company Inc. (“GreenPower”). Under the agreement, we will have exclusive rights to sell Class 4 step vans based on the GreenPower supplied base vehicle. The finished Class 4 step vans will be available for sale in the United States and Canada, under the Workhorse brand and with Workhorse after sales and support service. The van, known as the W750, will have approximately 750 cubic foot capacity and will feature up to 150 miles of all-electric range, with a payload capacity of five thousand pounds. We expect the first deliveries of the W750 will occur later in 2022.
U.S. Post Office Replenishment Program / Next Generation Delivery Vehicle Project
Workhorse was one of the five participants that the United States Postal Service (“USPS”) selected to build prototype vehicles for the USPS Next Generation Delivery Vehicle (“NGDV”) project to replace approximately 165,000 vehicles in its existing fleet. Workhorse delivered six vehicles for prototype testing under the NGDV Acquisition Program and on February 23, 2021, the USPS announced it awarded a contract to Oshkosh Defense, LLC (“Oshkosh”) to manufacture a new generation of U.S.-built postal delivery vehicles and assemble 50,000 to 165,000 vehicles over the next ten years.
On June 16, 2021, the Company filed a bid protest against the United States in the United States Court of Federal Claims in connection with the USPS award of the contract for its Next Generation Delivery Vehicle to Oshkosh. On September 15, 2021, the Company withdrew its bid protest filed in the United States Court of Federal Claims.
Aerospace
HorseFly™
Our HorseFly (“HorseFly”) Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (“UAV”) is the first in a family of custom-built, high-efficiency delivery UAVs being designed to be integrated with our line of electric delivery trucks. The Horsefly is a 4 rotor UAV that can fly fully autonomously and is designed for safety, efficiency, and the rigors of day-to-day delivery service. The HorseFly system is designed such that a driver or driver’s assistant can maintain line-of-sight operation of the UAV delivery process and to conform to the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) guidelines for UAV operation in the U.S.
Our Metron - Air delivery application is a custom HorseFly user control center. We built this technology to allow users a variety of planning, control and monitoring options, including monitoring locations of the truck, package and drone, and real-time onboard video of the HorseFly drone.
We recently announced that we entered into a pilot program with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service (“NRCS”) to demonstrate our ability to provide small UAS as a service to support NRCS efforts in Mississippi. As part of the pilot program, we will offer small UAS services, including monitoring via drone, data procurement and analytics. Automating the daily audits with the small UAS will allow the NRCS to expedite information delivery, increase safety for auditors on the ground, be more cost-effective, increase fidelity of the data gathered, and ultimately create a more efficient procedure. The first phase of the program involves the Company collaborating with NRCS agents to gain a field-level understanding of the program’s deliverables before implementing it’s UAS technology to gather actionable data and insights.
Certus Unmanned Aerial Systems LLC
Upon completion of the sale of our SureFly™ Multicopter in 2019, we entered into a joint venture agreement with Moog Inc. (“Moog”) for the development of our HorseFly UAV and the related business. Under the agreement, Workhorse and Moog contributed certain complimentary assets to Certus Unmanned Aerial Systems LLC (“Certus”), which is 50% owned by both the Company and Moog. Through Certus, teams from Workhorse and Moog are improving HorseFly’s components and subsystems with the goal of bringing the highest quality UAV to-market.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
There continues to be worldwide impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2021, there has been a trend in many parts of the world of increasing availability and administration of the vaccine against COVID-19, as well as an easing of restrictions on social, business, travel and government activities and functions. However, infection rates and regulations continue to fluctuate and there are ongoing global impacts resulting from the pandemic, including challenges and increases in costs for logistics and supply chains, such as increased port congestion, and intermittent supplier delays. While we have been relatively successful in navigating the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, we have previously been affected by temporary manufacturing closures. As of December 31, 2021, our locations and primary suppliers continue to operate and we continue to work through supplier constraints caused by the COVID-19 outbreak, as well as the supply chain difficulties. The Company is taking a variety of measures to maintain operations with as minimal an impact as possible to promote the safety and security of our associates, including increased frequency of cleaning and disinfecting of facilities, social distancing, remote working when possible and limitations on visitor access to facilities.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. As a result, the Company made provision to defer the employer side social security payments for the last three quarters of 2020, to be paid in two equal installments of $0.2 million each in 2021 and 2022.
Additionally, we entered into a Paycheck Protection Program Term Note (“PPP Note”) with PNC Bank, N.A. under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act. The Company received total proceeds of $1.4 million from the PPP Note and used the proceeds primarily to cover payroll costs. The outstanding principal and accrued interest on the PPP Note were forgiven in January 2021.
We cannot predict the duration or direction of current global trends from this pandemic, the sustained impact of which is largely unknown, is rapidly evolving and has varied across geographic regions. Ultimately, we continue to monitor macroeconomic conditions to remain flexible and to optimize and evolve our business as appropriate, and we will have to accurately project demand and infrastructure requirements globally and deploy our production, workforce and other resources accordingly. For more detailed descriptions of the impact and risks to our business, please see certain risk factors described in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Our Consolidated Statements of Operations financial information is as follows:
Revenue
Sales decreased $2.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in sales returns and allowances in connection with the recall of our C-1000 vehicles announced in the third quarter of 2021.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes direct and indirect materials, labor costs, manufacturing overhead, including depreciation costs of tooling and machinery, shipping and logistics costs, and reserves for estimated warranty expenses. Cost of sales also includes charges to write down the carrying amount of tooling and machinery when it exceeds the fair value of the asset or asset group, charges to write down the carrying value of our inventory when it exceeds its estimated net realizable value and to provide for obsolete and on-hand inventory in excess of forecasted demand.
Cost of sales increased $119.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $75.0 million increase in the inventory reserve, a $23.9 million increase in the prepaid purchases reserve, and a $6.8 million impairment charge to adjust the carrying amount of tooling and other assets related to the C-Series electric delivery truck. The year over year increases described above were primarily driven by the Company's decision to produce the C-1000 platform at low-volume and transition to a new all-electric delivery truck platform in the near future. This decision was based on results of extensive testing performed on the C-1000 vehicles, which concluded in early 2022.
Additionally, there was an increase of $5.0 million in employee and labor related expenses from increased headcount, a $4.9 million increase in manufacturing overhead attributable to an increase in volume related to our production of the C-Series electric delivery truck, and a $3.4 million increase in consulting costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses generally consist of personnel and facilities costs related to our sales, marketing, executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal organizations as well as fees for professional and contract services and litigation settlements.
SG&A expenses increased $20.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $7.9 million in employee and labor related expenses from increased headcount and the appointments of our new executive leadership team during the year. Additionally, there was an increase of $7.0 million in professional services related to litigation and settlements, marketing programs, investor relations services and
general consulting fees, a $3.1 million increase in selling related fees, and a $1.4 million increase in corporate insurance premiums.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our teams in engineering and research, manufacturing engineering and manufacturing test organizations, prototyping expense, and contract and professional services.
R&D expenses increased $2.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in employee and labor related expenses due to an increase in headcount to support our expanding product roadmap such as the new W56 and W34 truck chassis platforms and continuing development of our HorseFly UAV.
Other Loss (Income)
Other loss (income) consists primarily of gains and losses related to changes in fair value and sales of our Investment in Lordstown Motors Corp. (“LMC”), which was sold during the third quarter of 2021.
Other (loss) income changed unfavorably by $548.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a loss of $225.4 million, primarily attributable to unfavorable changes in fair value and sale of our Investment in LMC. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized income of $323.1 million, primarily attributable to favorable changes in fair value of our Investment in LMC.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense consisted of the following:
Interest expense decreased $177.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a reduction of $153.4 million related to fair value adjustments and losses on conversion of our convertible notes. Additionally, there was a decrease of $12.2 million related to mark-to-market adjustments and losses on exercises of warrants issued to lenders, a $7.7 million decrease in costs related to the issuance of our convertible notes, and a $4.7 million decrease in losses recognized on the redemption of Series B Preferred Stock.
Provision for Income Tax
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has taxable losses primarily due to operations and stock compensation related deductions and thus has no current tax expense recorded. As of December 31, 2021, the Company increased the valuation allowance recorded against its deferred tax assets due to the sale of LMC shares during the year and the uncertainty about our ability to utilize our remaining deferred tax assets in future years. As of December 31, 2020, the Company released the valuation allowance with the exception of certain tax credits and net operating losses that will not be realizable due to IRC Section 382 Ownership Change limitations. As a result, the deferred tax expense recorded in 2020 was reversed and the Company recognized a deferred tax benefit in 2021 to reinstate the valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity securities and issuance of debt. We have utilized this capital for research and development and to fund designing, building and delivering vehicles to customers and for working capital purposes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $201.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared to approximately $46.8 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $154.8 million. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily attributable to the January 2021 release of $194.4 million of restricted cash held in escrow from the convertible notes net proceeds issued in October 2020, in addition to proceeds of $105.1 million received in connection with the sale of our investment in LMC. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was offset by cash used in operations related to ramp-up of production of our C-Series vehicles, consulting and professional fees, and compensation related expenses.
We believe our existing capital resources will be sufficient to support our current and projected funding requirements for at least the next twelve months, after which time additional funding may be required. However, if the opportunity arises, we may elect to raise additional capital in 2022 through an At-the-Market program or similar instrument.
Cash Requirements
From time to time in the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements with vendors for the purchase of components and raw materials to be used in the manufacture of our products. However, due to contractual terms, variability in the precise growth curves of our development and production ramps, and opportunities to renegotiate pricing, we generally do not have binding and enforceable purchase orders under such contracts beyond the short term, and the timing and magnitude of purchase orders beyond such period is difficult to accurately project.
We currently expect our capital expenditures to upgrade our facilities in Indiana, Ohio and Michigan to be between $25.0 and $35.0 million in 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding $27.5 million in aggregate principal amount of indebtedness and our total minimum lease payments are $5.9 million. For details regarding our indebtedness and lease obligations, refer to Note 8, Debt, and Note 9, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sources and Condition of Liquidity
With the exception of contingent and royalty payments that we may receive under our existing collaborations, we do not currently have any committed future funding. To the extent we raise additional capital by issuing equity securities, our stockholders could at that time experience substantial dilution. Any debt financing that we can obtain may involve operating covenants that restrict our business.
Our future funding requirements will depend upon many factors, including, but not limited to:
•our ability to acquire or license other technologies that we may seek to pursue;
•our ability to manage our growth;
•competing technological and market developments;
•the costs and timing of obtaining, enforcing and defending our patent and other intellectual property rights; and
•expenses associated with any unforeseen litigation.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we maintained an investment in a bank money market fund. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested with regard to liquidity and capital preservation. Wherever possible, we seek to minimize the potential effects of concentration and degrees of risk. We will continue to monitor the impact of the changes in the conditions of the credit and financial markets to our investment portfolio and assess if future changes in our investment strategy are necessary.
Summary of Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are affected by our cash investments to support the business in research and development, manufacturing, selling, general and administration. Our operating cash flows are also affected by our working capital needs to support fluctuations in inventory, personnel expenses, accounts payable and other current assets and liabilities.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in operating activities was $132.6 million and $70.3 million, respectively. The increase in net cash used in operations in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to spend related to our initial production of the C-Series electric delivery truck, including inventory build and employee and labor related costs.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by (used in) investing activities was $99.8 million and $(5.7) million, respectively. The increase in net cash provided from investing activities was primarily attributable to net proceeds of approximately $105.1 million received in connection with the sale of our investment in LMC.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $6.8 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $292.4 million in 2020.
The significant financing activities that occurred in 2021 and 2020 include:
•$4.4 million for the exercise of stock options and warrants, and vesting of restricted shares.
•Issuance of convertible notes with net proceeds of approximately $262.4 million;
•Exercise of stock options and warrants with net proceeds of approximately $53.6 million;
•$1.4 million of net proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Plan Term Note; and
•$25.0 million for the redemption of the mandatorily redeemable Series B Preferred Stock.
The Company may seek to raise additional capital through public or private debt or equity financings in order to fund its operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (1) the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made, and (2) changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, or use of different estimates that we reasonably could have used in the current period, would have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
There are other items within our financial statements that require estimation but are not deemed critical as defined above.
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts and disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience, as appropriate, and an various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows may be affected.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been uncertainty and disruption in the global economy and financial markets. We have assessed the impact of the pandemic and are not aware of any specific events or circumstances that required an update to our estimates and assumptions or materially affected the carrying value of our assets or liabilities as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained. Actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Inventory Valuation
Nature of Valuation: Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We write-down inventory for any excess or obsolete inventories or when we believe the net realizable value of inventories is less than the carrying value.
Assumptions and Approach Used: We review our inventory to determine whether its carrying value exceeds the net amount realizable upon the ultimate sale of the inventory. This requires us to determine the estimated selling price of our inventory based on market conditions. Once inventory is written-down, a new, lower cost basis for that inventory is established and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis.
The following are key assumptions we used in establishing inventory reserves:
•Business projections: We make assumptions about the demand for our products in the marketplace. These assumptions drive our planning assumptions for volume, mix, and pricing. A change in our planned production volumes can materially impact the estimate of excess and obsolete inventories.
•Economic projections: Assumptions regarding general economic conditions are included in and affect our assumptions regarding sales and pricing estimates for our vehicles. Additionally, these assumptions affect our ability to sell inventories on hand in the open market. These assumptions include sales volume, inflation, and prices of raw materials. A change in economic conditions can materially impact the estimate of the net realizable value of inventories.
•FMVSS certification and vehicle repairs: Assumptions regarding the cost to recover and complete necessary modifications to address customer feedback and bring our vehicles into full compliance with FMVSS. These assumptions include cost of transportation, labor, raw materials and manufacturing overhead. A change in these assumptions can materially impact the estimate of the net realizable value of inventories.
During 2022, we completed our review of the C-1000 platform and determined it is eligible for certification and reintroduction as a limited production vehicle. In addition, we expect to transition our manufacturing focus to the W56 and W34 platforms in the near future. Accordingly, we determined that there was significant excess and obsolete inventory on-hand that would not be used in the limited production of the C-1000 platform, or for production of future vehicle platforms. Additionally, due to the recall of the C-1000 platform and estimated cost to complete necessary repairs and modifications, we reduced our estimated net realizable value of our inventory to a lower cost basis.
Should our estimates of future inventory usage or selling prices change, additional and potentially material increases to this reserve may be required. A small change in our estimates may result in a material charge to our reported financial results. Refer to Note 2, Inventory, to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding inventory valuation.
Warranty Liability
Nature of Estimates Required: We provide base warranties on the products we sell for specific periods of time and/or mileage, which vary depending upon the type of product. Separately, we also periodically perform field service actions related to safety recalls and other product campaigns. Pursuant to these warranties and field service actions, we will repair, replace, or adjust parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory-supplied materials or workmanship. We accrue the estimated cost of both base warranty coverages and field service actions at the time of sale. In addition, from time to time, we issue extended warranties at our expense, the estimated cost of which is accrued at the time of issuance.
Assumptions and Approach Used: Provisions for estimated assurance warranties are recorded at the time of sale and are periodically adjusted to reflect actual experience. The amount of warranty liability accrued reflects management’s best estimate of the expected future cost of honoring Company obligations under the warranty plans. Historically, the cost of fulfilling the Company’s warranty obligations has principally involved replacement parts, labor and sometimes travel for any field retrofit campaigns. The Company’s estimates are based on historical experience, the extent of pre-production testing, the number of units involved and the extent of features/components included in product models. Also, each quarter, the Company reviews actual warranty claims experience to determine if there are systemic defects that would require a field campaign.
Field service actions may occur in periods beyond the base warranty coverage period. We use historical information regarding the nature, frequency, severity, and average cost of claims for each model year to establish our estimates. We assess our obligation for field service actions on a regular basis using actual claims experience and update our estimates as necessary.
Due to the uncertainty and potential volatility of the factors used in establishing our estimates, changes in our assumptions could materially affect our financial condition and results of operations. Refer to Note 1, Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Principles, to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding warranty and field service action costs.
Fair Value of Convertible Notes
Nature of Estimates Required: As permitted under ASC 825, Financial Instruments, (“ASC 825”), the Company has elected the fair value option to account for its convertible notes. The Company records changes in fair value of the convertible notes in Interest Expense in the Consolidated Statement of Operations, and changes in fair value of the convertible notes attributable to credit risk in Other Comprehensive Loss. The primary reason for electing the fair value option is for simplification and cost-benefit considerations of accounting for the convertible notes (the hybrid financial instrument) at fair value in its entirety versus bifurcation of the embedded derivatives.
Assumptions and Approach Used: The fair value is determined using a binomial lattice valuation model, which is widely used for valuing convertible notes. The significant assumptions used in the model are as follows:
•Probability of a fundamental change: If a fundamental change event occurs as defined under the 2024 Notes, the holder shall have the right to require the Company to repurchase the notes at an amount equal to the Fundamental Change Base Repurchase Price, which is the greater of (x) 150% of the principal amount to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest and (y) 115% of the as-converted value of the repurchased amount, plus any accrued and unpaid interest. The probability of a fundamental change was considered de minimis as of December 31, 2021.
•Volatility: The volatility used in the binomial lattice valuation model was estimated based on historical prices for the Company’s common stock with a look-back period commensurate to the term of the 2024 Notes and the observed equity volatility for similar companies. A significant increase in the volatility of the market price of the Company’s common stock, in isolation, would result in a significantly higher fair value; and a significant decrease in volatility would result in a significantly lower fair value.
•Credit spread: The credit spread used in the binomial lattice model was estimated based on a synthetic credit rating assessed for the Company in the valuation as of the issuance date. Generally, as the credit spread increases, the fair value decreases, and conversely, as the credit spread decreases, the fair value of the convertible notes increases.
A change in assumptions used to estimate the fair value of the convertible notes could materially affect our financial condition and results of operations. Refer to Note 8, Debt, and Note 12, Fair Value Measurements, to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding the 2024 Notes.
Income Taxes
Nature of Estimates Required: We must make estimates and apply judgment in determining the provision for income taxes for financial reporting purposes. We make these estimates and judgments primarily in the following areas: (i) the calculation of tax credits, (ii) the calculation of differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax reporting and financial statement purposes, as well as (iii) the calculation of interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions. Changes in these estimates and judgments may result in a material increase or decrease to our tax provision, which would be recorded in the period in which the change occurs.
Assumptions and Approach Used: We are subject to the income tax laws and regulations of state and local jurisdictions in which we operate. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. These tax laws and regulations are complex and involve uncertainties in the application to our facts and circumstances that may be open to interpretation. We recognize benefits for these uncertain tax positions based upon a process that requires judgment regarding the technical application of the laws, regulations, and various related judicial opinions. If, in our judgment, it is more likely than not (defined as a likelihood of more than 50%) that the uncertain tax position will be settled favorably for us, we estimate an amount that ultimately will be realized. This process is inherently subjective since it requires our assessment of the probability of future outcomes. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis, including consideration of changes in facts and circumstances, such as new regulations or recent judicial opinions, as well as the status of audit activities by taxing authorities. Changes to our estimate of the amount to be realized are recorded in our provision for income taxes during the period in which the change occurred.
We must also assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets against future sources of taxable income and reduce the carrying amount of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on all available evidence, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of such assets will not be realized. Refer to Note 11, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding the income tax provision.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 14, Recent Pronouncements, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.