ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
Forward-Looking Statements. This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of historical fact, including statements regarding prospects or future results of operations or financial position, made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are forward-looking. We use words such as anticipates, believes, expects, future, intends, and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect management’s current expectations and are inherently uncertain. Actual results could differ materially for a variety of reasons, including, among others: the effects on the airline industry and the global economy of events such as terrorist activity and the COVID-19 pandemic, changes in oil prices and other disruptions to the world markets; trends in the airline industry and our ability to capitalize on those trends, including growth rates of markets and other economic factors; risks associated with owning and leasing jet engines and aircraft; our ability to successfully negotiate equipment purchases, sales and leases, to collect outstanding amounts due and to control costs and expenses; changes in interest rates and availability of capital, both to us and our customers; our ability to continue to meet the changing customer demands; regulatory changes affecting airline operations, aircraft maintenance, accounting standards and taxes; and the market value of engines and other assets in our portfolio. These risks and uncertainties, as well as other risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ significantly from management’s expectations, are described in greater detail in Item 1A “Risk Factors” of Part I which, along with the other discussion in this report, describes some, but not all, of the factors that could cause actual results to differ significantly from management’s expectations.
General. Our core business is acquiring and leasing commercial aircraft and aircraft engines and related aircraft equipment pursuant to operating leases, all of which we sometimes collectively refer to as “equipment.” As of December 31, 2021, the majority of our leases were operating leases with the exception of certain failed sale-leaseback transactions classified as notes receivable under the guidance provided by ASC 842. As of December 31, 2021, we had 76 lessees in 40 countries. Our portfolio is continually changing due to acquisitions and sales. As of December 31, 2021, our $1,991.4 million equipment held for operating lease portfolio and $115.5 million notes receivable represented 304 engines, twelve aircraft, one marine vessel and other leased parts and equipment. As of December 31, 2021, we also managed 475 engines, aircraft and related equipment on behalf of other parties.
Our wholly owned subsidiary Willis Asset Management Limited (“Willis Asset Management”) is focused on the engine management and consulting business. Willis Aeronautical Services, Inc. (“Willis Aero”) is a wholly owned subsidiary whose primary focus is the sale of aircraft engine parts and materials through the acquisition or consignment of aircraft and engines.
In 2011 we entered into an agreement with Mitsui & Co., Ltd. to participate in a joint venture formed as a Dublin-based Irish limited company, WMES, for the purpose of acquiring and leasing jet engines. Each partner holds a 50% interest in the joint venture. WMES owns a lease portfolio, inclusive of a note receivable, of 37 engines and five aircraft with a net book value of $292.5 million at December 31, 2021. Our investment in the joint venture was $39.1 million as of December 31, 2021.
In 2014 we entered into an agreement with CASC to participate in CASC Willis, a joint venture based in Shanghai, China. Each partner holds a 50% interest in the joint venture. The company acquires and leases jet engines to Chinese airlines and concentrates on meeting the fast-growing demand for leased commercial aircraft engines and aviation assets in the People’s Republic of China. CASC Willis owned a lease portfolio of four engines with a net book value of $49.0 million as of December 31, 2021. Our investment in the joint venture was $16.9 million as of December 31, 2021.
We actively manage our portfolio and structure our leases to maximize the residual values of our leased assets. Our leasing business focuses on popular Stage IV commercial jet engines manufactured by CFMI, General Electric, Pratt & Whitney, Rolls Royce and International Aero Engines. These engines are the most widely used engines in the world, powering Airbus, Boeing, Bombardier and Embraer aircraft.
COVID-19 Impact. Throughout the next year, we plan to continue to stay focused on cost control and remain prudent with our capital expenditures. We have continued to temporarily close our headquarters and other offices, require our employees and
contractors to predominately work remotely, and implement travel restrictions, all of which represent a significant disruption in how we operate our business. We have taken various proactive actions in an attempt to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, 9% of our employees have been either furloughed, or subject to a form of reduced compensation which was subsequently reversed in 2021. The operations of the Company’s partners and customers have likewise been disrupted. While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, it has had an adverse effect on the global economy and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. In particular, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruptions to the airline industry and has resulted in a dramatic reduction in demand for air travel domestically and abroad, which is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. Lower demand for air travel in turn presents significant risks to the Company, resulting in impacts which have adversely affected the Company’s business, results of operation, and financial condition. Lower demand for spare parts and engine and airframe leasing has negatively impacted collections of accounts receivable, caused the Company’s lessee customers to not enter into new leases, resulted in reduced spending by new and existing customers for leases or spare parts or equipment, resulted in lower usage fees, caused some of the Company’s customers to go out of business, and limited the ability of the Company’s personnel to travel to customers and potential customers. The Company is not able to evaluate or foresee the full extent of these impacts at the current time. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company experienced a decrease in lease rent revenue and maintenance reserve revenue as compared to the prior year. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, the Company has, in certain situations, agreed to rent concessions which resulted in a total reduction to rent revenues of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Rent concessions for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted in a total reduction of rent revenue of $6.5 million. The rent concessions provide lessees with payment deferral options or reduced rent, where the revised cash flows are substantially the same or less (i.e., the rights of the lessor and obligations of the lessee have not substantially increased) as the original lease agreements. There is no impact on the timing of revenue recognition for rent concessions that result in short term payment deferrals. The rent concessions with reduced rent qualify for the COVID-19 practical expedient to account for the rent concessions outside of the modification framework. Due to the impact of recent events, including challenges from declines in market conditions, the Company performed quarterly interim impairment analyses. The COVID-19 pandemic has materially affected our business and financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 and may continue to do so indefinitely thereafter.
The scope and nature of the impact of COVID-19 on the airline industry, and in turn our business, continue to evolve and the outcomes are uncertain. Given the uncertainty in the rapidly changing market and economic conditions related to COVID-19, we will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business and financial position. The ultimate extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our Company will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to residual values, estimated asset lives, impairments and bad debts. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies, grouped by our activities, affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Leasing Related Activities. Revenue from leasing of aircraft equipment is recognized as operating lease revenue on a straight-line basis over the terms of the applicable lease agreements. Where collection cannot be reasonably assured, for example, upon a lessee bankruptcy, we do not recognize revenue until cash is received. We also estimate and charge to income a provision for bad debts based on our experience in the business and with each specific customer and the level of past due accounts. The financial condition of our customers may deteriorate and result in actual losses exceeding the estimated allowances. In addition, any deterioration in the financial condition of our customers may adversely affect future lease revenues. As of December 31, 2021, the majority of our leases were operating leases with the exception of certain failed sale-leaseback transactions classified as notes receivable under the guidance provided by ASC 842. Under an operating lease, we retain title to the leased equipment, thereby retaining the potential benefit and assuming the risk of the residual value of the leased equipment.
We generally depreciate engines on a straight-line basis over 15 years to a 55% residual value. Aircraft and airframes are generally depreciated on a straight-line basis over 13 to 20 years to a 15% to 17% residual value. The marine vessel is depreciated on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of 18 years to a 15% residual value. Other leased parts and equipment are generally depreciated on a straight-line basis over 14 to 15 years to a 25% residual value. Major overhauls paid for by us, which improve functionality or extend the original useful life, are capitalized and depreciated over the shorter of the estimated period to the next overhaul (“deferral method”) or the remaining useful life of the equipment. We do not accrue for planned major maintenance. For equipment which is unlikely to be repaired at the end of its current expected life, and is likely to be disassembled upon lease
termination, we depreciate the equipment over its estimated life to a residual value based on an estimate of the wholesale value of the parts after disassembly. As of December 31, 2021, 40 engines having a net book value of $37.0 million were depreciated under this policy with estimated useful lives ranging from 1 to 113 months.
Asset Valuation. Long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles to be held and used are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable, and long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less cost to sell.
On a quarterly basis, management monitors the lease portfolio for events which may indicate that a particular asset may need to be evaluated for potential impairment. These events may include a decision to part-out or sell an asset, knowledge of specific damage to an asset, or supply/demand events which may impact the Company’s ability to lease an asset in the future. On an annual basis, even absent any such ‘triggering event’, we evaluate the carrying value of the assets in our lease portfolio to determine if any impairment exists.
Impairment may be identified by several factors, including, comparison of estimated sales proceeds or forecasted undiscounted cash flows over the life of the asset with the asset’s book value. If the forecasted undiscounted cash flows are less than the book value, the asset is written down to its fair value. When evaluating for impairment, we test at the individual asset level (e.g., engine or aircraft), as each asset generates its own stream of cash flows, including lease rents, maintenance reserves and repair costs.
We must make assumptions which underlie the most significant and subjective estimates in determining whether any impairment exists. Those estimates, and the underlying assumptions, are as follows:
•Fair value - we determine fair value by reference to independent appraisals, quoted market prices (e.g., an offer to purchase) and other factors such as current data from airlines, engine manufacturers and MRO providers as well as specific market sales and repair cost data.
•Future cash flows - when evaluating the future cash flows that an asset will generate, we make assumptions regarding the lease market for specific engine models, including estimates of market lease rates and future demand. These assumptions are based upon lease rates that we are obtaining in the current market as well as our expectation of future demand for the specific engine/aircraft model.
If the forecasted undiscounted cash flows and fair value of our long-lived assets decrease in the future we may incur impairment charges. Write-downs of equipment to their estimated fair values totaled $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 which included write-downs of $3.9 million due to a management decision to monetize three engines and one airframe either by sale to a third party or for part-out and $3.8 million for the adjustment of the carrying value of seven impaired engines. As of December 31, 2021, included within equipment held for lease and equipment held for sale was $36.0 million in remaining book value of 22 assets which were previously written down.
Write-downs of equipment to their estimated fair values totaled $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which included write-downs of $15.2 million due to a management decision to monetize 10 engines and two airframes either by sale to a third party or for part-out and $5.3 million for the adjustment of the carrying value of seven impaired engines.
Management continuously monitors the aviation industry and evaluates any trends, events or uncertainties involving airlines, individual aircraft and engine models, as well as the engine leasing and sale market which would materially affect the methodology or assumptions employed by WLFC. We do not consider there to be any trends, events or uncertainties that currently exist or that are reasonably likely to occur that would materially affect our methodology or assumptions. However, should any arise, we will adjust our methodology and our disclosure accordingly.
Spare parts inventory is stated at lower of cost or net realizable value. An impairment charge for excess or inactive inventory is recorded based upon an analysis that considers current inventory levels, historical usage patterns, future sales expectations and salvage value.
Accounting for Maintenance Expenditures and Maintenance Reserves. Use fees received are recognized in revenue as maintenance reserve revenue if they are not reimbursable to the lessee. Use fees that are reimbursable are recorded as a maintenance reserve liability until they are reimbursed to the lessee, the lease terminates, or the obligation to reimburse the lessee for such reserves ceases to exist, at which time they are recognized in revenue as maintenance reserve revenue. Our expenditures for maintenance are expensed as incurred. Expenditures that meet the criteria for capitalization are recorded as an addition to equipment recorded on the balance sheet.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The most recent adopted and to be adopted accounting pronouncements are described in Note 1(x) to our Consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue is summarized as follows:
Lease Rent Revenue. Lease rent revenue consists of rental income from long-term and short-term engine leases, aircraft leases, and other leased parts and equipment. Lease rent revenue decreased by $8.1 million, or 5.6%, to $134.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $142.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to lower average utilization when compared to the prior year which includes operations prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased equipment (including capitalized costs) totaling $205.8 million, which primarily consisted of 34 engines, four airframes, one aircraft and other parts and equipment purchased for our lease portfolio. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we purchased equipment (including capitalized costs) totaling $409.3 million, which primarily consisted of 38 engines and other parts and equipment purchased for our lease portfolio.
One customer accounted for more than 10% of total lease rent revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The aggregate net book value of equipment held for lease at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $1,991.4 million and $115.5 million notes receivable and $1,886.6 million and $158.7 million notes receivable, respectively. Average utilization (based on net book value) was approximately 81% and 84% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Maintenance Reserve Revenue. Maintenance reserve revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $31.4 million, or 29.8%, to $74.0 million from $105.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Long-term maintenance revenue was $56.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $87.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Engines out on lease with “non-reimbursable” usage fees generated $17.7 million of short-term maintenance revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Spare Parts and Equipment Sales. Spare parts and equipment sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $1.2 million, or 6.5%, to $17.4 million compared to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Spare parts sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $17.4 million compared to $17.7 million in 2020. There were no equipment sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.9 million for the sale of one engine for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on Sale of Leased Equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 12 engines and one airframe from the lease portfolio for a net gain of $6.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 11 engines and two airframes from the lease portfolio for a net gain of $3.4 million.
Gain on Sale of Financial Assets. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold two notes receivable for a net gain of $10.9 million. There were no gain on sale of financial assets during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Asset Transition Fee. Asset transition fee was $6.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflecting the settlement received from the close out of an engine transition program. There was no asset transition fee during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Revenue. Other revenue increased by $6.5 million, to $24.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $18.4 million in 2020. The increase primarily reflects increases of $2.7 million in service related fees and $3.4 million in interest income from our notes receivable.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $4.0 million, or 4.3%, to $90.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $94.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects certain assets reaching the end of their depreciable lives as compared to the prior year period.
Cost of Spare Parts and Equipment Sales. Cost of spare parts and equipment sales decreased by $1.8 million, or 10.9%, to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $16.8 million in the prior year period due to lower spare parts sales. There were no cost of equipment sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Write-down of Equipment. Write-downs of equipment to their estimated fair values totaled $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 which included write-downs of $3.9 million due to a management decision to monetize three engines and one airframe either by sale to a third party or for part-out and $3.8 million for the adjustment of the carrying value of seven impaired engines. Write-down of equipment was $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflecting the write-down of 10 engines and two airframes due to a management decision to monetize the assets either by sale to a third-party or for part-out and an adjustment of the carrying value of seven impaired engines.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased 11.0% to $75.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $67.9 million in 2020. The increase primarily reflects increased stock-based compensation as compared to the prior year period which was driven by an increased stock price at time of grant.
Technical Expense. Technical expenses consist of the non-capitalized cost of engine repairs, engine thrust rental fees, outsourced technical support services, sublease engine rental expense, engine storage and freight costs. These expenses increased 43.6% to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.5 million in 2020. The increase primarily reflects the increase in engine repairs.
Net Finance Costs. Net finance costs increased to $68.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, from $67.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The slight increase was primarily due to the increase in interest expense related to the WEST VI transaction partly offset by a loss on debt extinguishment of $4.7 million recognized in the prior year period.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to $5.8 million from $7.6 million for the comparable period in 2020. The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was 63.3% and 43.8%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate was predominantly due to change in tax laws in the United Kingdom.
FINANCIAL POSITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At December 31, 2021, the Company had $95.6 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash. At December 31, 2021, $13.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash were held in foreign subsidiaries. We do not intend to repatriate the funds held in foreign subsidiaries to the United States. In the event that we decide to repatriate these funds to the United States, we would be required to accrue and pay taxes upon the repatriation.
We generate significant cash flow from our core business as evidenced by our net cash provided by operating activities which was $90.7 million in 2021. The Company’s largest recurring expense is its non-cash depreciation. Beyond cash provided through operations, we generally fund the growth of our business through a combination of equity and corporate borrowings. Our credit facility is our primary source of capital to grow our business. We also access the Asset Backed Security (“ABS”) market to establish term fixed rate debt financing to better match our long-lived assets. The Company’s credit facility matures in 2024 and we have historically rolled that facility prior to its expiration. The ABS market continues to be open and active for issuers like the Company. Refer to Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements for a detailed discussion of the Company's debt obligations.
We finance our growth through borrowings secured by our equipment lease portfolio. The Company’s largest recurring expense is its non-cash depreciation. Beyond cash provided through operations, we generally fund the growth of our business through borrowings provided by our credit facility as well the issuance of ABS debt securities which allow us to establish term fixed rate debt against our long-lived assets. The Company’s credit facility matures in 2024 and has historically rolled that facility prior to its expiration. The ABS market continues to be open and active for issuers like the Company. Cash of approximately $513.7 million and $973.2 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, was derived from this borrowing activity. In these same time periods $417.0 million and $530.8 million, respectively, was used to pay down related debt.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global business environment has caused and could result in additional customer bankruptcies, early lease returns, payment defaults, or future rental concessions which could reduce rent or defer customer payments, negatively impacting our financial results.
Preferred Stock Dividends
In October 2016, the Company sold and issued to Development Bank of Japan Inc. (“DBJ”) an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of the Company’s 6.5% Series A Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) at a purchase price of $20.00 per share. The net proceeds to the Company after deducting investor fees were $19.8 million.
In September 2017, the Company sold and issued to DBJ an aggregate of 1,500,000 shares of the Company’s 6.5% Series A-2 Preferred Stock, $0.01 par value per share (the “Series A-2 Preferred Stock”) at a purchase price of $20.00 per share. The net proceeds to the Company after deducting issuance costs were $29.7 million.
The Company’s Series A-1 Preferred Stock and Series A-2 Preferred Stock accrue quarterly dividends at the rate per annum of 6.5% per share. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company paid total dividends of $3.3 million on the Series A-1 and Series A-2 Preferred Stock, respectively.
Cash Flows Discussion
Cash flows provided by operating activities were $90.7 million and $93.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash flows from operations are driven significantly by payments made under our lease agreements, which comprise lease revenue, security deposits and maintenance reserves, and are offset by interest expense and general and administrative costs. Cash received as maintenance reserve payments for some of our engines on lease are partially restricted by our debt arrangements. The lease revenue stream, in the short-term, is at fixed rates while a portion of our debt is at variable rates. If interest rates increase, it is unlikely we could increase lease rates in the short term and this would cause a reduction in our earnings and operating cash flows. Revenue and maintenance reserves are also affected by the amount of equipment off lease. Approximately 82% and 78%, by book value, of our assets were on-lease as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The average utilization rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately 81% and 84%, respectively. If there is an increase in off-lease rates or deterioration in lease rates that are not offset by reductions in interest rates, there will be a negative impact on earnings and cash flows from operations.
There were no distributions received from our investment in WMES in the year ended December 31, 2021. Distributions received from WMES were $7.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $148.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and primarily reflected $44.4 million related to leases entered into during 2021 which were classified as notes receivable under ASC 842 and $205.8 million for the purchase of equipment held for operating lease (including capitalized costs and prepaid deposits made during the year), partly offset by $37.6 million in proceeds from sales of equipment (net of selling expenses) and $58.4 million in proceeds from the sale of notes receivable (net of selling expenses). Cash flows used in investing activities were $506.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily reflected $136.6 million related to leases entered into during 2020 which were classified as notes receivable under ASC 842 and $409.3 million for the purchase of equipment held for operating lease (including capitalized costs and prepaid deposits made during the year), partly offset by $26.1 million in proceeds from sales of equipment (net of selling expenses) and $8.4 million in proceeds from the sale of a note receivable (net of selling expense).
Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $74.1 million and primarily reflected $513.7 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt obligations, partly offset by $417.0 million in principal payments, $4.6 million in debt issuance costs and $10.1 million in share repurchases. Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $428.5 million and primarily reflected $973.2 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt obligations, partly offset by $530.8 million in principal payments, $6.1 million in debt issuance costs, $2.4 million in debt prepayment costs and $1.5 million in share repurchases.
Debt Obligations and Covenant Compliance
At December 31, 2021, debt obligations consists of loans totaling $1,790.3 million, net of unamortized issuance costs, payable with interest rates varying between approximately 1.8% and 7.4%. Substantially all of our assets are pledged to secure our obligations to creditors. For further information on our debt instruments, see Note 6 “Debt Obligations” in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
In June 2021, WLFC entered into Amendment No. 2 to the Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of June 7, 2019, which updates the provisions relating to the future discontinuance of the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) and sets forth the mechanics for establishing the Secured Overnight Financing Rate as a benchmark replacement rate.
In May 2021, WLFC and its direct, wholly-owned subsidiary Willis Engine Structured Trust VI (“WEST VI”), closed its offering of $336.7 million aggregate principal amount of fixed rate notes (“WEST VI Notes”). The WEST VI Notes were issued in three series, with the Series A Notes issued in an aggregate principal amount of $278.6 million, the Series B Notes issued in an aggregate principal amount of $38.7 million and the Series C Notes issued in an aggregate principal amount of $19.4 million. The WEST VI Notes are secured by, among other things, WEST VI’s direct and indirect ownership interests in a portfolio of aircraft engines and an airframe.
The Series A Notes have a fixed coupon of 3.104%, an expected maturity of approximately eight years and a final maturity date in May 2046, the Series B Notes have a fixed coupon of 5.438%, an expected maturity of approximately eight years and a final maturity date in May 2046 and the Series C Notes have a fixed coupon of 7.385%, an expected maturity of approximately eight years and a final maturity date in May 2046. The Series A Notes were issued at a price of 99.99481% of par, the Series B Notes were issued at a price of 99.99996% of par and the Series C Notes were issued at a price of 99.99869% of par. Principal on the WEST VI Notes is payable monthly to the extent of available cash in accordance with a priority of payments included in the indenture.
The assets of WEST VI are not available to satisfy the Company’s obligations other than the obligations specific to WEST VI. WEST VI is consolidated for financial statement presentation purposes. WEST VI’s ability to make distributions and pay dividends to the Company is subject to the prior payments of its debt and other obligations and WEST VI’s maintenance of adequate reserves and capital. Under WEST VI’s indenture, cash is collected in a restricted account, which is used to service the debt and any remaining amounts, after debt service and defined expenses, are distributed to the Company. Additionally, a portion of maintenance reserve payments and lease security deposits are formulaically accumulated in restricted accounts and are available to fund future maintenance events and to secure lease payments, respectively. The WEST VI indenture requires that a minimum threshold of maintenance reserve and security deposit balances be held in restricted cash accounts.
In May 2021, WLFC repaid an existing note payable that was secured by two engines.
In March 2020, WLFC and its direct, wholly-owned subsidiary Willis Engine Structured Trust V (“WEST V”) (formerly known as Willis Engine Securitization Trust II (“WEST II”)), closed its offering of $366.2 million aggregate principal amount of fixed rate notes (the “WEST V Notes”). The WEST V Notes were issued in three series, with the Series A Notes issued in an aggregate principal amount of $303.0 million, the Series B Notes issued in an aggregate principal amount of $42.1 million and the Series C Notes issued in an aggregate principal amount of $21.1 million. The WEST V Notes are secured by, among other things, WEST V’s direct and indirect ownership interests in a portfolio of aircraft engines and airframes.
The Series A Notes have a fixed coupon of 3.228%, an expected maturity of approximately eight years and a final maturity date in March 2045, the Series B Notes have a fixed coupon of 4.212%, an expected maturity of approximately eight years and a final maturity date in March 2045 and the Series C Notes have a fixed coupon of 6.657%, an expected maturity of approximately eight years and a final maturity date in March 2045. The Series A Notes were issued at a price of 99.99859% of par, the Series B Notes were issued at a price of 99.99493% of par and the Series C Notes were issued at a price of 99.99918% of par. Principal on the WEST V Notes is payable monthly to the extent of available cash in accordance with a priority of payments included in the indenture for the WEST V Notes.
The assets of WEST V are not available to satisfy the Company’s obligations other than the obligations specific to WEST V. WEST V is consolidated for financial statement presentation purposes. WEST V’s ability to make distributions and pay dividends to the Company is subject to the prior payments of its debt and other obligations and WEST V’s maintenance of adequate reserves and capital. Under WEST V’s indenture, cash is collected in a restricted account, which is used to service the debt and any remaining amounts, after debt service and defined expenses, are distributed to the Company. Additionally, a portion of maintenance reserve payments and lease security deposits are formulaically accumulated in restricted accounts and are available to fund future maintenance events and to secure lease payments, respectively. The WEST V indenture requires that a minimum threshold of maintenance reserve and security deposit balances be held in restricted cash accounts.
We recognized a $4.7 million loss on debt extinguishment upon the repayment of the WEST II Series A 2012 term notes in March 2020.
In October 2020, the Company entered into a Limited Waiver (the “Waiver”) to its Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. The Waiver provides for the partial exclusion for specified periods of certain asset book values in the calculation of customer concentration limits, as such limits are defined in the Amended Credit Agreement.
Virtually all of the above debt requires our ongoing compliance with the covenants of each financing, including debt/equity ratios, minimum tangible net worth and minimum interest coverage ratios, and other eligibility criteria including customer and geographic concentration restrictions. Under our revolving credit facility, we can typically borrow up to 85% of an engine’s net book value and 65% of spare part’s net book value. Therefore we must have other available funds for the balance of the purchase price of any new equipment to be purchased or we will not be permitted to draw on our revolver. The facilities are also cross-defaulted against other facilities. If we do not comply with the covenants or eligibility requirements, we may not be permitted to borrow additional funds and accelerated payments may become necessary. Additionally, much of the above debt is secured by engines and aircraft to the extent that engines or aircraft are sold, repayment of that portion of the debt could be required.
At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants specified in the revolving credit facility, including the Interest Coverage Ratio requirement of at least 2.25 to 1.00, and the Total Leverage Ratio requirement to remain below 4.50 to 1.00. The Interest Coverage Ratio, as defined in the credit facility, is the ratio of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) and other one-time charges to consolidated interest expense. The Total Leverage Ratio, as defined in the credit facility, is the ratio of total indebtedness to tangible net worth. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants specified in the WEST III, WEST IV, WEST V and WEST VI indentures, servicing and other debt related agreements.
Contractual Obligation and Commitments
Repayments of our gross debt obligations primarily consist of scheduled installments due under term loans and are funded by the use of unrestricted cash reserves and from cash flows from ongoing operations. The table below summarizes our contractual commitments at December 31, 2021:
From time to time we enter into contractual commitments to purchase engines directly from original equipment manufacturers. As of the date of this report we have purchased three new LEAP-1B engines and are currently committed to purchasing 12 additional new LEAP-1B engines for $170.6 million and 19 additional new LEAP-1A engines for $269.3 million by 2025. Our purchase agreements generally contain terms that allow the Company to defer or cancel purchase commitments in certain situations. These deferrals or conversions would not result in penalties or increased costs other than any potential increase due to the normal year-over-year change in engine list prices, which is akin to ordinary inflation. The Company continues to expect demand for LEAP-1B engines to increase as the 737 Max continues to be re-certified and aircraft (and their installed engines) that have been parked and in storage for more than one year begin the technical process of returning to service.
In May 2021, we entered into a commitment for future maintenance services which are anticipated to cost $24.0 million by 2024.
In December 2020, we entered into definitive agreements for the purchase of 25 modern technology aircraft engines. As part of the purchase, we have committed to certain future overhaul and maintenance services which are anticipated to range between $73.8 million and $112.0 million by 2030.
$27.3 million of interest payments due under debt obligations, scheduled above, are estimated based upon by applying the interest rates applicable at December 31, 2021 to the remaining debt, adjusted for the estimated debt repayments identified in the table above. Actual interest payments made will vary due to actual changes in the rates for one-month LIBOR.
We believe our equity base, internally generated funds and existing debt facilities are sufficient to maintain our level of operations through 2022. A decline in the level of internally generated funds could result if the amount of equipment off-lease increases, there is a decrease in availability under our existing debt facilities, or there is a significant step-up in borrowing costs. Such decline would impair our ability to sustain our level of operations. We continue to discuss additions to our capital base with our commercial and
investment banks. If we are not able to access additional capital, our ability to continue to grow our asset base consistent with historical trends will be impaired and our future growth limited to that which can be funded from internally generated capital.
MANAGEMENT OF INTEREST RATE EXPOSURE
At December 31, 2021, $590.0 million of our borrowings were on a variable rate basis at various interest rates tied to one-month LIBOR. Our equipment leases are generally structured at fixed rental rates for specified terms. Increases in interest rates could narrow or result in a negative spread between the rental revenue we realize under our leases and the interest rate that we pay under our borrowings. Historically, we have entered into interest rate derivative instruments to mitigate our exposure to interest rate risk and not to speculate or trade in these derivative products. As of December 31, 2021, we have five interest rate swap agreements. During the first quarter of 2021, the Company entered into four fixed-rate interest swap agreements, each having notional amounts of $100.0 million, two with remaining terms of 25 months and two with remaining terms of 49 months as of December 31, 2021. One interest rate swap agreement was entered into during 2019 which has a notional outstanding amount of $100.0 million with a remaining term of 30 months as of December 31, 2021. One interest rate swap agreement which the Company entered into in 2016 expired in April 2021. The net fair value of the swaps as of December 31, 2021 was $7.3 million, representing an asset of $8.0 million and a liability of $0.7 million. The net fair value of the interest rate swaps as of December 31, 2020 was $4.0 million, representing a liability.
We record derivative instruments at fair value as either an asset or liability. We have used derivative instruments (primarily interest rate swaps) to manage the risk of interest rate fluctuation. While substantially all our derivative transactions are entered into for the purposes described above, hedge accounting is only applied where specific criteria have been met and it is practicable to do so. In order to apply hedge accounting, the transaction must be designated as a hedge and the hedge relationship must be highly effective. The hedging instrument’s effectiveness is assessed utilizing regression analysis at the inception of the hedge and on at least a quarterly basis throughout its life. All of the transactions that we have designated as hedges are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The effective portion of the gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated as a cash flow hedge is reported as a component of other comprehensive income and is reclassified into earnings in the period during which the transaction being hedged affects earnings. The ineffective portion of these hedges flows through earnings in the current period. The hedge accounting for these derivative instrument arrangements increased interest expense by $2.4 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This incremental adjustment for the swaps effective for hedge accounting was included in interest expense for the respective periods.
For any interest rate swaps that we enter into, we will be exposed to risk in the event of non-performance of the interest rate hedge counter-parties. We anticipate that we may hedge additional amounts of our floating rate debt in the future.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Joint Ventures
“Other revenue” on the Consolidated Statements of Income includes management fees earned of $2.1 million and $1.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the servicing of engines for the WMES lease portfolio.
During 2021, the Company sold two engines to WMES for $25.0 million. During 2020, the Company sold one note receivable to WMES for $8.4 million.
There were no engine or aircraft sales to CASC Willis during 2021 or 2020.
Other
On December 2, 2021, in a transaction approved by an independent committee, as well as the Audit Committee, of the Board of Directors, the Company purchased 60,000 shares of its common stock directly from the Company’s Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”), Charles F. Willis. The agreed and paid price per share was $35.43, the discounted volume weighted average price on December 2, 2021.
On October 1, 2021, the Board’s Independent Directors approved the payment of $0.2 million to the Company’s CEO, Charles F. Willis, for reimbursement of a club membership fee, as well as future payments of reasonable annual club dues.
During 2021, the Company paid approximately $27,000 of expenses payable to Mikchalk Lake, LLC, an entity in which our CEO retains an ownership interest. These expenses were for lodging and other business related services. These transactions were approved by the Board’s Independent Directors.
During 2020, the Board’s Independent Directors approved the Company’s agreement to a lease with our CEO in support of the Company’s marine vessel leasing business. That lease provides for a payment to our CEO of $750 per day for the use of his tender in support of our vessel lease to a third-party lessee. In addition, the Company purchased a hull insurance policy, for our CEO’s tender, at
a rate of $6,800 per annum, plus a one-time subscriber fee of $695 to insure his tender while in the service of the Company’s vessel leasing business. The Company has paid a total of $41,250 and $9,750 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for usage of the tender. On November 11, 2021, in a transaction approved by the Independent Compensation Committee, the Company purchased the tender for $0.5 million. Additionally, during 2020, our CEO was charged $4,000 for personal expenses while onboard the Company’s marine vessel.
During 2020, the Company’s CEO was charged $9,100 for the purchase of artwork from the Company.