Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion provides an analysis of the results of our continuing operations, an overview of our liquidity and capital resources and other items related to our business. It contains forward-looking statements about our future revenue, operating results, and expectations. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of the risks, assumptions and uncertainties affecting these statements. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with Part I of this Form 10-K as well as our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in this Form 10-K.
Our Restructuring
Beginning in 2016, we shifted our strategy to become a preferred provider of construction, maintenance, and specialty services, to exit all product manufacturing businesses and to use the proceeds from the sales to reduce and restructure our term debt, and during 2018, we completed the restructuring of our Company and began expanding our services. Unless otherwise specified, the financial information and discussion in this Form 10-K are as of December 31, 2021 and are based on our continuing operations; they exclude any results of our discontinued operations. Please refer to “Note 4-Changes in Business” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for additional information on our discontinued operations.
In 2018, we implemented major cost reduction initiatives to reduce our overhead costs, including restructuring and consolidating our corporate functions, and began working on a comprehensive strategic plan to grow and improve our business, which was finalized in early 2019. Our strategy has been focused on a comprehensive plan to grow and improve our operations, strengthen our core competencies, aggressively manage working capital, and reduce costs in order to improve liquidity and reduce debt.
During 2021, we changed our corporate management structure to reinforce our customer focus and strengthen operations. The Company added a Chief Operating Officer, an Executive Vice President of Business Development, a Vice President of Safety and a Chief Information Officer to strengthen operational effectiveness. Our Chief Financial Officer was appointed Chief Operating Officer and our Corporate Controller was appointed Chief Financial Officer. We are enhancing our management methods and implementing new information technology and operating systems to augment our efficiency and effectiveness and provide additional process capabilities and enhanced information security.
In early 2022, we lost a major contract with a customer in Canada, and as a result, we are in the process of exiting the Canadian market. This customer contributed to 12% of our revenue in 2021. In addition, in early 2022, we lost a major multi-year contract with a customer within the nuclear decommissioning market. This customer accounted for 10% of our revenue in 2021, and contributed to a loss of approximately $361.0 million in backlog in the years 2022 through 2029, including backlog of approximately $30.0 million for 2022 and $50.0 million for 2023. We continue to target other growth opportunities within our end markets with greater customer focus and strengthened operational effectiveness. This loss was not a result of performance and does not diminish the Company’s ability to serve its customers. Please refer to Item 1. Business under “Backlog” and “Note 17-Subsequent Events” included in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Industry Trends and Outlook
Electric Power Generation - We are primarily focused on nuclear and fossil power generation. We are involved in new build power generation facilities, maintenance of existing facilities and the decommissioning of retired facilities. Net electricity generation in the U.S. increased approximately 2.4% in 2021 compared to 2020 according to Fitch research. Fitch projects that electricity generation will increase by 1.5% in 2022.
Nuclear New Builds - In nuclear power generation, we are heavily involved in the construction of the only new nuclear reactors being built in the U.S., Plant Vogtle Units 3 and 4. In 2017, we formed a limited liability company with Bechtel Power Corporation, a global leader in EPC and project management, Richmond County Constructors, LLC (“RCC”). RCC operates as construction subcontractor to Bechtel Power Corporation, which has been selected as the prime construction contractor for the Plant Vogtle Units 3 and 4. RCC provides construction craft labor for the project. Williams is a 25% member in RCC. Plant Vogtle Units 3 and 4 are expected to become operative in 2023. We also have won additional scope of work outside RCC and are currently bidding on other opportunities for direct scope of work. Plant Vogtle Units 3 and 4 are expected to become operative in 2023.
In the future, we believe the nuclear generation market will provide innovative developments and high growth opportunities. According to Fitch research, the future of nuclear power capacity additions within the U.S. will come from the development of plants using small modular reactor (“SMR”) technologies. SMR technology has several benefits in comparison to traditional nuclear power facilities given their smaller size, including that they require a reduced footprint and lower capital investments and offer several safety benefits. While the “DOE” has already awarded significant funding for research and development towards the development of SMR technologies and pilot projects, there is the potential for additional funding over the coming years given that nuclear is expected to play a key role in the current administration’s efforts toward reaching carbon pollution-free power according to Fitch research.
Nuclear Decommissioning - Given the average age of nuclear facilities in the U.S. of 39 years old, nuclear decommissioning represents one of the fastest growing fields within the nuclear industry. According to the U.S. NRC, as of November 2021, there were 24 shut down commercial nuclear power reactors at 19 sites in various stages of decommissioning. We are currently working with a major contractor in the decommissioning field and believe there may be an opportunity for us to expand our capabilities and more broadly serve the decommissioning of nuclear power facilities. We are actively pursuing projects in the decommissioning market and see this as an opportunity for future growth.
Water and Wastewater Treatment Landscape - Technological advances in order to keep up with population growth and industrial capacity, are transforming the water and wastewater treatment industry. Nationally, the EPA estimates that the cost of replacing all 10 million lead service lines (LSLs) in the U.S. could range from $16 billion to as much as $80 billion. We are expanding our services to target capital projects and maintenance on booster pump stations, well buildouts, treatment expansions, and lift stations within the water and wastewater treatment industry. A significant portion of the November 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act has been allocated to improve water infrastructure ($55 billion).
Other Fossil Fuel Power Generation - The reduction of coal-fired electricity production has reduced demand for routine maintenance, plant upgrades, modification, and new construction at U.S. coal-fired power generation facilities.
The U.S. EIA reported that natural gas-fired generation surpassed coal-fired generation and was the most common electricity fuel starting in 2016. As a result, we have seen the demand for routine maintenance, plant upgrades, modification, and new construction in the gas-fired generation market increase. We have maintained a presence in that market, primarily in capital projects for efficiency improvements. However, because most of those plants are newer than their nuclear and coal counterparts, they require fewer upgrades, which means they also require less maintenance than either coal or nuclear plants.
Natural Gas Distribution Market - The U.S. accounts for a natural gas pipeline network of 305,000 miles of transmission pipelines and 2.2 million miles of distribution pipes within utility service areas. Natural gas usage remained broadly flat in 2021 with gas delivered to consumers rising only 0.1%. In the long-term it is expected that natural gas will likely serve as a transition fuel with the expected growth in demand, driven mostly by the power sector, projected to average at 1.6% year-over-year from 2022 to 2030. Nationwide, about 40% of natural gas is used for energy production and the remainder is mostly used for commercial uses (heating and cooking) and industrial uses. In New York and the northeastern U.S., we are involved in projects forecasted to invest in a range of $500 million to $1.5 billion in infrastructure improvements related to natural gas distribution. The Company estimates that the market opportunity is worth $6.0 billion per year.
Transmission and Distribution and Storm Hardening - Following extensive damage from storms, such as Hurricane Irma in 2017 and Hurricane Michael in 2018, the Florida legislature passed Senate Bill 796 in 2019. Bill 796 requires investor owned utilities to file 10-year storm protection plans in order to strengthen its grid as a prevention measure from future hurricane damage. In 2021, utilities operating in Florida included projects with a value of approximately $20 billion within their 10-year storm-hardening plans in Florida with execution that began in 2020. We have a significant presence in the Florida market and our activities have historically included infrastructure projects that are comparable to those that are included in the planned projects. We believe that we are positioned with the talent and experience to be part of these undergrounding projects related to storm hardening and are currently working with utility companies to identify and pursue these opportunities. A significant portion of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act has been allocated to improve power infrastructure ($73 billion).
Results of Operations
The following summary and discussion of our results of operations is based on our continuing operations and excludes any results of our discontinued operations. You should refer to this information, as well as the financial data provided in our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Form 10-K, when reading our discussion and analysis of results of operations below.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $35.9 million, or 13.3% compared with 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by our growth in the decommissioning market of $26.1 million, and the timing of a planned utility outage related to our long-term maintenance and modification contract of $18.9 million. In addition, our volume increased in the fossil fuel market by $13.8 million. These increases were partially offset by reduced volume in the nuclear market of $26.1 million.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.6 million, or 7.6% compared with 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by cost overruns on uncompleted fixed price projects in the industrial markets we serve in Florida. The decrease was partially offset by growth in the decommissioning market and the timing of a planned utility outage related to our long-term maintenance and modification contract, each of which has a lower gross margin profile compared to other services we perform and accounted for a greater portion of revenue compared with 2020.
Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.7 million, or 27.9% compared with 2020, due primarily to the decrease in gross profit of $2.6 million and an increase of $0.4 million in selling and marketing expenses. This was partially offset by a decrease of $0.3 million in general and administrative costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
Total general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $0.3 million, or 1.3%, compared with 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction of $0.8 million in professional fees due to a claim recovery on previously incurred expenses and a $0.3 million decrease in other expenses related to our cost reduction initiatives. These decreases were partially offset by increases of $0.3 million in employee-related expenses due to increased compensation costs, and a $0.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense due to an accelerated vesting of restricted stock awards along with a new grant of restricted stock units and awards to key employees and non-employee directors.
Other Expense, Net
Total other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.8 million, or 45.2%, compared with 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $1.1 million decrease in interest expense resulting from the refinancing of our previous debt facilities. We also recorded a non-recurring $1.5 million loss recognized in 2020 related to our unamortized debt issuance costs and other fees related to extinguishment of our previous term loan.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded income tax expense from continuing operations of $0.8 million and $1.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective tax rates from continuing operations were 22.8% and 41.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The income tax expense in 2021 was mainly comprised of a $0.8 million Canadian tax provision and the $0.3 million foreign withholding tax deferred expense related to the APB 23 deferred tax liability accrued for the undistributed Canadian earnings, with the rest attributable to interest and penalties accrued on uncertain tax positions, partially offset by the release of 2010 uncertain tax positions, and the net increase in the indefinitely-lived deferred tax assets related to post-2017 NOLs and Section 163(j) interest addback carryover, which was partially offset by an increase in deferred tax liabilities related to indefinitely-lived intangibles.
Discontinued Operations
Please refer to “Note 4-Changes in Business” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for information regarding discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were borrowings under the PNC Facility and effective management of our working capital. Our principal uses of cash were to pay for customer contract-related material, labor and subcontract labor, operating expenses, and interest expense on the Term Loan and the PNC Facility. See discussion in “Note 10-Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the Term Loan and the PNC Facility.
Net Cash Flows
Our net consolidated cash flows, including cash flows related to discontinued operations, consisted of the following:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of December 31, 2021, our operating unrestricted cash and cash equivalents decreased $6.2 million to $2.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, $0.7 million of our operating cash balance was held in U.S. bank accounts and $1.8 million in Canadian bank accounts. Total liquidity (the sum of unrestricted cash and availability under the PNC Facility) was $27.7 million as of December 31, 2021.
At March 7, 2022, we had $1.9 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents that could be used, along with normal cash flows from operations, to fund unanticipated shortfalls in future cash flows.
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities result primarily from earnings sources and are affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which consist primarily of working capital balances related to our projects. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash from operating activities decreased $15.7 million to $4.5 million cash used in operating activities compared to $11.2 million cash provided by operating activities in 2020. The decrease in our operating cash in 2021 was primarily attributable to a $7.8 million increase in accounts receivable, a $4.7 million increase in contract assets, and $4.7 million increase in other current assets. These amounts were partially offset by a $1.2 million increase in net income, a $5.9 million increase in accounts payable and a $6.2 million decrease in cash and cash equivalents.
During 2021, our working capital increased $3.2 million, or 17.8%, to $20.9 million compared to $17.7 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the changes described above.
Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our investing activities did not have a significant impact on our net cash flows.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $1.3 million primarily due to $1.1 million cash used to pay down our Term Loan and $0.5 million cash used in connection with our stock-based awards for payments of statutory taxes, which was partially offset by cash provided by our borrowings under the PNC Facility exceeding our repayments from customer cash receipts by $0.3 million. At any point in time, the outstanding balance under the PNC Facility is a function of the timing of collections of our customer receivables and the timing of our cash expenditure needs for the following week for payment of trade payable obligations, payroll, and related tax obligations. For additional information about our outstanding debt, including the Term Loan and the PNC Facility, please refer to “Note 10-Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $9.8 million primarily due to refinancing our previous term loan and asset-based lending facility, partially offset by the proceeds from our Rights Offering.
On December 16, 2020, we refinanced and replaced our previous term loan with Centre Lane with the Term Loan. This required the Company to pay $1.0 million in prepayment penalties and legal fees, $1.0 million in structuring fees, $4.2 million in debt issuance costs, and complete repayment of $33.6 million principal due on our prior term loan. This amount was offset by $35.0 million of borrowings under the Term Loan.
In addition, on December 16, 2020, we also refinanced and replaced our previous asset-based lending facility with MidCap Financial Trust with the PNC Facility. As such, our borrowings under the PNC Facility are currently our primary source of liquidity. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our payments from customer cash receipts under our prior asset-based lending facility exceeded our borrowings by $10.5 million primarily due to timing and completely repaying our prior asset-based lending facility.
On March 2, 2020, we successfully completed our Rights Offering which provided $6.5 million in net proceeds, partially offsetting our net cash used from refinancing our debt.
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes on Cash
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the effect of Canadian foreign exchange rate changes on our cash balances was not material.
Dividends
We do not currently anticipate declaring dividends in the future. As of December 31, 2021, the terms of the Term Loan and PNC Facility restricted our ability to pay dividends. In addition, the timing and amounts of any dividends would be subject to determination and approval by our Board of Directors.
Liquidity Outlook
Overall, we expect liquidity to improve through 2022 as a result of managing our borrowing and repayments of our PNC Facility and expected net profits. However, we may experience periodic short-term constraints on our liquidity as a result of the cash flow requirements of specific projects. A high percentage of our cost of service comes from weekly craft labor payrolls, and the lag between incurrence of those payrolls and the subsequent collection of the resulting customer billings results in negative cash flows for that time period. Although we utilize the PNC Facility to address those time period negative cash flows, contract terms restricting customer invoicing frequency, delays in customer payments, and underlying surety bonds negatively impact our available borrowing base. We believe that we have sufficient resources to satisfy our 2022 working capital requirements and our long-term liquidity needs and foreseeable material cash requirements, as we strategically use our $30.0 million borrowing availability under our PNC Facility and continue to implement our future growth initiatives. A variety of factors can affect our short- and long-term liquidity, which impact could be material, including, but not limited to: cash for operations; matters relating to our contracts, including contracts billed based on milestones that may require us to incur significant expenditures prior to collections from our customers and others that allow for significant upfront billing at the beginning of a project, which temporarily increases liquidity in the near term; the outcome of potential contract disputes, which may be significant; payment collection issues, including those caused by economic slowdowns or other factors which can lead to credit deterioration of our customers; required payments on the Term Loan and the PNC Facility and on our operating and finance leases; pension obligations requiring annual contributions to multiemployer pension plans; insurance coverage for contracts that require us to indemnify third parties; and issuances of letters of credit. We believe that we have adequate sources of liquidity to meet our long-term liquidity needs of developing key management and craft personnel, enhancing our services to meet new opportunities and obtaining the amount of capital needed to drive our long-term growth initiatives of attracting new customers and expanding our market reach. In the event that we are unable to address potential liquidity shortfalls in the future, management will need to seek additional funding, which may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all.
While we have been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, we currently cannot predict the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, as such impact is dependent on future developments, including the duration and severity of the pandemic and the related length of its impact on the global economy, which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. During 2021, we experienced a decrease in new business development based on restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, and stricter safety guidelines, coupled with decreased spending related to market uncertainty due to COVID-19. Any recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic impact may also be slowed or reversed by a number of factors, including the continued sporadic outbreaks of COVID-19 cases, the ongoing spread of new COVID-19 variants and the impact of COVID-19 vaccines, including the speed at which they are approved, disseminated and widely adopted and their effectiveness against COVID-19 and its evolving strains. Management will continue to closely monitor conditions using the data available and will draw on the expertise of health officials, including the latest recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the on-site medical professionals. Our liquidity, as well as our ability to satisfy our working capital requirements, may be adversely affected to some degree by the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently believe that the impact of COVID-19 will not negatively impact our ability to comply with the covenants under our existing credit facilities. However, we cannot provide any assurance that the assumptions used to estimate our liquidity requirements will remain accurate due to the unprecedented nature and the unpredictability of the COVID-19 global pandemic and its potential impact on us and our customer base. As a consequence, our estimates of the duration and severity of the pandemic and its impact on our future earnings and cash flows could change and have a material impact on our results of operations and financial condition. In addition, even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of the pandemic’s global economic impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
Our liquidity is currently not dependent on the use of off-balance sheet transactions but, in line with industry practice, we are often required to provide payment and performance surety bonds to customers and may be required to provide letters of credit. If performance assurances are extended to customers, generally our maximum potential exposure is limited in the contract with our customers. We frequently obtain similar performance assurances from third-party vendors and subcontractors for work performed in the ordinary course of contract execution. However, the total costs of a project could exceed our original cost estimates, and we could experience reduced gross profit or possibly a loss for a given project. In some cases, if we fail to meet certain performance standards, we may be subject to contractual liquidated damages.
As of December 31, 2021, we had a contingent liability for issued and outstanding standby letters of credit, generally issued to secure performance on customer contracts. As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.5 million of letters of credit under the PNC facility sublimit and $0.4 million of outstanding cash collateralized standby letters of credit pursuant to a prior revolving credit facility with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, and there were no amounts drawn upon these letters of credit. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding payment and performance surety bonds on projects of $67.6 million. Our subsidiaries also provide financial guarantees for certain contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
An accounting policy is considered critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. We believe that the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. The following descriptions of critical accounting policies, judgments and estimates should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition. We provide construction, maintenance, and support services to customers in energy, power, and industrial end markets. Our services, which are provided through long-term maintenance or discrete project agreements, are designed to improve or sustain our customers’ operating efficiencies and extend the useful lives of their process equipment. The contracts are awarded on a competitively bid and negotiated basis with the majority structured as cost-plus arrangements and the remainder as lump-sum.
Our contracts generally include a single performance obligation for which revenue is recognized over time, as performance obligations are satisfied, due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. For cost-plus contracts, we recognize revenue when services are performed and contractually billable based upon the hours incurred and agreed-upon hourly rates. Revenue on fixed-price contracts is recognized and invoiced over time using the cost-to-cost percentage-of-completion method. To the extent a contract is deemed to have multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. We do not adjust the price of the contract for the effects of a significant financing component. Change orders are generally not distinct from the existing contract due to the significant integration service provided in the context of the contract and are accounted for as a modification of the existing contract and performance obligation. We believe these methods of revenue recognition most accurately reflect the economics of the transactions with our customers.
Our contracts may include several types of variable consideration, including change orders, rate true-up provisions, retainage, claims, incentives, penalties, and liquidated damages. We estimate the amount of revenue to be recognized on variable consideration using estimation methods that best predict the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled. We include variable consideration in the estimated transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur or when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current, and forecasted) that is reasonably available. We update our estimate of the transaction price each reporting period and the effect of variable consideration on the transaction price is recognized as an adjustment to revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis. In circumstances where we cannot reasonably determine the outcome of a contract, we recognize revenue over time as the work is performed, but only to the extent of recoverable costs incurred (i.e. zero margin). A loss provision is recorded for the amount of any estimated unrecoverable costs in excess of total estimated revenue on a contract as soon as we become aware. We generally provide a limited warranty for a term of two years or less following completion of services performed under our contracts. Historically, warranty claims have not resulted in material costs incurred.
Long-Lived Assets. Long-lived assets, such as property, plant, and equipment, and purchased intangible assets subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset held for use to be tested for possible impairment, we first compare the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset to the carrying value of the asset. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds expected future cash flows, the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value is charged to impairment expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Assets held for sale are reported at the lower of their carrying value, less estimated costs to sell. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques, including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. We group long-lived assets by legal entity for purposes of recognition and measurement of an impairment loss, as this is the lowest level for which cash flows are independent.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually as of October 1 and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Our indefinite-lived intangible asset consists of the Williams trade name. Our testing of goodwill for potential impairment involves the comparison of each reporting unit’s carrying value to its estimated fair value, which is determined using a combination of income and market approaches.
For purposes of the income approach, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. We use our internal forecasts to estimate future cash flows and include an estimate of long-term future growth rates based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for our reporting unit. Under the market approach, the fair value is determined by utilizing comparative market multiples in the valuation estimates. The fair value of our Williams reporting unit exceeded book value on December 31, 2021.
Similarly, the testing of our trade names for potential impairment involves the comparison of the carrying value for each trade name to its estimated fair value, which is determined using the relief from royalty method.
Impairment write-downs are charged to results of operations in the period in which the impairment is determined. We recorded no impairment write-downs in 2021.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to be applied to taxable income in the years in which those differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We recognize income as a result of changes in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period that includes the enactment date.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740-Income Taxes, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) requires companies to assess whether valuation allowances should be established against their deferred tax assets based on the consideration of all available positive and negative evidence and utilizing a “more likely than not” standard. In making such assessments, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. A company’s current or previous operating history is given more weight than its future outlook, although we do consider future taxable income projections, ongoing tax planning strategies and the limitation on the use of carryforward losses in determining valuation allowance needs. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion of or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We recognize the tax benefit from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not to be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We believe that our benefits and accruals recognized are appropriate for all open audit years based on our assessment of many factors, including past experience and interpretation of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is determined to be different than the amounts recorded, those differences will impact income tax expense in the period in which the determination is made.
Tax Cuts and Jobs Acts of 2017
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Act was signed into law, making significant changes to the Internal Revenue Code. Such changes include, but are not limited to, a U.S. federal corporate tax rate decrease from 35% to 21% effective for tax years beginning after December 31, 2017, the transition of U.S. international taxation from a worldwide tax system to a territorial system, and a one-time transition tax on the mandatory deemed repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings as of December 31, 2017.
Due to changes in interpretations and assumptions, and future guidance that may be issued and actions we may take in response to the Tax Act, the ultimate impact of the Tax Act may change in future periods. The Tax Act is highly complex, and we will continue to assess the impact of certain aspects of the Tax Act. For additional information, please refer to “Note 8-Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Insurance. The Company maintains insurance coverage for most insurable aspects of its business and operations. The Company’s insurance programs, including, but not limited to, health, general liability, and workers’ compensation, have varying coverage limits depending upon the type of insurance. We retain exposure to potential losses based on deductibles, coverage limits and retentions. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, insurance expense, including insurance premiums related to the excess claim coverage and claims incurred for continuing operations, was $2.0 million and $2.4 million, respectively.
The Company’s consolidated balance sheets include amounts representing its probable estimated liability related to insurance-related claims that are known and have been asserted against the Company, and for insurance-related claims that are believed to have been incurred, but had not yet been reported as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company provided $0.9 million and $0.5 million, respectively, in letters of credit and provided cash collateral of $1.0 million and $0.6 million, respectively, as security for possible workers’ compensation claims.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2019-12, “Income Taxes”, which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions for investments, intraperiod allocations and interim calculations, and adding guidance to reduce complexity in accounting for income taxes. The update is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The Company historically did not rely on the exceptions in computing the tax provision. The Company adopted the guidance as of January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.