ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion provides the reader a narrative from the perspective of management and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Western Asset Mortgage Capital Corporation, a Delaware corporation, commenced operations in May 2012, focused on investing in, financing and managing a diversified portfolio of real estate related securities, whole loans and other financial assets, which we collectively refer to as our target assets. Our investment strategy is based on our Manager's perspective of which mix of our target assets it believes provides us with the best risk-reward opportunities at any given time. Our objective is to provide attractive risk adjusted returns to our stockholders primarily through an attractive dividend, which we intend to support with sustainable distributable earnings (which we previously referred to as core earnings), as well as the potential for higher returns through capital appreciation.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Results
Our results of operations are affected by several factors. They primarily depend on, among other things, the level of interest income and market value of our investments, the supply of and demand for the target assets in which we invest, and the financing and other costs associated with our business. Interest income and borrowing costs may vary due to changes in interest rates and the availability of financing, each of which could impact the net interest income we receive on our investments. Also, our operating results may be affected by conditions in the financial markets, such as unanticipated credit events experienced by our investment portfolio.
Changes in market interest rates. With respect to our business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with variable rate borrowings to increase; (ii) the value of certain of our assets to decline; (iii) to the extent applicable under the terms of our investments, prepayments on our investments to slow, and (iv) to the extent that we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to increase.
Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with variable rate borrowings to decrease; (ii) the value of certain of our investments to increase; (iii) to the extent applicable under the terms of our investments, prepayments on our investments to increase, and (iv) to the extent that we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to decrease.
Credit risk. One of our strategic focuses is acquiring assets which are believed to be of high credit quality. Management believes this strategy will generally keep credit losses and financing costs low. However, we are subject to varying degrees of credit risk in connection with our target assets. Our Manager seeks to mitigate this risk by seeking to acquire high quality assets, at appropriate prices given anticipated and unanticipated losses and by deploying a value-driven approach to underwriting and diligence, consistent with our Manager’s historical investment strategy. However, unanticipated credit losses could occur which could adversely impact operating results.
Size of portfolio. The size of our portfolio of assets is a key revenue driver. Generally, as the size of our portfolio grows, the amount of interest income earned increases, and conversely as the size of our portfolio declines, the amount of interest income earned will decline.
Market conditions. The Covid-19 recovery has been uneven across parts of the economy, geographically due to localized restrictions and caseloads, and across demographics with certain segments of the economy operating well above and others well below pre-COVID-19 levels. For the most part, structured credit spreads remained at wider levels relative to pre-COVID-19 and ended 2021 at their widest level for the year, in spite of the overall strength of the US economy due to the remaining uncertainties and unevenness of the recovery.
The housing market ended 2021 in a strong position, but one that is decelerating from the rapid home price appreciation ("HPA") experienced during the peak Covid-19 demand surge. Fueling the housing boom of the post-Covid-19 world are historically low mortgage rates, a dismal lack of housing supply on the market, tight lending conditions and a rebirth of household formations. Home price growth is expected to cool off but remain above average. Many market forecasts are still calling for a strong year, with the HPA growth estimates for 2022 ranging between 7% and 9%. The Manager believes housing starts should continue to rise to meet the strong demand, and as supply-chain issues ease, construction can pick up to close to 1.5 million units. This should help to reduce the supply and demand imbalance. However, that means that mortgage origination
volumes will again be strong in 2022 with net supply of agency mortgages anticipated to reach approximately $600 billion, which would be the second highest year on record after 2021’s $800 billion.
After a challenging year for commercial real estate with revenues limited due to mandated stay-at-home orders, the reopening of retailers and leisure travel has provided a tailwind for the industry. Our Manager believes single asset single borrower ("SASB") non-agency mortgages secured by high-quality commercial properties with strong equity sponsors will benefit if as the Manager anticipates as COVID-19 restrictions continue to lift and the economy moves toward a full reopening.
Our Manager believes the largest dislocated opportunities are in residential and commercial mortgage credit, which are sectors that have not received the benefit of a Federal Reserve backstop and have lagged other credit sectors in that the have rebounded since March 2021. Mortgage credit offers value backed by real assets that benefit from a rising inflation environment and can generate attractive risk-adjusted returns.
See Item 1A. "Risk Factors" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K additional factors that may impact our operating results. Also, please see "Liquidity and Capital Resources" section of this annual report on Form 10-K for additional discussion surrounding the ongoing impact we expect COVID-19 will have on our liquidity and capital resources.
Proposed Changes to LIBOR
In March 2021, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"), which regulates LIBOR, announced that December 31, 2021, will be the termination date for 1-week and 2-month USD-LIBOR. The FCA also set June 30, 2023, as the termination date for the other five USD-LIBOR (overnight, 1-month, 3-month, 6-month, and 12-month).
In July 2021, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee's ("ARRC") formally recommended Chicago Mercantile Exchange Group's forward looking Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR") term rate. However, market participants are still evaluating what convention of SOFR will be adopted for various types of financial instruments and securitization vehicles. For example, the mortgage and derivatives markets have adopted the daily compounded and paid in arrears SOFR convention. In contrast, government sponsored enterprises, such as Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac have begun issuing adjustable rate mortgages, mortgage-backed securities, and credit risk transfer deals indexed to the 30-, 90-, and 180-day Average SOFR rates published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as well as Term SOFR rates in the future. It is possible that not all of our assets and liabilities will transition away from LIBOR at the same time or to the same alternative reference rate
Since late 2019, our Manager has had in place a LIBOR working group comprised of representatives from all relevant areas of the Firm. Our Manager's working group was focused on the transition of the various LIBOR tenors that ceased at the end of December 2021 and remains focused on the USD LIBOR tenors that will cease at the end of June 2023. We were not impacted by any LIBOR tenor that ceased at the close of 2021. A comprehensive inventory of LIBOR exposures has been developed. The inventory includes portfolio instruments with LIBOR-related terms; accounts and portfolios with benchmarks tied to LIBOR; and other agreements using LIBOR to determine receivables or payment obligations. Our Manager's working group is committed to identifying potential negative economic or operational impacts and seeking to mitigate these risks.
We have investments and repurchase agreements that are indexed to LIBOR and our Manager continues to evaluate any potential related risks. However, we cannot predict the effects of the elimination of LIBOR on interest expense and interest income on our investments indexed to LIBOR. See Item 1A - "Risk Factors - Changes to, or and the elimination replacement of, LIBOR may adversely affect interest expense related to our loans and investments."
Critical Accounting Policies
The consolidated financial statements include our accounts, those of our consolidated wholly-owned TRS and certain variable interest entities (“VIEs”) in which we are the primary beneficiary. All intercompany amounts have been eliminated in consolidation. In accordance with GAAP, our consolidated financial statements require the use of estimates and assumptions that involve the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties. In accordance with SEC guidance, the following discussion addresses the accounting policies that we currently apply. Our most critical accounting policies will involve decisions and assessments that could affect our reported assets and liabilities, as well as our reported revenues and expenses. We believe that all of the decisions and assessments upon which our consolidated financial statements have been based were reasonable at the time made and based upon information available to us at that time. For a review of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact our results of operations, refer Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Valuation of Financial Instruments
We disclose the fair value of our financial instruments according to a fair value hierarchy (Levels I, II, and III, as defined below). ASC 820 "Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures" establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands financial statement disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. ASC 820 further specifies a hierarchy of valuation techniques, which is based on whether the inputs into the valuation technique are observable or unobservable. The hierarchy is as follows:
Level I - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level II - Quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations whose inputs are observable or whose significant value drivers are observable.
Level III - Prices are determined using significant unobservable inputs. In situations where quoted prices or observable inputs are unavailable, for example, when there is little or no market activity for an investment at the end of the period, unobservable inputs may be used.
The level in the fair value hierarchy within which a fair value measurement in its entirety falls is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. Transfers between levels are determined by us at the end of the reporting period.
Mortgage-Backed Securities and Other Securities
Our mortgage-backed securities and other securities portfolio primarily consists of Agency RMBS, Non-Agency RMBS, Agency CMBS, Non-Agency CMBS, ABS and other real estate related assets. These investments are recorded in accordance with ASC 320, “Investments - Debt and Equity Securities,” ASC 325-40, “Beneficial Interests in Securitized Financial Assets” or ASC 310-30, “Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality.” We have chosen to make a fair value election pursuant to ASC 825, “Financial Instruments” for our mortgage-backed securities and other securities portfolio. Electing the fair value option allows us to record changes in fair value in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of “Unrealized gain (loss), net.”
Residential Whole Loans
Investments in Residential Whole Loans are recorded in accordance with ASC 310-20, "Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs." We have chosen to make the fair value election pursuant to ASC 825 for our entire Residential Whole-Loan portfolio. Residential Whole Loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair market value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net." All other costs incurred in connection with acquiring Residential Whole Loans or committing to purchase these loans are charged to expense as incurred.
Securitized Commercial Loans
Securitized commercial loans are comprised of commercial loans of consolidated variable interest entities which were sponsored by third parties. These loans are recorded in accordance with ASC 310-20, "Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs." We have chosen to make the fair value election pursuant to ASC 825. Accordingly, these loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net."
Commercial Loans
Investments in Commercial Loans, which are comprised of commercial mortgage loans and commercial mezzanine loans, are recorded in accordance with ASC 310-20, "Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs." We have chosen to make the fair value election pursuant to ASC 825 for our Commercial Loan portfolio. Accordingly, these loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net." All other costs incurred in connection with acquiring the Commercial Loans or committing to purchase these loans are charged to expense as incurred.
Interest Income Recognition
Agency MBS, Non-Agency MBS and other securities, excluding Interest-Only Strips, rated AA and higher at the time of purchase
Interest income on mortgage-backed and other securities is accrued based on the respective outstanding principal balances and corresponding contractual terms. We record interest income in accordance with ASC subtopic 835-30 "Imputation of Interest," using the effective interest method. As such premiums and discounts associated with Agency MBS, Non-Agency MBS and other securities, excluding Interest-Only Strips, are amortized into interest income over the estimated life of such securities. Adjustments to premium and discount amortization are made for actual prepayment activity. We estimate prepayments at least quarterly for our securities and, as a result, if the projected prepayment speed increases, we will accelerate the rate of amortization on premiums or discounts and make a retrospective adjustment to historical amortization. Alternatively, if projected prepayment speeds decrease, we will reduce the rate of amortization on the premiums or discounts and make a retrospective adjustment to historical amortization.
Non-Agency MBS and other securities that are rated below AA at the time of purchase and Interest-Only Strips that are not classified as derivatives
Interest income on Non-Agency MBS and other securities that are rated below AA at the time of purchase and Interest-Only Strips that are not classified as derivatives are also recognized in accordance with ASC 835, using the effective yield method. The effective yield on these securities is based on the projected cash flows from each security, which is estimated based on our observation of the then current information and events, where applicable, and will include assumptions related to interest rates, prepayment rates and the timing and amount of credit losses. On at least a quarterly basis, we review and, if appropriate, make adjustments to our cash flow projections based on input and analysis received from external sources, internal models, and our judgment about interest rates, prepayment rates, the timing and amount of credit losses, and other factors. Changes in cash flows from those originally projected, or from those estimated at the last evaluation, may result in a prospective change in the yield/interest income recognized on such securities. Actual maturities of the securities are affected by the contractual lives of the underlying collateral, periodic payments of scheduled principal, and prepayments of principal. Therefore, actual maturities of the securities will generally be shorter than stated contractual maturities.
We adopted ASU 2016-13 beginning January 1, 2020. The ASU requires a company to measure credit loss using an expected credit loss model. We elected the fair value option for our investments and as such does not apply the expected loss model instead we record changes in fair value of these investment in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net." For the purposes of calculating interest income, to ensure that a projected credit loss of a security does not impact the effective yield and interest income we maintain a “shadow allowance” account. We use the shadow allowance to create a management basis. The management basis which is the difference between the net present value of projected cash flows less shadow allowance amount. The shadow allowance and the management basis are operational accounts that are used solely for the purposes of determining and calculating accretable yield and accretable book value and are not recorded in the consolidated financial statements. The management basis is limited to a fair market value of the investment. Actual realized loss on a security is recorded as a reduction in both the management basis and the amortized cost basis. Interest income is computed using the amortized basis as the reference amount and applying the yield calculated using management basis.
Loan Portfolio
Interest income on our residential loan portfolio and commercial loan portfolio is recorded using the effective interest method based on the contractual payment terms of the loan. Any premium amortization or discount accretion will be reflected as a component of "Interest income" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income recognition is suspended for loans at the earlier of the date at which payments become 90-days past due or when, in the opinion of management, a full recovery of income and principal becomes doubtful. When the ultimate collectability of the principal of an impaired loan is in doubt, all payments are applied to principal under the cost recovery method. When the ultimate collectability of the principal of an impaired loan is not in doubt, contractual interest is recorded as interest income when received, under the cash basis method until an accrual is resumed when the loan becomes contractually current and performance is demonstrated.
Variable Interest Entities (“VIEs”)
VIEs are defined as entities that by design either lack sufficient equity for the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support or are unable to direct the entity’s activities or are not exposed to the entity’s losses or entitled to its residual returns. We evaluate all of our interests in VIEs for consolidation. When the interests are determined to be variable interests, we assess whether we are deemed the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is determined to be the party that has both the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
To assess whether we have the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance, we consider all facts and circumstances, including our role in establishing the VIE and our ongoing rights and responsibilities. This assessment includes first, identifying the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance; and second, identifying which party, if any, has power over those activities. In general, the parties that make the most significant decisions affecting the VIE or have the right to unilaterally remove those decision makers is deemed to have the power to direct the activities of a VIE.
To assess whether we have the obligation to absorb losses of the VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE, we consider all of our economic interests. This assessment requires that we apply judgment in determining whether these interests, in the aggregate, are considered potentially significant to the VIE. Factors considered in assessing significance include: the design of the VIE, including its capitalization structure; subordination of interests; payment priority; relative share of interests held across various classes within the VIE’s capital structure; and the reasons why the interests are held by us.
In instances where we and our related parties have variable interests in a VIE, we consider whether there is a single party in the related party group that meets both the power and losses or benefits criteria on its own as though no related party relationship existed. If one party within the related party group meets both these criteria, such reporting entity is the primary beneficiary of the VIE and no further analysis is needed. If no party within the related party group on its own meets both the power and losses or benefits criteria, but the related party group as a whole meets these two criteria, the determination of primary beneficiary within the related party group requires significant judgment. The analysis is based upon qualitative as well as quantitative factors, such as the relationship of the VIE to each of the members of the related-party group, as well as the significance of the VIE's activities to those members, with the objective of determining which party is most closely associated with the VIE.
Ongoing assessments of whether an enterprise is the primary beneficiary of a VIE is required.
2021 Activity
Investment Activity
We continually evaluate potential investments, and our investment selection is based on the supply and demand of our target assets, costs of financing, and the expected future interest rate volatility costs of hedging. As part of our investment focus on residential real estate-related investments, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we acquired $427.8 million of Residential Whole Loans. Also, we strategically sold $27.5 million of commercial investments.
The following table presents our investing activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Other securities include $45.6 million of GSE CRTs and $6.1 million of ABS at December 31, 2021.
Portfolio Characteristics
Residential Real Estate Investments
Residential Whole Loans
The Residential Whole Loans have low LTV's and are comprised of 2,355 Non-QM adjustable rate mortgages and six investor fixed rate mortgages. The following table presents certain information about our Residential Whole-Loans investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
(1)The original FICO score is not available for 230 loans with a principal balance of approximately $74.3 million at December 31, 2021. We have excluded these loans from the weighted average computations.
Residential Bridge Loans
We are no longer allocating capital to Residential Bridge Loans. The following table presents certain information about the remaining nine Residential Bridge Loans left in the portfolio at December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Non-performing loans that are past their maturity date are excluded from the calculation of the weighted average contractual maturity. The weighted average contractual maturity for these loans is zero.
Non-performing Residential Loans
The following table presents the aging of the Residential Whole Loans and Bridge Loans as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
Residential Whole Loans in Non-Accrual Status
As of December 31, 2021, there were 20 Non-QM loans carried at fair value in non-accrual status with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $12.2 million and a fair value of approximately $12.0 million. These nonperforming loans represent approximately 1.2% of the total outstanding principal balance. No allowance or provision for credit losses was recorded as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 since the valuation adjustment, if any, would be reflected in the fair value of these loans. We stopped accruing interest income for these loan when they became contractually 90 days delinquent. As of December 31, 2021, we had no Non-QM loans in forbearance
As of December 31, 2021, we had nine Residential Bridge Loans remaining in the portfolio and six were in non-accrual status with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $4.8 million and a fair value of $4.4 million. No allowance and provision for credit losses was recorded for loans carried at fair value as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 since valuation adjustments, if any, would be reflected in the fair value of these loans. We stopped accruing interest income for these loans when they became contractually 90 days delinquent.
As of December 31, 2021, we had four real estate owned ("REO") properties with an aggregate carrying value of $1.1 million related to foreclosed Bridge Loans. The REO properties are held for sale and accordingly carried at the lower of cost or fair value less cost to sell. The REO properties are classified in "Other assets" in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Non-Agency RMBS
The following table presents the fair value and weighted average purchase price for each of our Non-agency RMBS categories, including IOs accounted for as derivatives, together with certain of their respective underlying loan collateral attributes and current performance metrics as of December 31, 2021 (fair value dollars in thousands):
Agency RMBS Portfolio
The following table summarizes our Agency portfolio by investment category as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
(1)IOs and IIOs have no principal balances and bear interest based on a notional balance. The notional balance is used solely to determine interest distributions on the interest-only class of securities.
Commercial Real Estate Investments
Non-Agency CMBS
The following table presents certain characteristics of our Non-Agency CMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
Commercial Loans
The following table presents our commercial loan investments as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
(1) CRE 3 is in default and not eligible for extension.
Commercial Loan Payoffs
On July 7, 2021, SBC 1, with an outstanding principal balance of $45.2 million collateralized by nursing facilities, was paid off in full.
On September 7, 2021, CRE 2, with an outstanding principal balance of $46.8 million collateralized by nursing facilities, was paid off in full.
On September 24, 2021, SBC 2 with an outstanding principal balance of $9.2 million collateralized by an apartment complex was paid off in full.
Non-Performing Commercial Loans
The impact of COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which our commercial loan borrowers operate and could impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations to us, most significantly retail and hospitality asset. All but the one loans discussed below remain current.
CRE 3 Loan
As of December 31, 2021, the CRE 3 junior mezzanine loan with an outstanding principal balance of $90.0 million secured by a retail facility was non-performing and past its maturity date of June 29, 2021. We were receiving interest payments on this loan from a reserve that was exhausted in May 2021. During the second quarter of 2021, the fair value of the loan declined significantly. We are currently in discussions with the borrower and certain other lenders regarding alternatives to address the situation which might include modifications of loan terms, deferral of payments and the funding of new advances. There can be no assurance that these discussions will result in an outcome in which we would be repaid any amount of the loan and we may suffer further declines in fair value with respect to the mezzanine investment. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we suffered a decline of $51.2 million in the fair value of this investment. We could experience a total loss of our investment under various scenarios, which at current levels would result in a $29.1 million reduction in the Company’s book value. Refer to Note 6 - "Commercial Loans" for details.
The following table presents the aging of the Commercial Loans as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
Commercial Real Estate Owned
In October 2020, we commenced foreclosure proceedings. However, on February 24, 2021, the borrower filed for bankruptcy protection halting the foreclosure process. In August 2021, the bankruptcy case was dismissed by the bankruptcy court and we, together with the other holders of the loan, foreclosed on the property through a SPE formed for the purpose of holding the property. The SPE is consolidated by us and the property is recorded at the lower of cost or fair value less cost to sell. As of December 31, 2021, the REO is recorded at $42.5 million and classified in "Other assets" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and the other members' interests in the SPE of approximately $11.2 million are recorded as "Non-controlling interest" in the consolidated financial statements.
The property was marketed for sale and in January 2022, a purchase and sales agreement was executed for a purchase price of $55.9 million, subject to customary diligence. The sale of the Property closed on February 14, 2022. The Company and the other investors fully recovered their aggregate initial investment of $42.0 million. The Company estimates it will recognize a gain on sale of approximately $6.7 million, based on the December 31, 2021 carrying value.
Securitized Commercial Loans
On September 15, 2021, the commercial loan that served as collateral for the RETL2019-RVP securitization paid in full by the borrower and the RETL HRR bond with an outstanding principal amount of $45.3 million held in WMC RETL LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, was paid off. Accordingly, the RETL 2019 Trust is no longer consolidated.
Geographic Concentration
The mortgages underlying our Non-Agency RMBS and Non-Agency CMBS are located in various states across the United States and other countries. The following table presents the five largest concentrations by location for the mortgages collateralizing our Non-Agency RMBS and Non-Agency CMBS as of December 31, 2021, based on fair value (dollars in thousands):
The following table presents the various states across the United States in which the collateral securing our Residential Whole Loans and Residential Bridge Loans at December 31, 2021, based on principal balance, is located (dollars in thousands):
Financing Activity
We will look to continue to expand and diversify our financing sources, especially those sources that provide an alternative to short-term repurchase agreements with daily margin requirements.
Repurchase Agreements
Our repurchase agreements bear interest at a contractually agreed-upon rate and have terms ranging from one month to 12 months. Our counterparties generally require collateral in excess of the loan amount, or haircuts. As of December 31, 2021, the contractual haircuts required under repurchase agreements on our investments were as follows:
(1) The haircut is based on 10% of the outstanding principal amount of the Residential Whole Loans
(2) Each Commercial Loans is financed separately under this facility and the haircuts are dependent on the type collateral.
Residential Whole Loan Facility
On November 5, 2021, we entered into an amendment of our Residential Whole Loan Facility. The amendment facility has a stated of capacity $500 million and bears an interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.00%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.25%. The facility is available to finance five types of residential mortgages: Non-Agency mortgage loans, Non-QM loans, investor loans,
re-performing and non-performing loans. The advance rates differ by type of loan, but for performing Non-QM loans the advance rate is 90% of the outstanding principal amount. The facility matures on November 4, 2022. The facility is a mark to market margin facility; however, the margin requirement is only triggered if the fair value of the collateral declines below its outstanding aggregate principal amount.
Non-Agency CMBS and Non-Agency RMBS Facility
On May 5, 2021, we amended our Non-Agency CMBS and Non-Agency RMBS financing facility to, among other things, extend the facility for an additional 12 months and reduce the interest rate. The amended facility has improved advance rates and bears interest at a rate of three-month LIBOR plus 2.00%. The facility is not subject to daily margin calls; however the margin requirement is triggered when the loan to value ratio surpasses a certain threshold (the "LTV Trigger"), on a weighted average basis per asset type, calculated on a portfolio level. The LTV Trigger for collectively for RMBS investments is 75% and 70% for collectively for CMBS investments.
Commercial Whole Loan Facility
On May 5, 2021, we amended our $100 million Commercial Whole Loan Facility to, among other things, convert the term to a 12-month facility with up to one 12-month extension option, subject to the lender's consent.
Convertible Senior Unsecured Notes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, through a series of transactions summarized below, we reduced the our overall convertible senior unsecured notes outstanding by $51.1 million and extended the maturity to 2024 for $86.3 million of our convertible senior unsecured debt to further strengthen our balance sheet. The following summarizes the transactions for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
•In March 2021, we repurchased $6.7 million aggregate principal amount of our 2022 Notes at a weighted average discount to par value of 6.3%.
•In August 2021, we repurchased $22.3 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes at a weighted average discount to par value of 2.8%. Refer to Note 7 - "Borrowings" for details of the 2024 Notes.
•In September 2021, we issued $86.3 million of the 2024 Notes and used the net proceeds, together with approximately $20.2 million of cash on hand, to repurchase an additional $100.3 million of our 2022 Notes.
•In December 2021, we repurchased $8.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2022 Notes at a weighted average premium to par value of 1.0%.
Outstanding Borrowings
Repurchase Agreements
At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings under five of our master repurchase agreements. The following table summarizes certain characteristics of our repurchase agreements at December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Includes repurchase agreement borrowings on securities eliminated upon VIE consolidation.
(2)Repurchase agreement borrowings on loans owned are through trust certificates. The trust certificates are eliminated in consolidation.
At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding repurchase agreement borrowings with the following counterparties:
(1)The counterparty ratings presented above are the long-term issuer credit ratings as rated at December 31, 2021 by S&P.
(2)Includes master repurchase agreements in which the buyer includes Alpine Securitization LTD., a Credit Suisse sponsored asset-backed commercial paper conduit.
(3)Nomura Holdings, Inc., the parent company of Nomura Securities International, Inc., is rated BBB+ by S&P at December 31, 2021.
(4)Represents amount outstanding with two counterparties, which each holds collateral valued less than 5% of our stockholders’ equity as security for our obligations under the applicable repurchase agreements as of December 31, 2021.
The following table presents our average repurchase agreement borrowings, excluding unamortized debt issuance costs, by type of collateral pledged for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Includes repurchase agreement borrowings on securities eliminated upon VIE consolidation.
(2)Amount represents the maximum borrowings at month-end during each of the respective periods.
Repurchase Agreements Financial Metrics
Certain of our financing arrangements provide the counterparty with the right to terminate the agreement and accelerate amounts due under the associated agreement if the we do not maintain certain financial metrics. Although specific to each financing arrangement, typical financial metrics include minimum equity and liquidity requirements, leverage ratios, and performance triggers. In addition, some of the financing arrangements contain cross-default features, whereby default under an agreement with one lender simultaneously causes default under agreements with other lenders. We were in compliance with the terms of such financial tests as of December 31, 2021.
Securitized Debt
Residential Mortgage-Backed Notes
In May 2019, we completed a residential mortgage-backed securitization comprised of a portion of our Residential Whole Loan portfolio. The Arroyo Mortgage Trust 2019-2 ("Arroyo Trust 2019"), a wholly owned subsidiary, issued $919.0 million of mortgage-backed notes and we retained the non-offered securities in the securitization, which include the class B, Class A-IO-S and Class XS certificates. These non-offered securities were eliminated in consolidation. At December 31, 2021,
Residential Whole Loans, with an outstanding principal balance of approximately $358.9 million, serve as collateral for the Arroyo Trust's securitized debt.
The following table summarizes the consolidated Arroyo Trust's issued mortgage-backed notes at December 31, 2021 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
In June 2020, we completed a second residential mortgage-backed securitization. The Arroyo Trust 2020-1 ("Arroyo Trust 2020) issued $341.7 million of mortgage-backed notes and we retained the non-offered securities in the securitization, which include the class B, Class A-IO-S and Class XS certificates. These non-offered securities were eliminated in consolidation. At December 31, 2021, Residential Whole Loans, with an outstanding principal balance of approximately $188.2 million, serve as collateral for the Arroyo Trust 2020's securitized debt.
The following table summarizes the consolidated Arroyo Trust 2020's issued mortgage-backed notes at December 31, 2021 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Notes
We hold a controlling financial variable interest in CSMC USA and were required to consolidate the CMBS VIE. Refer to Note 7 - "Financings" for details. The following table summarizes the consolidated 2014 CSMC USA's commercial mortgage pass-through certificates at December 31, 2021 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
(1) Class X-1 and Class X-2 are interest-only classes with notional balances of $652.1 million and $733.5 million as of December 31, 2021, respectively.
The above table does not reflect the portion of the class F bond held by us because the bond is eliminated in consolidation. Our ownership interest in the class F bond represents a controlling financial interest, which resulted in consolidation of the trust. The class F bond had a fair market value of $11.4 million at December 31, 2021, and our exposure to loss is limited to our ownership interest in this bond.
Convertible Senior Unsecured Notes
2022 Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we had $37.7 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022Notes outstanding. The 2022 Notes mature on October 1, 2022, unless earlier converted, redeemed by the holders pursuant to their terms or repurchased by us , and are not redeemable by us except during the final three months prior to maturity.
2024 Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we had $86.3 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes outstanding. The 2024 notes mature on September 15, 2024, unless earlier converted, redeemed by the holders pursuant to their terms or repurchased by us , and are not redeemable by us except during the final three months prior to maturity.
Recourse and Non-Recourse Financing
We utilize both recourse and non-recourse debt to finance our portfolio. Our recourse debt included our short and long-term repurchase agreement financings and our convertible senior unsecured notes. At December 31, 2021, our total non-recourse financing is comprised of $519.1 million of securitized debt issued in connection with our two Residential Whole Loan securitizations and $1.3 billion of securitized debt from owning a Non-Agency CMBS bond with a fair value of $11.4 million that was deemed a controlling financial variable interest in CSMC USA which required us to consolidate the CMBS VIE.
Hedging Activity
The following tables summarize the hedging activity during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
Capital Markets Activity
The following is a summary of activity for the year ended December 31, 2021:
Stock Repurchase
On December 21, 2021, our Board of Directors reauthorized the repurchase program of up to 3,000,000 shares of our common stock through December 31, 2023. In the fourth quarter of 2021, pursuant to the repurchase plan we acquired 479,808 shares with an average price, including commission, of $2.27 per share, totaling approximately $1.1 million.
However, management's overall goals include growing the Company's equity base to help reduce the Company's expense ratio and expand capital for investment, but from time to time when shares are trading at a significant discount repurchasing shares can generate value for our shareholders. The timing, manner, price and amount of any future repurchases will be determined by the Company in its discretion and will be subject to economic and market conditions, stock price, applicable legal requirements and other factors.
Dividends
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we declared dividends totaling $0.24 per share generating a dividend yield of approximately 11.4% based on the stock closing price of $2.11 on December 31, 2021
Book Value
The following chart reflects our book value per common share basic and diluted shares over five consecutive quarters:
We continue to implement measures to improve our balance sheet by increasing liquidity, reducing leverage, and seek alternative financing arrangements to preserve long-term shareholder value. The decrease in book value to $3.20 at December 31, 2021 when compared to our September 30, 2021 book value of $3.45 was primarily due to a decline in fair value in our investment portfolio coupled with a reduction in net interest income from investment payoffs and accelerated premium amortization associated prepayments in our Residential Whole Loan portfolio.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020
General
Due to the continued uncertainty surrounding the COVID -19 pandemic our results of operations continued to be impacted and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 may not be comparable. The full impact of COVID-19 on our results of operations is still uncertain as it depends on several factors beyond our control including, but not limited to (i) the duration and spread of the virus and its variants of the outbreak, (ii) the availability, acceptance and effectiveness of vaccines, (iii) the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies, (iv) the timing, scope and effectiveness of additional governmental responses to the pandemic, (v) the timing and speed of economic recovery, and (vi) the negative impact on our borrowers, asset values and cost of capital.
In 2021, we continued to make progress towards strengthening our balance sheet and improving liquidity. During the year ended December 31, 2021, through a series of transactions, we reduced the aggregate principal amount of our convertible senior unsecured notes outstanding by $51.1 million and extended the maturity to 2024 for $86.3 million of our convertible senior unsecured debt through the issuance of the 2024 Notes. We also amended and extended two key financing facilities, our Residential Whole Loan Facility and our Non-Agency RMBS and Non-Agency CMBS Facility, resulting in improved advance rates and lowered interest rates. These facilities have limited mark to market provisions (See Note 7 - "Financings" for additional details.). For the year ended December 31, 2021 we did not receive a margin call on either of these facilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated a net loss of $49.9 million or $0.81 per basic and diluted weighted common share, compared to a net loss of $328.3 million or $5.72 per basic and diluted weighted common share for the year ended December 31, 2020. Although the residential credit markets improved in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our commercial real estate investments especially in the retail and hospitality sectors are taking longer to recover, which impacted valuations and was a key driver of the net loss for the period. Our Non-Agency CMBS and Commercial Loan investments declined in fair value by approximately $60.1 million and further losses are possible. However, during the third quarter of 2021, certain of our commercial investments benefited from improvements in the commercial mortgage markets resulting in $157.2 million in payoffs from three commercial loans, a Non-Agency CMBS bond and a risk retention bond. With our new focus of capital allocation in residential real estate-related investments, in the second half of 2021, we deployed capital
to acquire $417.8 million in Non-QM loans and in December 2021, we strategically sold three Non-Agency CMBS investments for net proceeds of $27.5 million. During the transition of the portfolio over the next 12 to 18 months we may experience negative fluctuations in earnings.
The following tables set forth certain information regarding our net interest income on our investment portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Average cost of funds does not include the interest expense related to our derivatives. In accordance with GAAP, such costs are included in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Since we do not apply hedge accounting, our net interest margin is this table does not reflect the benefit / cost of our interest rate swaps. See Non-GAAP Financial Measure section for net investment income table that includes the benefit / cost from our interest rate swaps.
Interest Income
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we earned interest income on our investments of approximately $164.1 million and $178.0 million, respectively. The decrease of approximately $14.0 million was mainly due to a smaller investment portfolio from 2021 payoffs of $406.7 million and $157.2 million in our Residential Whole Loans and commercial investments, respectively, and our $90.0 million commercial mezzanine loan becoming non-performing in May 2021. The consolidation of CSMC USA as of August 1, 2020 and the 2021 acquisition, in the latter part of 2021, of $427.8 million, in Non-QM loans partially offset the decline in interest income.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, mainly a result of the consolidation of CSMC USA, which increased interest expense by $48.2 million. However, interest expense on our recourse leverage declined by $24.2 million from lower average borrowings attributable to a smaller investment portfolio, improved terms on our amended residential and securities financing facilities, and the repurchases of our 2022 Notes. Also, in 2021 interest expense declined by $17.9 million related to our securitized debt from the payoff of RETL 2019 Trust and paydown in our residential mortgage-backed debt (Arroyo Trust 2019 and Arroyo Trust 2020).
Other income (loss), net
Realized gain (loss), net
Realized gain (loss) represents the net gain (loss) on sales or settlements from our investment portfolio and debt. In December 2021, as part of our new investment focus on residential real estate-related investments we strategically sold three Non-Agency CMBS investments for net proceeds of $27.5 million, realizing a loss of $1.1 million. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, to improve liquidity, reduce our repurchase agreement borrowing and satisfy our margin calls, we sold $2.4 billion in investments mainly in March and April 2020. These sales generated $84.3 million in net realized gains.
The following table presents the realized gains (losses) for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Realized gains/losses recognized on the final settlement of the loans.
(2)Realized gains/losses recognized on the transfer of Residential Bridge Loans to REO. Proceeds represent the fair value less estimated selling costs of the real estate on the date of transfer.
(3)Realized gains/losses recognized on the extinguishment of the 2022 Notes. See Note 7 - Financings for details.
(4)Realized losses of $8.2 million were recognized on the permanent write down of Non-Agency CMBS investments for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Unrealized gain (loss), net
Our investments, and securitized debt, for which we have elected the fair value option are recorded at fair value with the periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings. The change in unrealized gain (loss) is directly attributable to changes in market pricing on the underlying investments and securitized debt during the period.
We recognized an unrealized loss of $46.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 , mainly driven by the non-performing CRE 3 junior mezzanine loan and our Non-Agency CMBS investments. During the the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 the fair value of the commercial mezzanine loan declined significantly, and we recognized an unrealized loss of $51.2 million. Generally, we saw a recovery in asset prices across our residential investments.
We recognized an unrealized loss of $221.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, driven by the extreme lack of liquidity in mortgage markets combined with forced selling which led to swift and dramatic price declines in the first quarter of 2020. While we saw some price recovery of certain investments in the second quarter of 2020, the rally was not sufficient to significantly reduce the substantial unrealized loss from the dramatic price declines in the first quarter of 2020.
The following table presents the net unrealized gains (losses) we recorded on our investments and securitized debt (dollars in thousands):
Gain (loss) on derivatives, net
As of December 31, 2021, we had interest rate swaps with a notional amount of $22.0 million. Our hedging strategy is designed to mitigate our exposure to interest rate volatility.
In March 2020, we effectively terminated all of our fixed-pay interest rate swaps and variable-pay interest rate swaps to reduce hedging costs and associated margin volatility. The effects of the termination is reflected in the table below for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the components of gain (loss) on derivatives for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Contractual interest income (expense), net on derivative instruments includes interest settlement paid or received.
Other, net
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, "Other, net" consisted of income of $490 thousand and income of $339 thousand, respectively. The balance is mainly comprised of interest on cash balances, miscellaneous net interest income (expense) on cash collateral for our repurchase agreements and derivatives and miscellaneous fees collected on residential mortgage loans.
Expenses
Management Fee Expense
We incurred management fee expense of approximately $5.9 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement, our Manager is paid a management fee equal to 1.5% per annum of our stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement), calculated and payable (in cash) quarterly in arrears. The increase was mainly attributable to our Manager's waiver of the management fee from March 2020 to May 2020 to help address the impact of COVID-19 and the disruption in the mortgage markets. Future waivers are at the Manager's discretion.
The management fees, expense reimbursements and the relationship between our Manager and us are discussed further in Note 10, “Related Party Transactions” to the consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financing Fee
In the second quarter of 2020, in order to manage the severe market conditions and the resulting large margin demands from lenders and pressure on our liquidity, we entered into a longer term financing arrangement for our Residential Whole Loans, as we sought to reduce our exposure to short-term financings with daily mark to market exposure. Under this agreement, we were required to pay the counterparty a 30% premium recapture fee of all realized value on any Residential Whole Loans above such counterparty’s amortized basis upon the securitization or sale.
On June 29, 2020, we securitized approximately $355.8 million of the Residential Whole Loans and paid down the facility by approximately $339.4 million (see "Securitized Debt" below for additional details). As noted above, as part of the financing arrangements, we agreed to pay the lender a fee of 30% of all realized value on the Residential Whole Loans above the counterparty's amortized basis upon securitization or sale. As a result of refinancing the Residential Whole Loans through a securitization, we accrued a premium recapture fee of approximately $20.5 million, which was payable at the maturity of the facility. However, in connection with an amendment to this facility effective October 6, 2020, we paid $12.0 million of the fee with the balance of $8.5 million paid on November 5, 2021 when the facility was further amended and extended to November 2022. The amendment also eliminated the premium recapture fee for assets financed under the amended facility.
Other Operating Expenses
We incurred other operating expenses of approximately $4.7 million and $2.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Other operating cost is comprised of derivative transaction costs, custody, acquisition transaction costs and asset management/loan servicing fees. The increase was primarily a result of transaction, real estate and insurance costs recorded in the consolidated SPE that holds the foreclosed hotel REO. The increase was partially offset by an overall decrease in derivative transaction costs, acquisition transaction costs and asset management/loan servicing fees.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $10.0 million and $11.0 million, respectively. The decrease was mainly attributable to a decrease in the cost of our director and officer insurance.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
General
Our results of operations were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which created unprecedented market disruption and dislocation. During the first quarter of 2020, the uncertainty surrounding the pandemic created an extreme lack of liquidity in mortgage markets and when combined with forced selling led to swift and dramatic price declines. The significant decline in value of our investment portfolio resulted in substantial margin calls from our repurchase agreement counterparties. In order to satisfy the margin calls, we sold a significant portion of our investments. We also terminated our interest rate hedges because they were ineffective in the low interest rate environment and it further reduced margin call volatility. During the second half of 2020, our portfolio experienced improved valuations and earnings, and we did not have significant asset sales or margin calls during the quarter.
Due to the significant amount of investment sales, resulting from the market volatility created by the COVID-19 pandemic, our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are not comparable.
During the second half of 2020, we continued to make progress towards strengthening our balance sheet, improving liquidity, shareholders equity and the earnings power of the portfolio. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated a net loss of $328.3 million or $5.72 per basic and diluted weighted common share, compared to net income of $70.7 million or $1.37 per basic and diluted weighted common share for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our results of operations, for the second half of 2020, was positively impacted by improved valuations on our investment portfolio, specifically our Residential Whole Loan Investments. Our credit sensitive portfolio continued to perform in line with our expectations.
The following tables set forth certain information regarding our net interest income on our investment portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Average cost of funds does not include the interest expense related to our derivatives. In accordance with GAAP, such costs are included in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Since we do not apply hedge accounting, our net interest margin is this table does not reflect the benefit / cost of our interest rate swaps. See Non-GAAP Financial Measure section for net investment income table that includes the benefit / cost from our interest rate swaps.
Interest Income
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we earned interest income on our investments of approximately $178.0 million and $217.3 million, respectively. The decrease in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was driven by the sales of a significant portion of our investment portfolio to meet margin calls. We sold $2.0 billion of investments, mainly in March and April 2020. The majority of the impact of these sales were reflected in interest income in starting in the second of 2020. Our portfolio experienced improved valuations and we did not have significant asset sales in the second half of the year.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased from $150.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $132.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was a result of the significant reduction in leverage associated with the sale of $2.4 billion of investments, mainly in March and April 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, we entered into two new financing facilities to limit our exposure to short-term mark to market financings. Also, we completed a securitization of approximately $355.8 million of our Residential Whole Loans, reducing our recourse leverage by $339.4 million or 46.0%.
Other income (loss)
Realized gain (loss) on investments, net
Realized gain (loss) on investments represents the net gain (loss) on sales or settlements from our investment portfolio. To improve liquidity, reduce our repurchase agreement borrowing and satisfy our margin calls, we sold $2.4 billion in investments mainly in March and April 2020. These sales generated $80.6 million in net realized gains. Our portfolio experienced improved valuations and we did not have significant asset sales during the third quarter.
The following table presents the sales and realized gains (loss) of our investments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Realized gains/losses recognized on the final settlement of the loans.
(2)Realized gains/losses recognized on the transfer of Residential Bridge Loans to REO. Proceeds represent the fair value less estimated selling costs of the real estate on the date of transfer.
Unrealized gain (loss), net
Our investments, and securitized debt, for which we have elected the fair value option are recorded at fair value with the periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings. The change in unrealized gain (loss) is directly attributable to changes in market pricing on the underlying investments and securitized debt during the period. The extreme lack of liquidity in mortgage markets combined with forced selling led to swift and dramatic price declines in the first quarter of 2020. While we did not see price recovery on our investments in the second, third, and fourth quarters, there was still a lot of uncertainty surrounding the opening and recovery of the economy. Therefore, the recovery experienced was not sufficient to significantly reduce the substantial unrealized loss from the dramatic price declines.
The following table presents the net unrealized gains (losses) we recorded on our investment and securitized debt (dollars in thousands):
Gain (loss) on derivatives, net
In March 2020, we effectively terminated all of our fixed-pay interest rate swaps and variable-pay interest rate swaps to reduce hedging costs and associated margin volatility. The effects of the terminations are reflected in the table below for the December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the components of gain (loss) on derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Contractual interest income (expense), net on derivative instruments includes interest settlement paid or received.
Other, net
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, "Other, net" consisted of income of $339 thousand and income of $2.2 million, respectively. The balance is mainly comprised of interest on cash balances, miscellaneous net interest income (expense) on cash collateral for our repurchase agreements and derivatives and miscellaneous fees collected on residential mortgage loans.
Expenses
Management Fee Expense
We incurred management fee expense of approximately $4.5 million and $7.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement, our Manager is paid a management fee equal to 1.5% per annum of our stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement), calculated and payable (in cash) quarterly in arrears. The decrease was mainly attributable to our Manager's waiver of the management fee from March 2020 to May 2020 to help address the impact of COVID-19 and the disruption in the mortgage markets. Future waivers, if any, are at the Manager's discretion. Also, the termination of our interest rate swaps in March 2020 resulted in realized losses that reduced stockholders' equity that is used to calculate the management fee.
The management fees, expense reimbursements and the relationship between our Manager and us are discussed further in Note 10, “Related Party Transactions”
Financing Fee
In the second quarter of 2020 in order to manage the severe market conditions and the resulting large margin demands from lenders and pressure on our liquidity, we entered into a longer term financing arrangement for our Residential Whole Loans, as we sought to reduce our exposure to short-term financings with daily mark to market exposure. Under this agreement,
we were required to pay the counterparty a 30% premium recapture fee of all realized value on any Residential Whole Loans above such counterparty’s amortized basis upon the securitization or sale.
On June 29, 2020, we securitized approximately $355.8 million of the Residential Whole Loans and paid down the facility by approximately $339.4 million (see "Securitized Debt" below for additional details). As noted above, as part of the financing arrangements, we agreed to pay the lender a fee of 30% of all realized value on the Residential Whole Loans above the counterparty's amortized basis upon securitization or sale. As a result of refinancing the Residential Whole Loans through a securitization, we accrued a premium recapture fee of approximately $20.5 million, which was payable at the maturity of the facility. However, in connection with an amendment to this facility effective October 6, 2020, we paid $12.0 million of the fee with the balance of $8.5 million due on the maturity of the amended facility on November 5, 2021. The amendment also eliminated the premium recapture fee for assets financed under the amended facility.
Other Operating Expenses
We incurred other operating expenses of approximately $2.9 million and $5.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Other operating cost is comprised of derivative transaction costs, custody, and asset management/loan servicing fees. The decrease was primarily a result of a smaller bridge loan portfolio, which were acquired servicing released, thereby decreasing the associated third party asset management/loan servicing fees. In addition we incurred lower acquisition transaction costs, due to no investment acquisitions in the second, third and fourth quarters and lower derivative commissions and fees due to no new derivative transactions since we terminated our interest rate swaps in March 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $11.0 million and $8.1 million, respectively. The increase was mainly attributable to an increase in the cost of our director and officer insurance and additional legal fees incurred.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that our non-GAAP measures (described below), when considered with GAAP, provide supplemental information useful to investors in evaluating the results of our operations. Our presentations of such non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies, who may use different calculations. As a result, such non-GAAP measures should not be considered as substitutes for our GAAP net income, as measures of our financial performance or any measure of our liquidity under GAAP.
Distributable Earnings (formerly referred to as Core Earnings) is a Non-GAAP financial measure that is used by us to approximate cash yield or income associated with our portfolio and is defined as GAAP net income (loss) as adjusted, excluding: (i) net realized gain (loss) on investments and termination of derivative contracts; (ii) net unrealized gain (loss) on investments and debt; (iii) net unrealized gain (loss) resulting from mark-to-market adjustments on derivative contracts; (iv) other than temporary impairment; (v) provision for income taxes; (vi) non-cash stock-based compensation expense; (vii) non-cash amortization of the convertible senior unsecured notes discount; (viii) one-time charges such as acquisition costs and impairment on loans and (ix) one-time events pursuant to changes in GAAP and certain other non-cash charges after discussions between us, our Manager and our independent directors and after approval by a majority of our independent directors.
We utilize Distributable Earnings as a key metric to evaluate the effective yield of the portfolio. Distributable Earnings allows us to reflect the net investment income of our portfolio as adjusted to reflect the net interest rate swap interest expense. Distributable Earnings allows us to isolate the interest expense associated with our interest rate swaps in order to monitor and project our borrowing costs and interest rate spread. It is one metric of several used in determining the appropriate distributions to our shareholders.
Due to the significant amount of investment sales, resulting from the market volatility created by the COVID-19 pandemic, our Distributable Earnings for the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are not comparable.
The table below reconciles Net Income to Distributable Earnings for the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Alternatively, our Distributable Earnings can also be derived as presented in the table below by starting with Adjusted net interest income, which includes interest income on Interest-Only Strips accounted for as derivatives and other derivatives, and net interest expense incurred on interest rate swaps and foreign currency swaps and forwards (a Non-GAAP financial measure) subtracting Total expenses, adding Non-cash stock based compensation, adding one-time transaction costs, adding amortization of discount on convertible senior notes, and adding interest income on cash balances and other income (loss), net:
Reconciliation of GAAP Book Value to Non-GAAP Economic Book Value
"Economic Book Value" is a non-GAAP financial measure of our financial position on an unconsolidated basis. We own certain securities that represent a controlling variable interest, which under GAAP requires consolidation; however, our economic exposure to these variable interests is limited to the fair value of the individual investments. Economic book value is calculated by taking the GAAP Book Value and 1) adding the fair value of the retained interest or acquired security of the VIEs held by us and 2) removing the asset and liabilities associated with each of consolidated trusts (CSMC USA, Arroyo 2019-2 and Arroyo 2020-1). Management considers that Economic Book Value provides investors with a useful supplemental measure to evaluate our financial position as it reflects the actual financial interest of these investments irrespective of the variable interest consolidation model applied for GAAP reporting purposes. Economic Book Value does not represent and should not be considered as a substitute for Stockholders' Equity, as determined in accordance with GAAP, and our calculation of this measure may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The table below is a reconciliation of the GAAP Book Value to Non-GAAP Economic Book Value (dollars in thousands - except per share data):
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin
The following tables set forth certain information regarding our Non-GAAP net investment income and net interest margin which includes interest income on Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips classified as derivatives and excludes the interest expense for third-party consolidated VIEs for the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Includes Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips accounted for as derivatives.
(2)Refer to below table for components of interest income.
(3)Includes the net amount paid, including accrued amounts and premium amortization for MAC interest rate swaps during the periods included in gain/loss on derivative instruments for GAAP.
(4)Includes only the third-party sponsored securitized debt from RETL Trust, CMSC Trust, MRCD Trust and CMSC USA.
The following table reconciles total interest income to adjusted interest income, which includes interest income on Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips classified as derivatives (Non-GAAP financial measure) for the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
(1)Reported in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Effective Cost of Funds includes the net interest component related to our interest rate swaps, as well as the impact of our foreign currency swaps and forwards. While we have not elected hedge accounting for these instruments, such derivative instruments are viewed by us as an economic hedge against increases in future market interest rates on our liabilities and changes in foreign currency exchange rates on our assets and liabilities and are characterized as hedges for purposes of satisfying the REIT requirements and therefore the Effective Cost of Funds reflects interest expense adjusted to include the realized gain/loss (i.e., the interest income/expense component) for all of our interest rate swaps and the impact of our foreign currency swaps and forwards.
The following table reconciles the Effective Cost of Funds (Non-GAAP financial measure) with interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, fund and maintain our assets and operations, make distributions to our stockholders, and other general business needs. To maintain our REIT qualifications under the Internal Revenue Code, we must distribute annually at least 90% of our taxable income, excluding capital gains and, such distributions requirements limit our ability to retain earnings and increase capital for operations. Our principal sources of funds generally consist of borrowings under repurchase agreements, Residential Whole Loan securitizations , payments of principal and interest we receive on our investment portfolio, cash generated from investment sales and, to the extent such transactions are entered into, proceeds from capital market and unsecured convertible note transactions.
We will continue to closely monitor developments related to COVID-19 as they relate to our liquidity position and financial obligations. We currently believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources available, for at least the next 12 months, to fund our operations, meet our financial obligations, purchase our target asset, and make dividend payments to maintain our REIT qualifications. As of December 31, 2021, we had access to various sources of liquidity, including $40.2 million of cash and cash equivalents, unencumbered investments, and unused borrowing capacity in certain borrowing facilities since the amount borrowed is less than the maximum advance rate.
Sources of Liquidity
Our primary sources of liquidity are as follows:
Cash Generated from Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $2.1 million. This was primarily attributable to the net interest income on our investments, less operating expenses, and general and administrative expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was approximately $147.6 million. This was primarily attributable to the net loss on our investments net of adjustments pertaining to the amortization/accretion of premiums and discounts and other non-cash items less operating expenses, general and administrative expenses and margin settlements on our interest rate swaps. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was by approximately $52.2 million. This was primarily attributable to the net income we earned on our investments net of adjustments pertaining to the amortization/accretion of premiums and discounts and other non-cash items less operating expenses, general and administrative expenses and margin settlements on our interest rate swaps.
Cash Provided by and Used in Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $512.7 million. The net cash provided by investing activity was primarily attributable to proceeds from payoffs in our commercial and
residential whole loans and principal payments on our investments, which was partially offset by our investment acquisitions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $2.7 billion. This was primarily attributable to proceeds from sales and receipts of principal payments on our investments, which were partially offset by our investment acquisitions. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $478.5 million. This was primarily attributable to our investment acquisitions, including a consolidated CMBS VIE investment, which was partially offset by proceeds from sales and receipts of principal payments on our investments.
Cash Provided by and Used in Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was approximately $582.0 million. This was primarily attributable to extinguishment of $137.3 million principal amount of the 2022 Notes, the repayments on securitized debt, and distribution of escrows related to consolidated VIEs and the payment of dividends on our common stock The proceeds from the issuance of the 2024 Notes partially offset the net cash used in financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activity was approximately $2.5 billion. This was primarily attributable to net repayments of our repurchase agreement borrowings. Our net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by dividends paid on our common stock. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activity was approximately $537.2 million. This was primarily attributable to net proceeds from financings during the year and a secondary public offering. Our net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by dividends paid on our common stock.
Financing Facilities
Repurchase Agreements
As of December 31, 2021, we had borrowings under five of our master repurchase agreements of approximately $617.2 million. The following table presents our repurchase agreement borrowings, by type of collateral pledged, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, and the respective effective cost of funds (Non-GAAP financial measure) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" (dollars in thousands):
(1)The effective cost of funds for the period presented is calculated on an annualized basis and includes interest expense for the period and net periodic interest payments on interest rate swaps, net of premium amortization on MAC swaps, of approximately $109 thousand received and $1.1 million paid for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. While interest rate swaps are not accounted for using hedge accounting, such instruments are viewed by us as an economic hedge against increases in interest rates on our liabilities and are treated as hedges for purposes of satisfying the REIT requirements. See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
(2)Includes repurchase agreement borrowings on securities eliminated upon VIE consolidation.
(3)Repurchase agreement borrowings collateralized by Whole Loans, Bridge Loans and securitized commercial loans owned through trust certificates. The trust certificates are eliminated upon consolidation.
(4)The pledged amount relates to our non-controlling membership interest in our wholly owned subsidiary, WMC RETL LLC, which was financed under a repurchase agreement. The membership interest is eliminated in consolidation.
In connection with our repurchase agreement financings and interest rate swaps, we may receive margin calls or make a margin call from our counterparties. Our ability to meet future margin calls will be affected by our ability to use cash, draw on the unused capacity existing on financing facilities or obtain financing from unpledged collateral, the amount of which can vary based on the market value of such collateral. Our cash position fluctuates based on the timing of our operating, investing, and financing activities and is managed based on our anticipated cash needs. In 2021, we met our margin calls, and the cash collateral related to margin calls held by counterparties on December 31, 2021, was approximately $3.2 million.
At-The-Market Program
In March 2017, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with JMP Securities LLC, or "JMP", which was amended on June 5, 2020, under which we may offer and sell up to $100.0 million shares of common stock in an At-The-Market equity offering from time to time through JMP.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 are as follows (dollars in thousands):
(1)The table above does not include amounts due under the Management Agreement (as defined herein) with our Manager, as those obligations do not have fixed and determinable payments.
(2)The securitized debt is non-recourse to us and can only be settled with the loans that serve as collateral. The collateral for the securitized debt has a principal balance of $1.9 billion. Assumes entire outstanding principal balance at December 31, 2021 is paid at maturity.
Management Agreement
On May 9, 2012, we entered into a management agreement (the "Management Agreement") with our Manager which describes the services to be provided by our Manager and compensation for such services. Our Manager is responsible for managing our operations, including: (i) performing all of our day-to-day functions; (ii) determining investment criteria in conjunction with our Board of Directors; (iii) sourcing, analyzing and executing investments, asset sales and financings; (iv) performing asset management duties; and (v) performing financial and accounting management, subject to the direction and oversight of our Board of Directors. Pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement, our Manager is paid a management fee equal to 1.50% per annum of our stockholders' equity, (as defined in the Management Agreement), calculated and payable (in cash) quarterly in arrears. The Manager waived the management fee for March 2020 through May 2020 because of the unprecedented market disruption and dislocation across fixed income markets surrounding the uncertainty related to COVID-19
pandemic. In December 2021, the Manager agreed to voluntarily waive 25% of its management fee solely for the duration of calendar year 2022 in order to support the earnings potential of the Company and its transition to a residential focused investment portfolio. Future waivers, if any, are at the Manager's discretion. Refer to Note 10 - "Related Party Transactions" to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 included in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with any entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured investment vehicles, or special purpose or variable interest entities, established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Further, other than guaranteeing certain obligations of our wholly-owned taxable REIT subsidiary or TRS and the obligations of our wholly-owned subsidiary, WMC CRE LLC, we have not guaranteed any obligations of any entities or entered into any commitment to provide additional funding to any such entities.
Dividends
To maintain our qualification as a REIT, U.S. federal income tax law generally requires that we distribute at least 90% of our REIT taxable income annually, determined without regard to the deduction for dividends paid and excluding net capital gains. We must pay tax at regular corporate rates to the extent that we annually distribute less than 100% of our taxable income.
We evaluate each quarter to determine our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders based on our net taxable income if and to the extent authorized by our Board of Directors. Before we pay any dividend, whether for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, we must first meet both our operating requirements and debt service payments. If our cash available for distribution is less than our net taxable income, we could be required to sell assets or borrow funds to make cash distributions or we may make a portion of the required distribution in the form of a taxable stock distribution.