ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) describes the matters that we consider to be important to understanding the results of our operations for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2021, and our capital resources and liquidity as of December 31, 2021. Our discussion begins with a COVID-19 update as well as our assessment of the condition of the North American trailer industry along with a summary of the actions we have taken to strengthen the Company. We then analyze the results of our operations for the last two years, including the trends in the overall business and our operating segments, followed by a discussion of our cash flows and liquidity, capital markets events and transactions, our debt obligations, and our contractual commitments. We also provide a review of the critical accounting judgments and estimates that we have made that we believe are most important to an understanding of our MD&A and our consolidated financial statements. We conclude our MD&A with information on recent accounting pronouncements that we adopted during the year, if any, as well as those not yet adopted that may have an impact on our financial accounting practices, if any.
We have historically managed our business in three segments: Commercial Trailer Products (“CTP”), Diversified Products (“DPG”), and Final Mile Products (“FMP”). We began our One Wabash organizational transformation during the first quarter of 2020 to better align our resources and processes on serving the customer and enable long-term growth. In connection with the substantial completion of the One Wabash strategic initiatives during the third quarter of 2021, including organizational and structural changes as well as portfolio rationalization, beginning in September 2021 we realigned our operating and reportable segments based on how the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) manages the business, allocates resources, makes operating decisions, and evaluates operating performance. Based on this realignment, we established two operating and reportable segments: Transportation Solutions (“TS”) and Parts & Services (“P&S”), and eliminated the historical CTP, DPG, and FMP segments.
While we have historically generated a small portion of our revenue and profitability from streams like aftermarket parts, repair and maintenance services, and upfitting and equipment services, historically these businesses existed scattered throughout the Company’s siloed organization structure. During the One Wabash transformation that culminated with segment realignment, we brought these previously siloed businesses together to leverage our strengths and better reach the customer, which included shifting significant resources and talent to lead these parts and services businesses. We continue to formulate aggressive plans that now underpin growth initiatives under the One Wabash approach.
Additional information related to the composition of our segments is included below.
▪Transportation Solutions: The TS segment comprises the design and manufacturing operations for the Company’s transportation-related equipment and products. This includes dry and refrigerated van trailers, platform trailers, and the Company’s wood flooring production facility, all of which were previously reported in the CTP segment. The Company’s EcoNex™ products that were historically included in both the CTP and FMP segments are now reported in the TS segment. In addition, the TS segment includes tank trailers and truck-mounted tanks that were historically reported in the DPG segment. Finally, truck-mounted dry and refrigerated bodies and service and stake bodies that were previously reported in the FMP segment are also in the TS segment.
▪Parts & Services: The P&S segment is comprised of each of the Company’s historical segments’ parts and services businesses as well as the upfitting component of our truck bodies business. In addition, the Company’s Composites business, which focuses on the use of DuraPlate® composite panels beyond the semi-trailer market, is also part of the P&S segment (previously reported in the DPG segment). Finally, the P&S segment includes the Company’s Engineered Products business (previously reported in the DPG segment), including stainless-steel storage tanks and silos, mixers, and processors for a variety of end markets. Growing and expanding the parts and services businesses is a key strategic initiative for the Company moving forward.
Refer to Note 19 for additional discussion and information regarding segments and to Note 5 for the impact thereof to the evaluation of recorded goodwill balances. Also, see the “Products” section in Part I, Item 1, “Business”, of this Annual Report on 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 for details related to each segment’s product offerings.
For discussion of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, see Part II, Item 7,-”Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) related to COVID-19. This pandemic created significant uncertainties and disruptions in the global economy. We are closely monitoring the pandemic and remain focused on the health and safety of our employees, as well as the health of our business. In addition, we track, evaluate, and manage our operating plans in light of the most recent developments including the changes to best practice guidelines by health experts, the availability of vaccines, the drop in new cases in the United States, and changing local, state, and federal requirements. Further, we remain focused on maintaining business continuity and ensuring our facilities remain operational where safe and appropriate to do so. We are also monitoring and preparing for potential vaccine and testing mandates that may be announced or implemented in jurisdictions in which our businesses operate.
The safety and well-being of our employees have been, and will remain, our highest priorities. In early March 2020, we assembled a pandemic response team to manage the changes necessary to adapt to the rapidly-changing environment. This response team continues to meet with our senior leadership team to provide updates and continuously monitor the most recent developments. Actions we have taken to protect our employees include, but are not limited to:
▪We implemented pandemic continuity plans.
▪We continue to evaluate best-practice safety guidelines by recognized health experts.
▪We are informing our employees about the availability of vaccines and encouraging them to get vaccinated.
▪We are encouraging employees with symptoms to stay home.
As the pandemic evolves along with the guidance from federal, state and local public health authorities, we may take additional actions based on their requirements and recommendations.
We also worked with local food banks, schools, healthcare facilities, and other nonprofit organizations to support agencies and families in need.
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to cause supply chain, labor, and raw material constraints that impact global markets. As a result, we have experienced inflation across our supply chain, increased freight and logistic costs, and volatility in connection with labor shortages. While the global market downturn and overall impacts on our operations are expected to be temporary, the duration of the impacts cannot be estimated at this time. Should the disruptions continue for an extended period of time or worsen, the impact on our production, supply chain, demand for our products, and overall business could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
Refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” for additional information regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company.
Executive Summary
The most recent estimates from industry forecasters ACT Research Co. (“ACT”) and FTR Associates (“FTR”) indicate total United States trailer production levels for 2021 of approximately 266,000 and 265,000, respectively, which represent increases of approximately 29% and 26%, respectively, from 2020 production levels. We enter 2022 with continued uncertainty of the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly around supply chain disruptions and labor shortages. However, the outlook for the overall trailer market is strong, and we believe our backlog of orders provides a solid foundation as we enter 2022. Current estimates from ACT and FTR for 2022 United States trailer production are 298,000 and 315,000, respectively, representing increases from 2021 of approximately 12% and 19%, respectively. These increases are generally in-line with our expectations as trailer manufacturers prepare to ramp-up production for strong 2022 demand, and we believe that these estimates for production will remain above replacement demand over the next several years.
In addition, ACT is forecasting annual new trailer production levels for 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 of approximately 332,000, 309,000, 295,000, and 286,000, respectively. While these estimates are more historically consistent production levels in the trailer industry, industry forecasters note that certain issues, such as supply chain disruptions and staffing challenges, could impact these estimates. We believe we are well positioned to capitalize on strong demand in 2022.
Despite the continued uncertainty of the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as supply chain disruptions and labor shortages, we believe we have maintained a solid position from a liquidity perspective over the last two years. While we are focused in the near-term on executing on increased demand in 2022, we also continue to work on strategic initiatives to profitably grow the Company in the long-term. This includes our plans to add 20% more dry van manufacturing capacity beginning in 2023, which will be achieved by ramping down traditional refrigerated trailer capacity and converting the floor space to create additional dry van production. These plans remain on track, and allow us to go-to-market with a portfolio-based selling approach that leverages the breadth of our products. In addition, our near-term plan to scale our EcoNexTM technology within refrigerated vans, truck bodies, and other transportation and logistics related products also remains on track. We believe that continuing to bring new technologies to market combined with our focus on building out adjacent revenue opportunities will provide us with opportunities for growth.
The Company’s operating performance throughout 2021 highlights the success of our adaptability, balanced growth, and diversification initiatives, which are driven by our long-term strategic plan to transform the Company into an innovation leader of engineered solutions for the transportation, logistics, and distribution industries that help customers move goods from the first to final mile. We will also continue to maintain our focus and expertise in lean and six sigma optimization initiatives to support a higher growth and margin profile as One Wabash. Operating income in 2021 totaled $33.5 million and operating margin was 1.9%, which are increases from 2020 driven in part by higher sales and stronger demand for our products. Additional discussion related to financial results are included in the “Results of Operations” section below.
In addition to our commitment to sustain profitable growth within each of our existing reporting segments, our long-term strategic initiatives include a focus on diversification efforts, both organic and strategic, to continue to transform Wabash into a lean, innovation leader of engineered solutions with a higher growth and margin profile and successfully deliver a greater value to our shareholders. Our strategy is centered around our ability to scale core competencies by growing in and around core markets with known customers. Key strategic initiatives include, but are not limited to, cold chain, e-commerce and logistics, and parts and services. Our ability to generate solid margins and cash flows and a healthy balance sheet should position the Company with ample resources to (1) fund our internal capital needs to support both organic growth and productivity improvements, (2) optimize our debt leverage ratios, (3) return capital to shareholders, and (4) selectively pursue strategic acquisitions. We continue our internal effort to strategically identify potential acquisition targets that we believe can create shareholder value and accelerate our growth and diversification efforts, while leveraging our strong competencies in manufacturing execution, sourcing and innovative engineering leadership to assure strong value creation. Organically, our focus is on profitably growing and diversifying our operations through leveraging our existing assets, capabilities, and technology into higher margin products and markets and thereby providing value-added customer solutions.
Throughout 2021, we demonstrated our commitment to be responsible stewards of the business by maintaining a balanced approach to capital allocation. Even with continued uncertainty of the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, our operational performance, healthy backlog and industry outlook, and financial position provided us the opportunity to take specific actions as part of the ongoing commitment to prudently manage the overall financial risks of the Company, returning capital to our shareholders, and deleveraging our balance sheet. These actions included repurchasing $65.4 million of common stock under the share repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors and paying dividends of $16.4 million. In addition, as further described in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below, in October, 2021 we closed on an offering of $400 million in aggregate principal amount of unsecured Senior Notes due 2028 (the “New Senior Notes”). We used the net proceeds of the New Senior Notes and a portion of the $50 million draw from the increased capacity under our Revolving Credit Agreement to fund the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025 and to repay in full the $108.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. Prior to the October, 2021 activity described above, during the second quarter of 2021, we made principal payments totaling $30.0 million under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. Collectively, these actions demonstrate our confidence in the financial outlook of the Company and our ability to generate cash flow, both near and long term, and reinforce our overall commitment to deliver shareholder value while maintaining the flexibility to continue to execute our strategic plan for profitable growth and diversification.
In addition to overall industry risks, there are downside risks relating to issues with both the domestic and global economies, including the housing, energy and construction-related markets in the U.S. Other potential risks as we proceed into 2022 primarily relate to our ability to effectively manage our manufacturing operations, including ongoing labor shortages, disruption of our supply chain, and our overall business with the expected increase in production to meet demand. In addition, the cost of raw materials, commodities, and components are also potential risks as we enter 2022 with increased demand. Significant increases in the cost of certain commodities, raw materials or components have had, and may continue to have, an adverse effect on our results of operations. As has been our practice, we will endeavor to pass raw material and component price increases to our customers in addition to continuing our cost management and hedging activities in an effort to minimize the risk that changes in material costs could have on our operating results. In addition, we rely on a limited number of suppliers for certain key components and raw materials in the manufacturing of our products, including tires, landing gear, axles, suspensions, aluminum extrusions, chassis and specialty steel coil. At the current and expected demand levels, there may be additional or increased shortages of supplies of raw materials or components which would have an adverse impact on our ability to meet demand for our products. Despite these risks, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize on the expected strong overall demand levels while maintaining or growing margins through improvements in product pricing as well as productivity and other operational excellence initiatives.
As we enter 2022, we will continue to adjust to changes in the current environment, preserve the strength of our balance sheet, prioritize the safety of our employees, and ensure the liquidity and financial well-being of the Company. We believe we remain well-positioned for both near-term and long-term success in the trailer industry because: (1) our core customers are among the major participants in the trucking industry; (2) our technology and innovation provides value-added solutions for our customers by reducing trailer operating costs, improving revenue opportunities, and solving unique transportation problems; (3) our Wabash Management System (“WMS”) principles and processes and enterprise-wide lean efforts drive focus on the interconnected processes that are critical for success across our business; (4) our significant brand recognition, including our January 2022 rebranding as Wabash®, presence throughout North America, and the utilization of our extensive dealer network to market and sell our products; and (5) our One Wabash approach to create a consistent, superior experience for all customers who seek our solutions in the transportation, logistics, and distribution markets. By continuing to be an innovation leader in the transportation, logistics, and distribution industries we expect to leverage our existing assets and capabilities into higher margin products and markets by delivering value-added customer solutions.
Operating Performance
We generally measure our operating performance in five key areas - Safety/Morale, Quality, Delivery, Cost Reduction, and Environment. We maintain a continuous improvement mindset in each of these key performance areas.
Safety/Morale. The safety of our employees is our number one priority. We demonstrate this core value by working on innovations to protect the people who operate our equipment and partnering with others to promote higher standards in transportation and manufacturing. We continually focus on reducing the severity and frequency of workplace injuries to create a safe environment for our employees and minimize workers compensation costs. We believe that our improved environmental, health and safety management translates into higher labor productivity and lower costs as a result of less time away from work and improved system management. See the “Human Capital Resources and Management” section in Part I, Item 1, "Business" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional detail on our commitment to safety and human capital.
Quality. Our commitment to quality and safety is backed by a robust concern reporting system and associated processes. Any Wabash National employee can report a potential safety-related concern that could cause unreasonable risk of harm to our customers. Potential or reported safety concerns are routed to a cross-functional Product Safety Team that includes members from Quality, Warranty, Engineering, Sales and Strategic Sourcing. The Product Safety Team investigates submissions and serves as an initial filter of potential safety issues. Issues that need to be escalated are sent to the Product Safety Council, which consists of executive team members who will coach and give final direction to the Product Safety Team. We monitor product quality on a continual basis through a number of means for both internal and external performance as follows:
▪Internal performance. Key process indicators for our quality measurement include both First Time Quality (“FTQ”) and Defects Per Unit (“DPU”). FTQ is a performance metric that measures the impact of all aspects of the business on our ability to ship our products at the end of the production process and DPU is a measurement of defects found at the end of the production process. As with previous years, the expectations of the highest quality product continue to increase while maintaining FTQ performance and reducing rework. In addition, we currently maintain ISO 9001 registrations at our Lafayette, Indiana (since 2012) and Cadiz, Kentucky facilities (since 2014).
▪External performance. We actively track our warranty claims and costs to identify and drive improvement opportunities in quality and reliability. Early life cycle warranty claims for our van trailers are trended for performance monitoring. Using a unit-based warranty reporting process to track performance and document failure rates, early life cycle warranty units per 100 trailers shipped averaged approximately 1.9, 2.0, and 2.4 units in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Continued low claim rates have been driven by our successful execution of continuous improvement programs centered on process variation reduction and responding to the input from our customers. We expect that these activities will continue to drive down our total warranty cost profile.
In addition to managing a robust quality management system for Wabash’s operations for internal and external performance, we expect suppliers to meet certain standards of quality, engineering, delivery, and management. Our supplier audit process is a comprehensive assessment performed at the supplier’s facility focusing on their system capabilities and how they measure to Wabash’s established requirements. Based on a supplier’s overall rating, action plans are developed to identify improvement opportunities, corrective actions, and timelines to ensure proper closure. Results of each audit are captured in our Supplier Development and Quality database. The process is applied to both direct and indirect suppliers based on a number of selection criteria, such as a new supplier to Wabash, a new supplier facility, a current supplier with significant growth opportunities, or a current supplier experiencing significant performance issues.
Delivery/Productivity. We measure productivity on many fronts. Some key indicators include production line throughput, labor hours per trailer or truck body, labor cost as a percentage of revenue, scrap rates, and inventory levels. Improvements over the last several years in these areas have translated into significant improvements in our ability to better manage inventory flow, control costs, and analyze material and contribution margins.
▪We continue to remain focused on the availability of labor and any potential challenges as we enter 2022 and look to increase our operational capacity to meet the demand in the transportation, logistics, and distribution markets. We expect to continue to add additional labor during 2022 to support our operations and production to meet expected demand.
▪During the past several years, we have focused on productivity enhancements within manufacturing assembly and sub-assembly areas through developing the capability for mixed model production. These efforts have resulted in improvements to the mixed model production in our Lafayette, Indiana, Goshen, Indiana, Cadiz, Kentucky, and San José Iturbide, Mexico facilities.
▪Through deployment of the Wabash Management System (“WMS”), all of our business reporting segments have focused on increasing velocity at all our manufacturing locations. We have engaged in extensive lean training and over the last two years have deployed purposeful capital to accelerate our productivity initiatives.
▪Our manufacturing leadership teams have developed competencies to isolate process constraints, and then address those constraints through multiple avenues that drive additional throughput and cost reductions.
Cost Reduction and our Operating System. The WMS allows us to develop and scale high standards of excellence across the organization. We believe in our One Wabash approach and standardized processes to drive and monitor performance inside our manufacturing facilities. Continuous improvement is a fundamental component of our operational excellence focus. Our focus on leveraging One Wabash and the WMS mindset across the Company, for example, has allowed us to make strides in all areas of manufacturing including safety, quality, on-time delivery, cost reduction, employee morale, and environment. We continue to maintain focus on continuous improvement. In the past two years, we made adjustments throughout our processes to align variable and fixed costs with capacity, and created leaner internal processes in multiple areas. In addition, we continued to invest capital in our processes to reduce variable cost, lowered inherent safety risk in our processes, improved overall consistency in our manufacturing processes, and maintained our assets to capitalize on any economic and/or industry upswings. Finally, we took actions to align our business portfolio with our broader strategic plan.
Environment. We have been on a sustainability journey since the Company’s inception. Uniquely incentivized to improve product designs by utilizing new composite materials to reduce the weight and improve the durability of our products, we are a leader in creating value for customers by facilitating improved fuel efficiency and ensuring the quality and longevity of our equipment. We commit to our employees, customers and shareholders to manage all of our business activities in a responsible manner with respect for the environment through pollution prevention and with our highest priority being the health and safety of our employees. Energy conservation efforts are another critical part of our commitment to continuous improvement and environmental stewardship, and we require energy conservation efforts across all of our facilities. This policy includes improving operational efficiency as well as upgrading to energy-conserving equipment where possible.
We demonstrate our commitment to sustainability by maintaining ISO 14001 registration of our Environmental Management System at our Lafayette, Indiana; Cadiz, Kentucky; San José Iturbide, Mexico; and Harrison, Arkansas locations. In 2005, our Lafayette, Indiana facility was one of the first trailer manufacturing operations in the world to be ISO 14001 registered. Being ISO 14001 registered requires us to demonstrate quantifiable and third-party verified environmental improvements. In addition, our San José Iturbide, Mexico facility was recognized with Clean Industry certification from Mexico’s Federal Agency of Environmental Protection for adhering to environmental care in its manufacturing processes. During 2020, our recycling programs and use of recycled materials saved 221,000 cubic yards of landfill space (an increase of 80,000 cubic yards compared to 2019), 49,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity (a decrease of 103,000,000 kilowatt-hours compared to 2019), 45,000 metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions (a decrease of 28,000 metric tons compared to 2019), and 26,000 mature trees (an increase of 3,000 mature trees compared to 2019). In addition, in January 2022 we were recognized among Newsweek’s America’s Most Responsible Companies 2022.
In addition, manufacturers across multiple industries choose our proprietary DuraPlate® composite technology for its versatility and strength. Each DuraPlate® panel and product contains between 15% and 30% post-consumer resin (“PCR”). By using PCR in the manufacture of DuraPlate®, Wabash has diverted more than 1 billion plastic bottles from landfills. Furthermore, at the end of the product lifespan, DuraPlate® is 100% recyclable.
Our 2020 Corporate Responsibility Report is available on our website (ir.onewabash.com) and references the ongoing environmental, social, and governance (ESG) initiatives that demonstrate our commitment to sustainability and social responsibility. The content on any website referred to in this Annual Report on Form 10-K is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K unless expressly noted.
Industry Trends
Trucking in the U.S., according to the American Trucking Association (“ATA”), was estimated to be a $732.3 billion industry in 2020, representing approximately 80% of the total U.S. transportation industry revenue. From a financial (e.g., value) industry perspective, this represents a decrease of approximately 7.5% from ATA’s 2019 estimate but is consistent with the prior year as a percentage of the total U.S. transportation industry revenue (80%). Furthermore, ATA estimates that approximately 72.5% of all domestic freight tonnage in 2020 was carried by trucks, and 300.1 billion miles were traveled by registered trucks in 2019. Trailer demand is a direct function of the amount of freight to be transported. To monitor the state of the industry, we evaluate a number of indicators related to trailer manufacturing and the transportation industry. Recent trends we have observed include the following:
Transportation / Trailer Cycle. The trailer industry generally follows the transportation industry cycles. Data related to new trailer shipments over the last nine years is shown below.
The most recent estimates from industry forecasters ACT Research Co. (“ACT”) and FTR Associates (“FTR”) indicate total United States trailer production levels for 2021 of approximately 266,000 and 265,000, respectively, which represent increases of approximately 29% and 26%, respectively, from 2020 production levels. We enter 2022 with continued uncertainty of the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly around supply chain disruptions and labor shortages. However, the outlook for the overall trailer market is strong, and we believe our backlog of orders provides a solid foundation as we enter 2022. Current estimates from ACT and FTR for 2022 United States trailer production are 298,000 and 315,000, respectively, representing increases from 2021 of approximately 12% and 19%, respectively. These increases are generally in-line with our expectations as trailer manufacturers prepare to ramp-up production for strong 2022 demand, and we believe that these estimates for production will remain above replacement demand over the next several years.
In addition, ACT is forecasting annual new trailer production levels for 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026 of approximately 332,000, 309,000, 295,000, and 286,000, respectively. While these estimates are more historically consistent production levels in the trailer industry, industry forecasters note that certain issues, such as supply chain disruptions and staffing challenges, could impact these estimates. We believe we are well positioned to capitalize on strong demand in 2022.
New Trailer Orders. According to ACT, total orders in 2021 were approximately 248,000 trailers, a 16% decrease from 294,000 trailers ordered in 2020. Total orders for the dry van segment, the largest within the trailer industry, were approximately 135,000, a decrease of 32% from 2020. These decreases are generally consistent with our expectations due to the supply chain issues and staffing shortfalls in the industry throughout 2021.
Transportation Regulations and Legislation. There are several different areas within both federal and state government regulations and legislation that are expected to have an impact on trailer demand, including:
▪The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”) proposed new greenhouse gas regulations in July 2015, in an effort to reduce fuel consumption and production of carbon dioxide of heavy duty commercial vehicles. Following a comment period, the final rule was released in August 2016. The regulations are presently under review processes in Congress, within the EPA, and NHTSA that will ultimately determine whether this rule actually goes into effect. The Phase 2 greenhouse gas trailer (“GHG2”) rules were initially set to require compliance starting in January 2018. The Truck Trailer Manufacturers Association (“TTMA”) filed a petition in the U.S. Court of Appeals seeking review of the rule as it relates to the authority of the agencies to regulate trailers under the Clean Air Act. In addition, TTMA also filed for a Stay to suspend enforcement of the rule, to allow time for the EPA and NHTSA to reconsider the trailer provisions in the rule. In October 2017, the Court of Appeals granted the motion for Stay of the GHG2 rule as it applies to trailers. Ultimately, while compliance is on hold, the final impact on the trailer industry will not be known until there is a final ruling on the TTMA lawsuit. The rule itself focuses mainly on van trailers, and is divided into four increasingly stringent greenhouse gas reduction standards. The rule requires fuel saving technologies on van trailers, such as trailer side skirts, low rolling resistance tires, and automatic tire inflation systems. For tank trailers and flatbed trailers, the rule will require low rolling resistant tires and automotive tire inflation systems. In addition to increasing the cost of a trailer, these regulations may also lead to a higher demand for various aerodynamic device products.
▪In December 2017, the California Air Resource Board (“CARB”) unveiled its own proposal for new greenhouse gas standards for medium- and heavy-duty trucks and trailers that operate in California. The CARB rules are similar to the EPA’s current GHG2 standards for vehicles, but CARB made additions to counter pending EPA challenges to repeal rules pertaining to trailers. On September 27, 2018, CARB approved for adoption the California Phase 2 GHG regulation. That regulation largely aligns California’s GHG emission standards and test procedures with the federal Phase 2 GHG emission standards and test procedures and provides nationwide consistency for engine and vehicle manufacturers, which will require trailers be equipped with the fuel savings technologies outlined in the EPA GHG2 rules.
▪On December 3, 2019, CARB issued an official advisory notifying trailer manufacturers that CARB will be suspending enforcement of GHG2 trailer requirements until at least January 1, 2022, and will provide at least a 6-month written notice prior to commencement of enforcing GHG2. Additionally, CARB continues to process and approve voluntary applications during the suspension period. If we were to receive CARB’s 6-month advance notice of enforcement, more stringent van trailer standards would come into play in model years 2021, 2024, and 2027-requiring more advanced fuel efficiency technologies, such as rear boat tails and higher percentage improvement side skirts and tires. (While CARB’s 2021 requirements remain intact, they are not enforced-however, if we were to receive the 6-month advance notice of enforcement during 2022, the 2021 objectives would become the requirement.) CARB continues to suspend enforcement as a 6-month written notice has not been issued. We will continue preparations to become compliant if/when official notice has been received for commencement of the regulation.
▪On September 2, 2020, the Truck Trailer Manufacturers Association (“TTMA”) notified its members, including Wabash, that it had filed a motion in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (the “Court”) asking for a Stay to the NHTSA GHG2 rules, which reflect the federal Phase 2 greenhouse gas emission standards. The hearing occurred on September 15, 2020, as scheduled, and on September 29, 2020, the ruling to Stay was granted by the Court. The Stay relates specifically to fuel economy regulations for truck trailers pending further order of the court. Therefore, Wabash and our customers are not required to take any action concerning any new specification-driven regulatory requirements in 2021.
▪On November 12, 2021, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit released its decision on the GHG2 rule making concerning trailers by rejecting the EPA and NHTSA’s attempt to include and regulate trailers in the GHG rules.
Other Developments. Other developments and potential impacts on the industry include:
▪The result of the U.S. Court of Appeals’ rejection of the EPA and NHTSA’s attempt to regulate trailers enables carriers to decide for themselves what emission-reducing equipment and technologies to specify on their trailers. While this reduces pressure off of the trailer manufacturers in the short term, CARB continues to seek additional states to join their position in attempting to drive regulation at the state level.
▪While we believe the need for trailer equipment will be positively impacted by the legislative and regulatory changes addressed above, these demand drivers could be offset by factors that contribute to the increased concentration and density of loads.
▪Trucking company profitability, which can be influenced by factors such as fuel prices, freight tonnage volumes, and government regulations, is highly correlated with the overall economy of the U.S.; carrier profitability significantly impacts demand for, and the financial ability to, purchase new trailers.
▪We expect that the majority of freight in our industry will continue to be moved by truck and, according to ATA, total freight transportation revenue is expected to increase from an estimated $1,083 billion in 2021 to $1,627 billion in 2032.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain operating data as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
2021 Compared to 2020
Net Sales
Net sales in 2021 increased $321.4 million, or 21.7%, compared to 2020. By business segment, net sales prior to intersegment eliminations and related trailer units sold were as follows (dollars in thousands):
TS segment sales, prior to the elimination of intersegment sales, were $1,633.3 million in 2021, an increase of $317.9 million, or 24.2%, compared to 2020. The increase in sales was primarily due to a 23.9% increase in new trailer shipments as 45,365 trailers were shipped in 2021 compared to 36,615 trailer shipments in 2020. New truck bodies shipped during 2021 totaled 16,560 compared to 13,430 truck bodies in the prior year period, an increase of 23.3%. The increase in new trailer shipments resulted in a 24% increase in new trailer revenue, driven by stronger demand for our dry and refrigerated van offerings as well as our platform trailers. The increase in new truck body shipments drove a 27% increase in new truck body revenue, also driven by stronger demand. Tank trailer shipments and related new trailer revenue were materially consistent year-over-year. Revenue per new trailer unit was materially consistent with the prior year, which was in part due to pricing actions to partially mitigate the increase in material costs.
P&S segment sales, prior to the elimination of intersegment sales, were $177.2 million in 2021, a decrease of $2.3 million, or 1.3%, compared to 2020. The overall decrease in sales for this segment is primarily attributable to the completion of 17 service location closures during 2021 that attributed to the decrease by approximately $18.5 million. In addition, we sold our Extract Technology® business during the second quarter of 2021, which resulted in a decrease in sales year-over-year of approximately $10.6 million. Excluding these decreases, P&S segment sales increased from the prior year primarily due to higher demand for our parts, services, and upfitting offerings as well as pricing increases.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $1.6 billion in 2021, an increase of $284.7 million, or 21.5%, compared to 2020. Cost of sales is comprised of material costs, a variable expense, and other manufacturing costs, comprised of both fixed and variable expenses, including direct and indirect labor, outbound freight, overhead expenses, and depreciation.
TS segment cost of sales was $1,466.7 million in 2021, an increase of $274.6 million, or 23.0%, compared to 2020. The increase in cost of sales, which was primarily driven by higher sales and production volumes on account of stronger demand as well as higher commodity costs, was due to an increase in materials costs of $218.0 million, or 27%, and higher labor costs of approximately $53.6 million. An additional increase related to other manufacturing costs, including operating supplies and employee costs. These increases were partially offset by an overall decrease in fixed costs, due in part to higher volume leverage and the continued realization of cost containment measures implemented during 2020.
P&S segment cost of sales, prior to the elimination of intersegment sales, was $140.3 million in 2021, an increase of $3.0 million, or 2.2%, compared to 2020. The increase in cost of sales was driven by an increase in materials costs of approximately $19.2 million, or 23%. In addition, partially offsetting the increase in materials costs was the sale of our Extract Technology® business during the second quarter of 2021 and completion of 17 service location closures during 2021, which contributed to a decrease in labor and employee-related costs of approximately $8.8 million. There was also an overall decrease in fixed costs, due in part to the continued realization of cost containment measures implemented during 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $196.5 million in 2021, an increase of $36.7 million, or 23.0% from 2020. Gross profit as a percentage of sales, or gross margin, was 10.9% in 2021 as compared to 10.8% in 2020. Gross profit by segment was as follows (in thousands):
TS segment gross profit was $166.6 million in 2021 compared to $123.3 million in 2020, an increase of $43.3 million. Gross profit, as a percentage of net sales prior to the elimination of intersegment sales, was 10.2% in 2021 as compared to 9.4% in 2020, an increase of 80 basis points. The overall increase in gross profit from the prior year period was primarily driven by an increase of $75.2 million in our dry vans products and an increase of $3.1 million for platforms, both of which were generally attributable to higher demand for these products compared to the prior year period. Gross profit for our truck body products was materially consistent with the prior year. The overall increase in gross profit as a percentage of net sales was largely due to higher volume leverage and in part as a result of our continued realization of cost containment measures implemented throughout 2020. Because of these reasons, along with a favorable product mix for a portion of 2021, gross profit as a percentage of net sales for 2021 increased compared to the prior year. These increases were partially offset by net decreases in our other product lines, primarily due to higher manufacturing costs as well as labor inefficiencies driven by supply chain disruptions.
P&S segment gross profit was $36.9 million in 2021 compared to $42.1 million in 2020. Gross profit, as a percentage of net sales prior to the elimination of intersegment sales, was 20.8% in 2021 compared to 23.5% in 2020, a decrease of 270 basis points. The overall decrease in gross profit and gross profit as a percentage of net sales for this segment is primarily attributable to the sale of our Extract Technology® business during the second quarter of 2021, which caused a decrease in gross profit in 2021 of approximately $2.9 million compared to 2020. We also completed the closure of 17 service locations during 2021 that attributed to the decrease by approximately $7.3 million. These decreases were offset by higher gross profit in our other parts, services, and upfitting offerings.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $88.8 million in 2021, a decrease of $3.9 million, or 4.2%, compared to 2020. The decrease from the prior year period was largely due to a decrease of approximately $6.2 million in employee-related costs, including benefits and incentive programs and severance costs. In addition, professional service expenses were lower by approximately $0.9 million, which was partially due to the expenses incurred in closing on the New Term Loan Credit Agreement during the third quarter of 2020. These decreases were partially offset by increases in outside service and education and training expenses of approximately $1.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively. General and administrative expenses, as a percentage of net sales, were 4.9% in 2021 compared to 6.3% in 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales was due in part to our continued realization of cost containment measures implemented during 2020.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses were $23.7 million in 2021, a decrease of $1.4 million, or 5.5%, compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily due to lower advertising and promotional expenses of approximately $1.7 million. In addition, there was a decrease in employee-related costs, including benefits and incentive programs, of approximately $1.3 million. These decreases were partially offset by higher outside services costs of $1.1 million. As a percentage of net sales, selling expenses were 1.3% in 2021 compared to 1.7% in 2020. The decrease in selling expenses as a percentage of net sales was due in part to our continued realization of cost containment measures implemented during 2020.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles was $22.9 million in 2021 compared to $22.0 million in 2020. Amortization of intangibles for both periods was the result of expenses recognized for intangible assets recorded from the acquisitions of Walker in May 2012 (of which Extract Technology® was a part of prior to its sale in the second quarter of 2021), certain assets of Beall in February 2013 (which was sold during the fourth quarter of 2020), and Supreme in September 2017. The increase from the prior year period is attributable to certain of the intangible assets recorded from the acquisition of Supreme, which utilize the undiscounted cash flow method for amortization rather than the straight line method. This increase was partially offset by the Beall® and Extract Technology® divestitures as the intangible assets for these businesses were written-off as part of the sales.
Impairment and Other, Net
Impairment and other, net was $27.6 million during 2021 and $105.6 million during 2020. The current year activity was primarily attributable to non-cash impairment charges of approximately $28.3 million during the fourth quarter of 2021 related to trade name and trademark intangible assets due to the significant reduction in the related useful lives of these assets in connection with our rebranding initiative. In addition, during the second quarter of 2021 we sold our Extract Technology® business and recognized a gain on sale of approximately $1.9 million. This gain was partially offset by the impairment of unused and obsolete property, plant, and equipment assets during the first quarter of 2021 totaling approximately $0.8 million. Additional activity during 2021 relates to sales of property, plant, and equipment assets.
The prior year activity was primarily the result of impairment charges related to goodwill within the historical FMP and DPG segments totaling $106.7 million during the first quarter of 2020. These impairment charges were partially offset by the net gain on sale of property, plant, and equipment assets. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020 we closed on the divestiture of the Beall® brand of tank trailers and recognized a loss on sale of approximately $2.1 million.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense in 2021 totaled $23.1 million compared to $24.2 million in 2020. Interest expense during 2021 relates to interest and non-cash accretion charges on the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, Senior Notes due 2028, Senior Notes due 2025, and Revolving Credit Agreement. The decrease from the previous year is primarily due to repayment and refinancing activity during both 2021 and 2020, which is more fully described in Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other, net for 2021 represented expense of $9.1 million as compared to income of $0.6 million for 2020. The expense in the current year is primarily attributable to debt extinguishment charges totaling $9.5 million from the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025 and to repay in full the outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement (these financing transactions are described in more detail in Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). Income for the prior year period is primarily related to interest income, partially offset by debt extinguishment charges totaling $0.4 million related to repayment activity.
Income Taxes
We recognized income tax expense of $0.1 million in 2021 compared to an income tax benefit of $11.8 million in 2020. The effective tax rate for 2021 was 9.8% compared to 10.8% for 2020. The effective tax rate for 2021 differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of state and local taxes and discrete items, including stock-based compensation and tax credits. For 2020, the effective tax rate differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of state and local taxes, impairment of non-deductible goodwill, provisions related to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), and discrete items related to stock-based compensation. Net refunds received for income taxes in 2021 were $0.5 million compared to net refunds received during 2020 of $4.7 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Structure
Our capital structure is comprised of a mix of debt and equity. As of December 31, 2021, our debt to equity ratio was approximately 1.3:1.0. Our long-term objective is to generate operating cash flows sufficient to support the growth within our businesses and increase shareholder value. This objective will be achieved through a balanced capital allocation strategy of sustaining strong liquidity, maintaining healthy leverage ratios, investing in the business, both organically and strategically, and returning capital to our shareholders. As of May 11, 2021, our Board of Directors designated a Finance Committee for the primary purpose of assisting the Board in its oversight of the Company’s capital structure, financing, investment, and other financial matters of importance to the Company.
Throughout 2021, and in keeping to this balanced approach, we repurchased $65.4 million of common stock under the share repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors and paid dividends of $16.4 million. In addition, as further described in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below, in October, 2021 we closed on an offering of $400 million in aggregate principal amount of unsecured Senior Notes due 2028 (the “New Senior Notes”). We used the net proceeds of the New Senior Notes and a portion of the $50 million draw from the increased capacity under our Revolving Credit Agreement to fund the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025 and to repay in full the $108.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. Prior to the October, 2021 activity described above, during the second quarter of 2021 we made principal payments totaling $30.0 million under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. Collectively, these actions demonstrate our confidence in the financial outlook of the Company and our ability to generate cash flow, both near and long term, and reinforce our overall commitment to deliver shareholder value while maintaining the flexibility to continue to execute our strategic plan for profitable growth and diversification.
Despite continued uncertainty of the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe we have maintained a solid position from a liquidity perspective over the last couple of years. Our liquidity position, defined as cash on hand and available borrowing capacity on the Revolving Credit Facility, amounted to $258.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and $384.0 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 33%. This decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in our cash balance as we ramp-up for 2022 production. For 2022, we expect to continue our commitment to fund our working capital requirements and capital expenditures, including our plans to add 20% more dry van manufacturing capacity beginning in 2023, which will be achieved by ramping down traditional refrigerated trailer capacity and converting the floor space to create additional dry van production. Along with the increased dry van manufacturing capacity, we will also maintain our assets to capitalize on any economic and/or industry upswings, while also responsibly returning capital to our shareholders. We will continue to move rapidly to adjust to the current environment to preserve the strength of our balance sheet, while prioritizing the safety of our employees and ensuring the liquidity and financial well-being of the Company.
Debt Agreements and Related Amendments
Senior Notes due 2028
On October 6, 2021, we closed on an offering of $400 million in aggregate principal amount of its 4.50% unsecured Senior Notes due 2028 (the “New Senior Notes”). The New Senior Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture dated as of October 6, 2021, by and among Wabash, certain subsidiary guarantors named therein (the “Guarantors”) and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (the “Indenture”). The New Senior Notes bear interest at the rate of 4.50% and pay interest semi-annually in cash in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, beginning on April 15, 2022. The New Senior Notes will mature on October 15, 2028. At any time prior to October 15, 2024, we may redeem some or all of the New Senior Notes for cash at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the New Senior Notes being redeemed plus an applicable make-whole premium set forth in the Indenture and accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date.
Prior to October 15, 2024, we may redeem up to 40% of the New Senior Notes at a redemption price of 104.500% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date, with the proceeds of certain equity offerings so long as if, after any such redemption occurs, at least 60% of the aggregate principal amount of the New Senior Notes remain outstanding. On and after October 15, 2024, we may redeem some or all of the New Senior Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) equal to 102.250% for the twelve-month period beginning on October 15, 2024, 101.125% for the twelve-month period beginning October 15, 2025 and 100.000% beginning on October 15, 2026, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. Upon the occurrence of a Change of Control (as defined in the Indenture), unless we have exercised its optional redemption right in respect of the New Senior Notes, the holders of the New Senior Notes will have the right to require us to repurchase all or a portion of the New Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the New Senior Notes, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the date of repurchase.
The New Senior Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by all direct and indirect existing and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, subject to certain restrictions. The New Senior Notes and related guarantees are our and the Guarantors’ general unsecured senior obligations and will be subordinated to all of our and the Guarantors’ existing and future secured debt to the extent of the assets securing that secured obligation. In addition, the New Senior Notes are structurally subordinated to any existing and future debt of any of the our subsidiaries that are not Guarantors, to the extent of the assets of those subsidiaries.
Subject to a number of exceptions and qualifications, the Indenture restricts our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional indebtedness; (ii) pay dividends or make other distributions in respect of, or repurchase or redeem, our capital stock or with respect to any other interest or participation in, or measured by, its profits; (iii) make loans and certain investments; (iv) sell assets; (v) create or incur liens; (vi) enter into transactions with affiliates; and (vii) consolidate, merge or sell all or substantially all of our assets. These covenants are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications.
During any time when the New Senior Notes are rated investment grade by at least two of Moody’s, Fitch and Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services and no Default (as defined in the Indenture) has occurred and is continuing, many of such covenants will be suspended and we and our subsidiaries will cease to be subject to such covenants during such period.
The Indenture contains customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of covenants, failure to pay certain judgments and certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency and reorganization. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the principal amount of the New Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, may be declared immediately due and payable. These amounts automatically become due and payable if an event of default relating to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization occurs. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants, and while the duration and severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic remain unknown at this time, we do not anticipate that the pandemic will impact our ability to remain in compliance with these covenants.
The sale of the New Senior Notes resulted in net proceeds of approximately $395 million, after deducting financing fees and other offering expenses. We used the net proceeds of the New Senior Notes and a portion of the $50 million draw from the increased capacity under the Revolving Credit Agreement to fund the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025, to repay in full the $108.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, and to pay all related fees and expenses. Debt extinguishment charges totaling $9.1 million were recorded during the fourth quarter of 2021 in connection with the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025 and the repayment in full of the outstanding borrowing under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. The loss on debt extinguishment charges are included in Other, net in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Contractual coupon interest expense and accretion of fees for the New Senior Notes for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $4.3 million and $0.1 million, respectively, and are included in Interest expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Senior Notes due 2025
On September 26, 2017, we issued Senior Notes due 2025 (the “Old Senior Notes”) in an offering pursuant to Rule 144A or Regulation S under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, with an aggregate principal amount of $325 million. The Old Senior Notes bore interest at the rate of 5.50% per annum from the date of issuance, and required interest to be paid semi-annually in cash on April 1 and October 1 of each year. We used the net proceeds of $318.9 million from the sale of the Old Senior Notes to finance a portion of the acquisition of Supreme and to pay related fees and expenses.
The Old Senior Notes were scheduled to mature on October 1, 2025. At any time prior to October 1, 2020, we could have redeemed some or all of the Old Senior Notes for cash at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior Notes being redeemed plus an applicable make-whole premium set forth in the indenture for the Old Senior Notes and accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. Prior to October 1, 2020, we could have redeemed up to 40% of the Old Senior Notes at a redemption price of 105.50% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date, with the proceeds of certain equity offerings so long as if, after any such redemption occurs, at least 60% of the aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior Notes remained outstanding. On and after October 1, 2020, we could have redeemed some or all of the Old Senior Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) equal to 102.750% for the twelve-month period beginning on October 1, 2020, 101.375% for the twelve-month period beginning October 1, 2021 and 100.000% beginning on October 1, 2022, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. Upon the occurrence of a Change of Control (as defined in the indenture for the Old Senior Notes), unless we had exercised its optional redemption right in respect of the Old Senior Notes, the holders of the Old Senior Notes would have had the right to require us to repurchase all or a portion of the Old Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the Old Senior Notes, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the date of repurchase.
The Old Senior Notes were guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by all direct and indirect existing and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, subject to certain restrictions. The Old Senior Notes and related guarantees were ours and the guarantors’ general unsecured senior obligations and are subordinate to all of our and the guarantors’ existing and future secured debt to the extent of the assets securing that secured obligation. In addition, the Old Senior Notes were structurally subordinate to any existing and future debt of any of our subsidiaries that were not guarantors, to the extent of the assets of those subsidiaries.
The indenture for the Old Senior Notes restricted our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional indebtedness; (ii) pay dividends or make other distributions in respect of, or repurchase or redeem, our capital stock or with respect to any other interest or participation in, or measured by, our profits; (iii) make loans and certain investments; (iv) sell assets; (v) create or incur liens; (vi) enter into transactions with affiliates; and (vii) consolidate, merge or sell all or substantially all of our assets. These covenants were subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications. During any time when the Old Senior Notes were rated investment grade by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services and no event of default had occurred or was continuing, many of such covenants would have been suspended and we and our subsidiaries would not have been subject to such covenants during such period.
The indenture for the Old Senior Notes contained customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of covenants, failure to pay certain judgments and certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency and reorganization. If an event of default were to have occurred and continued, the principal amount of the Old Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, may have been declared immediately due and payable. These amounts would have automatically become due and payable if an event of default relating to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization occurred.
As described above, in October 2021 we used the net proceeds of the New Senior Notes and a portion of the $50 million draw from the increased capacity under the Revolving Credit Agreement to fund the redemption in full of the Old Senior Notes. Contractual coupon interest expense and accretion of discount and fees for the Old Senior Notes for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, was $13.8 million, $18.6 million and $18.5 million, respectively and is included in Interest expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
During the third quarter of 2020, we repaid $10.0 million of the Old Senior Notes utilizing net proceeds from the closure of the new term loan credit agreement, which is described in more detail below.
Revolving Credit Agreement
On December 21, 2018, we entered into the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”), among us, certain of our subsidiaries as borrowers (together with us, the “Borrowers”), the lenders from time to time party thereto, Wells Fargo Capital Finance, LLC, as the administrative agent, joint lead arranger and joint bookrunner (the “Revolver Agent”), and Citizens Business Capital, a division of Citizens Asset Finance, Inc., as syndication agent, joint lead arranger and joint bookrunner, which amended and restated our existing amended and restated revolving credit agreement, dated as of May 8, 2012.
On September 28, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “First Amendment”) among us, certain of our subsidiaries party thereto, the lenders party thereto, and the Revolver Agent. The First Amendment primarily made conforming changes to the provisions in the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to reflect modifications made under the new term loan credit agreement, which is described in more detail below.
On September 28, 2021, we entered into an Increase Agreement Regarding Incremental Revolver Commitments and Second Amendment to Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Second Amendment”, and together with the First Amendment and Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the “Revolving Credit Agreement” or “Revolving Facility”), which exercised an option under the Revolving Credit Agreement to increase the total revolving credit commitments by $50 million from $175 million to $225 million. The Revolving Credit Agreement continues to include an increase option, which would allow us, subject to certain terms and conditions set forth in the Revolving Credit Agreement (including the approval of the lenders providing the applicable increase), to increase the total revolving credit commitments under the Revolving Credit Agreement by a further $50 million to a maximum of $275 million.
The Revolving Credit Agreement is guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries (the “Revolver Guarantors”) and is secured by (i) first priority security interests (subject only to customary permitted liens and certain other permitted liens) in substantially all personal property of the Borrowers and the Revolver Guarantors, consisting of accounts receivable, inventory, cash, deposit and securities accounts and any cash or other assets in such accounts and, to the extent evidencing or otherwise related to such property, all general intangibles, licenses, intercompany debt, letter of credit rights, commercial tort claims, chattel paper, instruments, supporting obligations, documents and payment intangibles (collectively, the “Revolver Priority Collateral”), and (ii) second-priority liens on and security interests in customary permitted liens and certain other permitted liens) (A) equity interests of each direct subsidiary held by the Borrowers and each Revolver Guarantor (subject to customary limitations in the case of the equity of foreign subsidiaries), and (B) substantially all other tangible and intangible assets of the Borrowers and the Revolver Guarantors including equipment, general intangibles, intercompany notes, insurance policies, investment property and intellectual property (in each case, except to the extent constituting Revolver Priority Collateral), but excluding real property (collectively, including certain material owned real property that does not constitute collateral under the Revolving Credit Agreement, the “Term Priority Collateral”). The respective priorities of the security interests securing the Revolving Credit Agreement and the New Term Loan Credit Agreement were governed by an Intercreditor Agreement, dated as of September 28, 2020, between the Revolver Agent and the Term Agent (as defined below), as amended (the “Intercreditor Agreement”). The Revolving Credit Agreement has a scheduled maturity date of December 21, 2023.
Subject to availability, the Revolving Credit Agreement provides for a letter of credit subfacility in an amount not in excess of $15 million, and allows for swingline loans in an amount not in excess of $17.5 million. Outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Agreement bear interest at an annual rate, at the Borrowers’ election, equal to (i) London Interbank Offer Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.75% or (ii) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.25% to 0.75%, in each case depending upon the monthly average excess availability under the revolving loan facility. The Borrowers are required to pay a monthly unused line fee equal to 0.20% times the average daily unused availability along with other customary fees and expenses thereunder.
The Revolving Credit Agreement contains customary covenants limiting our ability and certain of our affiliates to, among other things, pay cash dividends, incur debt or liens, redeem or repurchase stock, enter into transactions with affiliates, merge, dissolve, repay subordinated indebtedness, make investments and dispose of assets. In addition, we will be required to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.0 to 1.0 as of the end of any period of 12 fiscal months when excess availability under the Revolving Credit Agreement is less than 10% of the total revolving commitment. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants, and while the duration and severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic remain unknown at this time, we do not anticipate that the pandemic will impact our ability to remain in compliance with these covenants.
If availability under the Revolving Credit Agreement is less than 15% of the total revolving commitment or if there exists an event of default, amounts in any of the Borrowers’ and the Revolver Guarantors’ deposit accounts (other than certain excluded accounts) will be transferred daily into a blocked account held by the Revolver Agent and applied to reduce the outstanding amounts under the facility.
If the covenants under the Revolving Credit Agreement are breached, the lenders may, subject to various customary cure rights, require the immediate payment of all amounts outstanding and foreclose on collateral. Other customary events of default in the Revolving Credit Agreement include, without limitation, failure to pay obligations when due, initiation of insolvency proceedings, defaults on certain other indebtedness, and the incurrence of certain judgments that are not stayed, satisfied, bonded or discharged within 30 days.
Our liquidity position, defined as cash on hand and available borrowing capacity on the Revolving Credit Facility, amounted to $258.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and $384.0 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 33%.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we drew $50.0 million under the Revolving Credit Agreement, a portion of which was used along with the proceeds of the New Senior Notes to fund the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025, to repay in full the $108.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, and to pay all related fees and expenses of the New Senior Notes. We repaid $17.0 million under the Revolving Credit Agreement during the fourth quarter of 2021, and as of December 31, 2021 outstanding borrowings totaled $33.0 million.
During the three-month period ended March 31, 2020, we drew $45.0 million under the Revolving Credit Agreement as a precautionary measure in response to the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the second quarter of 2020, we repaid the $45.0 million in outstanding borrowings, and for the remainder of 2020 and as of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the Revolving Facility.
Interest expense under the Revolving Credit Agreement for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $0.6 million and $0.2 million, respectively. There was no interest expense under the Revolving Credit Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2019.
New and Old Term Loan Credit Agreements
On September 28, 2020, we entered into a Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “New Term Loan Credit Agreement”) among us, the lenders from time to time party thereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as the administrative agent (the “Term Agent”), providing for a senior secured term loan facility of $150.0 million that was advanced at closing. The New Term Loan Credit Agreement refinanced and replaced that certain Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of May 8, 2012 (as amended, restated, supplemented, or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Old Term Loan Credit Agreement”), among us, the lenders party thereto and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as the administrative agent.
The New Term Loan Credit Agreement was guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries (the “Term Loan Guarantors”) and was secured by (i) second priority security interests (subject only to the liens securing the Revolving Credit Agreement, customary permitted liens, and certain other permitted liens) in substantially all of our personal property and the Term Loan Guarantors, consisting of accounts receivable, inventory, cash, deposit and securities accounts and any cash or other assets in such accounts and, to the extent evidencing or otherwise related to such property, all general intangibles, licenses, intercompany debt, letter of credit rights, commercial tort claims, chattel paper, instruments, supporting obligations, documents and payment intangibles, and (ii) first priority security interests (subject only to customary permitted liens and certain other permitted liens) in (A) subject to certain limitations, equity interests of each direct subsidiary held by us and each Term Loan Guarantor, and (B) substantially all of our other tangible and intangible assets and the Term Loan Guarantors, including equipment, general intangibles, intercompany notes, investment property and intellectual property, but excluding real property. The respective priorities of the security interests securing the New Term Loan Credit Agreement and the Revolving Credit Agreement were governed by an Intercreditor Agreement, dated as of September 28, 2020, between the Term Agent and the Revolver Agent (the “Intercreditor Agreement”). The New Term Loan Credit Agreement had a scheduled maturity date of September 28, 2027. The loans under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement amortized in quarterly installments equal to 0.25% of the original principal amount of the term loans issued thereunder, with the balance payable at maturity.
Outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement bore interest at a rate, at our election, equal to (i) LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.75% per annum) plus a margin of 3.25% per annum or (ii) a base rate plus a margin of 2.25% per annum.
The New Term Loan Credit Agreement contained customary covenants limiting our ability and our subsidiaries to, among other things, pay cash dividends, incur debt or liens, redeem or repurchase stock, enter into transactions with affiliates, merge, dissolve, pay off subordinated indebtedness, make investments and dispose of assets.
Subject to the terms of the Intercreditor Agreement, if the covenants under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement were to be breached, the lenders may, subject to various customary cure rights, require the immediate payment of all amounts outstanding and foreclose on collateral. Other customary events of default in the New Term Loan Credit Agreement included, without limitation, failure to pay obligations when due, initiation of insolvency proceedings, defaults on certain other indebtedness, and the incurrence of certain judgments that are not stayed, satisfied, bonded or discharged within 60 days.
As described above, in October 2021 we used the net proceeds of the New Senior Notes and a portion of the $50 million draw from the increased capacity under the Revolving Credit Agreement to repay in full the $108.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. In addition to the full repayment during the fourth quarter, during the second quarter of 2021 we made principal payments totaling $30.0 million and recognized loss on debt extinguishment charges of approximately $0.5 million. The extinguishment charges are included in Other, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, under the New and Old Term Loan Credit Agreements we paid interest of $3.9 million, $4.8 million, and $7.8 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we incurred charges of $0.2 million in each period for amortization of fees and original issuance discount which is included in Interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
In September 2020, we used the net proceeds of $148.5 million from the New Term Loan Credit Agreement to pay off the outstanding principal under the Old Term Loan Credit Agreement of $135.2 million, repay a portion of our outstanding Senior Notes, and pay related fees and expenses. In connection with the pay off of the Old Term Loan Credit Agreement (specifically for those lenders that did not participate in the New Term Loan Credit Agreement) and partial repayment of the outstanding Senior Notes, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment totaling approximately $0.2 million, which is included in Other, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. In addition, as further described in Note 20, during the fourth quarter of 2020 we sold our Beall® brand of tank trailers and associated assets. The net proceeds of approximately $11.2 million from the sale were used to pay down outstanding principal under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. In connection with the pay down we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment totaling approximately $0.2 million. Our required quarterly principal payments through scheduled maturity under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement were satisfied in full with this prepayment. As of December 31, 2020, we had $138.8 million outstanding under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, of which none was classified as current on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we paid principal of $50.5 million and as a result recognized losses on debt extinguishment totaling approximately $0.2 million. The losses on debt extinguishment are included in Other, net on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Cash Flow
2021 compared to 2020
Cash used in operating activities for 2021 totaled $7.5 million, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $124.1 million in 2020. The cash used in operations during the current year was the result of net income adjusted for various non-cash activities, including depreciation, amortization, net gain on the sale of assets and business divestiture, deferred taxes, loss on debt extinguishment, stock-based compensation, impairment, accretion of debt discount, and a $94.5 million increase in our working capital. Changes in key working capital accounts for 2021 and 2020 are summarized below (in thousands):
Accounts receivable increased $80.9 million in 2021 and decreased $71.4 million for 2020. Days sales outstanding, a measure of working capital efficiency that measures the amount of time a receivable is outstanding, was approximately 33 days and 23 days for three months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in accounts receivable for 2021 was primarily due to higher shipment volume during the current year, especially late in the fourth quarter, as well as the timing of customer payments. Inventories increased in 2021 by $74.8 million compared to a decrease in 2020 of $21.1 million. The overall increase in inventory for 2021 was primarily attributable to higher raw materials as we prepare to ramp-up production for strong 2022 demand. Our inventory turns, a commonly used measure of working capital efficiency that measures how quickly inventory turns per year, was approximately 6 times in both 2021 and 2020. Accounts payable and accrued liabilities increased $54.9 million in 2021 compared to a decrease of $28.3 million for 2020. Days payable outstanding, a measure of working capital efficiency that measures the amount of time a payable is outstanding, was 36 days in 2021 and 26 days in 2020. The increase in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher purchases for increased 2022 production and the overall timing of payments.
Investing activities used $27.1 million during 2021 compared to $3.0 million used in 2020. Investing activities for 2021 included capital expenditures of $49.1 million to support maintenance, growth, and improvement initiatives at our facilities, including expenditures related to expanding our dry van manufacturing capacity beginning in 2023. Capital expenditures were partially offset by proceeds from the sale of assets and a business divestiture totaling $22.0 million. Cash used in investing activities in 2020 was primarily related to capital expenditures to support growth and improvement initiatives at our facilities totaling $20.1 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of assets and a business divestiture of $17.1 million.
Financing activities used $111.4 million during 2021, primarily related to the pay off of the New Term Loan Credit Agreement and the full repayment against our Senior Notes due 2025 totaling $453.8 million, both of which utilized net proceeds from our offering of Senior Notes due 2028. This activity was partially offset by net draws on our Revolving Credit Facility of $33.0 million. We also repurchased common stock of $66.7 million and paid cash dividends to our shareholders of $16.4 million. Financing activities used $44.0 million during 2020, primarily related to the pay off of the Old Term Loan Credit Agreement and repayments against our senior notes totaling $156.4 million, common stock repurchases totaling $18.9 million, and cash dividends paid to our shareholders of $17.3 million. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020 we made a prepayment under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement of $11.2 million.
Despite continued uncertainty of the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe we have maintained a solid position from a liquidity perspective over the last two years. Our liquidity position, defined as cash on hand and available borrowing capacity on the Revolving Credit Facility, amounted to $258.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and $384.0 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 33%. This decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in our cash balance as we ramp-up for 2022 production. For 2022 we expect to continue our commitment to fund our working capital requirements and capital expenditures, including maintaining our assets to capitalize on any economic and/or industry upswings, while also responsibly returning capital to our shareholders. We will continue to move rapidly to adjust to the current environment to preserve the strength of our balance sheet, while prioritizing the safety of our employees and ensuring the liquidity and financial well-being of the Company.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
A summary of our contractual obligations and commercial commitments, both on and off balance sheet, as of December 31, 2021 are as follows (in thousands):
1 Future interest payments on variable rate long-term debt (the Revolving Facility) are estimated based on the rate in effect as of December 31, 2021, and include only interest payments (not unused line fees).
Borrowings under the Revolving Facility bear interest at a variable rate based on the LIBOR or a base rate determined by the lender’s prime rate plus an applicable margin, as defined in the agreement. Any outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Facility bear interest at a rate, at our election, equal to (i) LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.75% or (ii) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.25% to 0.75%, in each case depending upon the monthly average excess availability under the Revolving Facility. We are required to pay a monthly unused line fee equal to 0.20% times the average daily unused availability along with other customary fees and expenses of our agent and lenders. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we drew $50.0 million under the Revolving Credit Agreement, a portion of which was used along with the proceeds of the New Senior Notes to fund the redemption in full of the Senior Notes due 2025, to repay in full the $108.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, and to pay all related fees and expenses of the New Senior Notes. We repaid $17.0 million under the Revolving Credit Agreement during the fourth quarter of 2021, and as of December 31, 2021 outstanding borrowings totaled $33.0 million.
The Senior Notes due 2028 bear interest at the rate of 4.5% per annum from the date of issuance, payable semi-annually on April 15 and October 15.
Finance leases represent future minimum lease payments including interest. Operating leases represent the total future minimum lease payments for leases that have commenced. As of December 31, 2021, obligations related to operating leases that we have executed but have not yet commenced were insignificant.
We have standby letters of credit totaling $5.7 million issued in connection with workers compensation claims and surety bonds.
We have $129.6 million in purchase commitments through December 2022 for various raw material commodities, including aluminum, steel, polyethylene and nickel as well as other raw material components which are within normal production requirements.
We, through our subsidiary Supreme, obtain most vehicle chassis for its specialized vehicle products directly from the chassis manufacturers under converter pool agreements. Chassis are obtained from the manufacturers based on orders from customers, and in some cases, for unallocated orders. The agreements generally state that the manufacturer will provide a supply of chassis to be maintained at the Company’s facilities with the condition that we will store such chassis and will not move, sell, or otherwise dispose of such chassis except under the terms of the agreement. In addition, the manufacturer typically retains the sole authority to authorize commencement of work on the chassis and to make certain other decisions with respect to the chassis including the terms and pricing of sales of the chassis to the manufacturer’s dealers. The manufacturer also does not transfer the certificate of origin to the Company nor permit the Company to sell or transfer the chassis to anyone other than the manufacturer (for ultimate resale to a dealer). Although the Company is party to related finance agreements with manufacturers, the Company has not historically settled, nor expects to in the future settle, any related obligations in cash. Instead, the obligation is settled by the manufacturer upon reassignment of the chassis to an accepted dealer, and the dealer is invoiced for the chassis by the manufacturer. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 the Company’s outstanding chassis converter pool with the manufacturer totaled $18.2 million and has included this financing agreement on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets within Prepaid expenses and other and Other accrued liabilities. All other chassis programs through its Supreme subsidiary are handled as consigned inventory belonging to the manufacturer and totaled approximately $2.6 million. Under these agreements, if the chassis is not delivered to a customer within a specified time frame the Company is required to pay a finance or storage charge on the chassis. Additionally, the Company receives finance support funds from manufacturers when the chassis are assigned into the Company’s chassis pool. Typically, chassis are converted and delivered to customers within 90 days of the receipt of the chassis by the Company.
The total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions, including positions impacting only the timing of tax benefits, was $2.3 million at December 31, 2021. Payment of these obligations would result from settlements with taxing authorities. Due to the difficulty in determining the timing of settlements, these obligations are not included in the table above. We do not expect to make a tax payment related to these obligations within the next year that would significantly impact liquidity.
Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate.
We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if it requires us to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time we were making the estimate or changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected would have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Legal and Other Contingencies. The outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against us and other loss contingencies are subject to significant uncertainty. We establish legal contingency reserves when we determine that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. In determining the appropriate accounting for loss contingencies, we consider the likelihood of loss or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether an accrual should be established or adjusted. Estimating the probability that a loss will occur and estimating the amount of a loss or a range of loss involves significant judgment and such matters are unpredictable. We could incur judgments or enter into settlements for current or future claims that could materially impact our results of operations.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Definite-Lived Intangible Assets. We review, on at least a quarterly basis, the financial performance of each business unit for indicators of impairment. In reviewing for impairment indicators, we also consider events or changes in circumstances such as business prospects, customer retention, market trends, potential product obsolescence, competitive activities, and other economic factors. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying value of an asset group exceeds the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset group. The impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the asset group exceeds its fair value.
Impairment of Trade Name and Trademark Intangible Assets
As further described in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, on January 10, 2022, we completed our review and approval of its plan for rebranding as Wabash®. As part of the planning process, we assessed our usage of trade names and brand names in connection with the long-term growth strategy as One Wabash. Under the plan as approved, we no longer plan to use certain trade names or brand names, and will predominantly use Wabash (or variations thereof) to refer to the Company. The decision resulted in non-cash impairment charges of approximately $28.3 million during the fourth quarter of 2021 related to trade name and trademark intangible assets due to the significant reduction in the related useful lives of these assets.
Goodwill. We assess goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of October 1st, after the annual planning process is complete. More frequent evaluations may be required if we experience changes in our business climate or as a result of other triggering events that may take place. If the carrying value exceeds fair value, the asset is considered impaired and is reduced to its fair value.
In assessing goodwill for impairment, we may choose to initially evaluate qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the qualitative assessment is not conclusive, then an impairment analysis for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level using a quantitative approach. The quantitative test is a comparison of the fair value of the reporting unit, determined using a combination of the income and market approaches, to its recorded amount. If the recorded amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment is recorded to reduce the carrying amount to fair value, but will not exceed the amount of goodwill that is recorded.
The process of evaluating goodwill for impairment is subjective and requires significant judgment at many points during the analysis. If we elect to perform an optional qualitative analysis, we consider many factors including, but not limited to, general economic conditions, industry and market conditions, financial performance and key business drivers, long-term operating plans, and potential changes to significant assumptions used in the most recent fair value analysis for the reporting unit. When performing a quantitative goodwill impairment test, we generally determine fair value using a combination of an income-based approach and a market-based approach. The fair value determination consists primarily of using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) under the fair value measurement standards. We believe the most critical assumptions and estimates in determining the estimated fair value of our reporting units include, but are not limited to, the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows which is largely dependent on expected EBITDA margins, the discount rate applied to those cash flows, and terminal growth rates. The assumptions used in determining our expected future cash flows consider various factors such as historical operating trends and long-term operating strategies and initiatives. The discount rate used by each reporting unit is based on our assumption of a prudent investor’s required rate of return assuming the risk of investing in a particular company. The terminal growth rate reflects the sustainable operating income a reporting unit could generate in a perpetual state as a function of revenue growth, inflation, and future margin expectations.
Segment Realignment
As further described in Note 5 and Note 19 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, beginning in September 2021 we realigned our operating and reportable segments. Based on these changes, we have established two operating and reportable segments: Transportation Solutions (“TS”) and Parts & Services (“P&S”). These operating and reportable segments have also been determined to be the applicable reporting units for purposes of goodwill assignment and evaluation. In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment of goodwill immediately prior to and subsequently following the change in segments and reporting units. The quantitative analyses did not result in any impairment charges as the fair value of each reporting unit exceeded the carrying value. In addition, as part of the change in segment structure, we reassigned goodwill from the historical Commercial Trailer Products (“CTP”), Diversified Products (“DPG”), and Final Mile Products (“FMP”) reporting units to the TS and P&S reporting units using a relative fair value allocation approach as required by the relevant accounting guidance.
Annual Goodwill Impairment Test
As of December 31, 2021, goodwill allocated to our TS and P&S segments was approximately $120.5 million and $67.9 million, respectively. Because of the recency and lack of changes with respect to market conditions and data assumptions used in the quantitative assessment performed in connection with the segment realignment discussed above, during the fourth quarter of 2021 we completed our annual goodwill impairment test using a qualitative assessment. As part of the qualitative analysis, we considered many factors including, but not limited to, general economic conditions, industry and market conditions, financial performance and key business drivers, long-term operating plans, and potential changes to significant assumptions used in the fair value analysis for each reporting unit (performed in connection with the segment realignment).
In connection with our segment realignment beginning in September 2021, as well as our annual goodwill impairment tests conducted during the fourth quarters of 2020 and 2019, we performed a quantitative assessment for each reporting unit utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches, the results of which we weighted evenly. No impairment was indicated as the fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its respective carrying value. We believe our TS and P&S segments and reporting units will generate sufficient future earnings based on the markets in which they participate as well as growth potential.
Future events and changing market conditions may require a re-evaluation of the assumptions used in the determination of fair value for each reporting unit, including key assumptions used in the expected EBITDA margins and cash flows, as well as other key assumptions with respect to matters out of our control, such as discount rates and market multiple comparables. These future events and changing market conditions could result in an impairment of goodwill.
Goodwill Allocation for Extract Technology® (“Extract”)
As further described in Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, during the second quarter of 2021, we sold our Extract business that manufactured stainless steel isolators and downflow booths, as well as custom-fabricated equipment, including workstations and drum booths for the pharmaceutical, fine chemical, biotech, and nuclear end markets. Prior to the divestiture, Extract was an operating unit within the historical DPG reporting unit. In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, as part of the sale we allocated $11.1 million of goodwill based upon the relative fair value of the Extract operating unit compared to the historical DPG reporting unit as a whole. This goodwill was included in the carrying value of the disposed assets and the resulting net gain recognized in connection with the sale. Prior to and subsequent to the divestiture, we performed an impairment assessment for the historical DPG reporting unit and concluded the fair value of the reporting unit continued to exceed the carrying value.
Goodwill Allocation for Beall®
As further described in Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we sold our Beall® brand of tank trailers and associated assets. Prior to the divestiture Beall® was an operating unit within the Tank Trailers reporting unit. In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, as part of the sale we allocated $4.7 million of goodwill based upon the relative fair value of the Beall® operating unit compared to the Tank Trailers reporting unit as a whole. This goodwill was included in the carrying value of the disposed assets and the resulting loss recognized in connection with the sale. Subsequent to the divestiture, we performed an impairment assessment for the Tank Trailers reporting unit and concluded the fair value of the reporting unit continued to exceed the carrying value.
2020 Interim Goodwill Impairment Test
Subsequent to December 31, 2019, our share price and market capitalization declined. In addition, as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related impact on our results of operations, we did not perform in-line with expectations. As a result, indicators of impairment were identified and we performed an interim quantitative assessment as of March 31, 2020, utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches, which were weighted evenly. Key assumptions used in the analysis were discount rates of 17.0% and 13.5% for the historical FMP reporting unit and historical Tank Trailers reporting unit (which was within the historical DPG segment), respectively, EBITDA margins, and a terminal growth rate of 3.0%. The results of the quantitative analysis indicated the carrying value of the historical FMP and historical Tank Trailers reporting units exceeded their respective fair values and, accordingly, goodwill impairment charges of $95.8 million and $11.0 million, respectively, were recorded during the first quarter of 2020. The goodwill impairment charges, which are based on Level 3 fair value measurements, are included in Impairment and other, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
In addition, the results of the quantitative analysis performed as of March 31, 2020 indicated the fair value of the historical Process Systems reporting unit, which was within the historical DPG segment, exceeded the carrying value by approximately 3%. Key assumptions used in the analysis were a discount rate of 14.5%, EBITDA margin, and a terminal growth rate of 3.0%. The historical Process Systems reporting unit designed and manufactured a broad range of products, such as isolators, stationary silos, and downflow booths used in a number of unique markets, including the chemical, dairy, food and beverage, pharmaceutical and nuclear markets. We believe this historical reporting unit’s broad range of innovative products in unique industries will result in sufficient future earnings. Based on the results of the interim quantitative test, we performed sensitivity analyses around the key assumptions used in the analysis, the results of which were: (a) a 100 basis point decrease in the EBITDA margin used to determine expected future cash flows would have resulted in an impairment of approximately $4.6 million, (b) a 100 basis point increase in the discount rate would have resulted in an impairment of approximately $4.5 million, and (c) a 100 basis point decrease in the terminal growth rate would have resulted in an impairment of approximately $1.2 million.
Other
Inflation
Inflation impacts prices paid for labor, materials and supplies. Significant increases in the costs of production or certain commodities, raw materials, and components could have an adverse impact on our results of operations. As has been our practice, we will endeavor to offset the impact of inflation through selective price increases, productivity improvements, and hedging activities. Our ability to mitigate the impact of inflation through selective price increases may be limited by our strong backlog in cases of orders without inflation-based price adjustment provisions.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information related to new accounting standards, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.