Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect Management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate” and “continue,” or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of our management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. Prospective investors are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risk and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Important factors known to us could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time. We believe that its assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations and the business and operations of our company. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from its assumptions. Factors that could cause differences include, but are not limited to, expected market demand for our services, fluctuations in pricing for materials, and competition.
Our Business
SCWorx is a provider of data content and services related to the repair, normalization and interoperability of information for healthcare providers and big data analytics for the healthcare industry.
SCWorx has developed and markets health information technology solutions and associated services that improve healthcare processes and information flow within hospitals. SCWorx’s software platform enables healthcare providers to simplify, repair, and organize its data (“data normalization”), allows the data to be utilized across multiple internal software applications (“interoperability”) and provides the basis for sophisticated data analytics (“big data”). SCWorx’s solutions are designed to improve the flow of information quickly and accurately between the existing supply chain, electronic medical records, clinical systems, and patient billing functions. The software is designed to achieve multiple operational benefits such as supply chain cost reductions, decreased accounts receivables aging, accelerated and more accurate billing, contract optimization, increased supply chain management and cost visibility, synchronous Charge Description Master (“CDM”) and control of vendor rebates and contract administration fees.
SCWorx empowers healthcare providers to maintain comprehensive access and visibility to an advanced business intelligence that enables better decision-making and reductions in product costs and utilization, ultimately leading to accelerated and accurate patient billing. SCWorx’s software modules perform separate functions as follows:
● virtualized Item Master File repair, expansion and automation;
● CDM management;
● contract management;
● request for proposal automation;
● rebate management;
● big data analytics modeling; and
● data integration and warehousing.
SCWorx continues to provide transformational data-driven solutions to many healthcare providers in the United States. The Company’s clients are geographically dispersed throughout the country. The Company’s focus is to assist healthcare providers with issues that they have pertaining to data interoperability. SCWorx provides these solutions through a combination of direct sales and relationships with strategic partners.
SCWorx’s software solutions are delivered to its clients within a fixed term period, typically a three-to-five-year contracted term, where such software is hosted in SCWorx data centers (Amazon Web Service’s “AWS” or RackSpace) and accessed by such clients through a secure connection in a software as a service (“SaaS”) delivery method.
SCWorx currently sells its solutions and services in the United States to hospitals and health systems through its direct sales force and its distribution and reseller partnerships.
SCWorx, as part of the acquisition of Alliance MMA, operates an online event ticketing platform focused on serving regional MMA (“mixed martial arts”) promotions which it has paused due to COVID-19.
We currently host our solutions, serve our customers, and support our operations in the United States through an agreement with a third party hosting and infrastructure provider, RackSpace. We incorporate standard IT security measures, including but not limited to; firewalls, disaster recovery, backup, etc. Our operations are dependent upon the integrity, security and consistent operation of various information technology systems and data centers that process transactions, communication systems and various other software applications used throughout our operations. Disruptions in these systems could have an adverse impact on our operations. We could encounter difficulties in developing new systems or maintaining and upgrading existing systems. Such difficulties could lead to significant expenses or to losses due to disruption in our business operations.
In addition, our information technology systems are subject to the risk of infiltration or data theft. The techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable or degrade service, or sabotage information technology systems change frequently and may be difficult to detect or prevent over long periods of time. Moreover, the hardware, software or applications we develop or procure from third parties may contain defects in design or manufacture or other problems that could unexpectedly compromise the security of our information systems. Unauthorized parties may also attempt to gain access to our systems or facilities through fraud or deception aimed at our employees, contractors or temporary staff. In the event that the security of our information systems is compromised, confidential information could be misappropriated, and system disruptions could occur. Any such misappropriation or disruption could cause significant harm to our reputation, lead to a loss of sales or profits or cause us to incur significant costs to reimburse third parties for damages.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States which requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. By their nature, these estimates and judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We evaluate our estimates based on our historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates relate to revenue recognition, the assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, the assessment of useful lives and the recoverability of property, plant and equipment, the valuation and recognition of stock-based compensation expense, recognition and measurement of deferred income tax assets and liabilities, the assessment of unrecognized tax benefits, and others. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and material effects on our consolidated operating results and consolidated financial position may result. Refer to Note 3, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, for a full description of our accounting policies.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance to U.S. GAAP and the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of SCWorx and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. All material intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. All material intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Cash
Cash is maintained with various financial institutions. Financial instruments that potentially subject us to concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash deposits. Accounts at each institution are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation up to $250,000.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Management applies fair value accounting for significant financial assets and liabilities and non-financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the consolidated financial statements on a recurring basis. Management defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities, which are required to be recorded at fair value, management considers the principal or most advantageous market in which we would transact and the market-based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, such as risks inherent in valuation techniques, transfer restrictions and credit risk. Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value measurement: Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level 2 - Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 - Inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Concentration of Credit and Other Risks
Financial instruments that potentially subject our company to significant concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash, accounts receivable and warrants. We believe that any concentration of credit risk in its accounts receivable is substantially mitigated by our evaluation process, relatively short collection terms and the high level of credit worthiness of its customers. We perform ongoing internal credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition, obtain deposits and limit the amount of credit extended when deemed necessary but generally require no collateral.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had two customers representing 19% and 13% of aggregate revenues. or the year ended December 31, 2020, we had two customers representing 22% and 17% of aggregate revenues. At December 31, 2021, we had three customers representing 17%, 16% and 14% of aggregate accounts receivable. At December 31, 2020, we had three customers representing 35%, 32% and 10% of aggregate accounts receivable.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our company continually monitors customer payments and maintains a reserve for estimated losses resulting from our customers’ inability to make required payments. In determining the reserve, we evaluate the collectability of our accounts receivable based upon a variety of factors. In cases where we become aware of circumstances that may impair a specific customer’s ability to meet its financial obligations, we record a specific allowance against amounts due. For all other customers, we recognize allowances for doubtful accounts based on our historical write-off experience in conjunction with the length of time the receivables are past due, customer creditworthiness, geographic risk and the current business environment. Actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates. The Company recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $421,736 and $183,277, respectively.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. The current portion of lease obligations are included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease, which are included in the lease ROU asset when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We have lease agreements with lease components only, none with non-lease components, which are generally accounted for separately.
Business Combinations
Our company includes the results of operations of a business we acquire in our consolidated results as of the date of acquisition. We allocate the fair value of the purchase consideration of our acquisition to the tangible assets, liabilities and intangible assets acquired, based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. The primary items that generate goodwill include the value of the synergies between the acquired businesses and our company. Intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives. The fair value of contingent consideration (earn out) associated with acquisitions is remeasured each reporting period and adjusted accordingly. Acquisition and integration related costs are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred. For additional information regarding our acquisitions, refer to Note 5, Business Combinations.
Goodwill and Identified Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the net tangible and identified intangible assets acquired under a business combination. Goodwill also includes acquired assembled workforce, which does not qualify as an identifiable intangible asset. Management reviews impairment of goodwill annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the goodwill might be impaired. We first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test is unnecessary.
Identified intangible assets
Identified finite-lived intangible assets consist of ticketing software and promoter relationships resulting from the February 1, 2019 business combination. Our identified intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, ranging from 5 to 7 years. Management makes judgments about the recoverability of finite-lived intangible assets whenever facts and circumstances indicate that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated or that the carrying amount of assets may not be recoverable. If such facts and circumstances exist, we assess recoverability by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining lives against their respective carrying amounts. Impairments, if any, are based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets. If the useful life is shorter than originally estimated, we would accelerate the rate of amortization and amortize the remaining carrying value over the new shorter useful life.
For further discussion of goodwill and identified intangible assets, refer to Note 5, Business Combinations.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost, less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method over the related assets’ estimated useful lives. Equipment, furniture and fixtures are being amortized over a period of three years.
Expenditures that materially increase asset life are capitalized, while ordinary maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Topic 606 to depict the transfer of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of Topic 606 we perform the following steps:
● Step 1: Identify the contract(s) with a customer
● Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 3: Determine the transaction price
● Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation
We follow the accounting revenue guidance under Topic 606 to determine whether contracts contain more than one performance obligation. Performance obligations are the unit of accounting for revenue recognition and generally represent the distinct goods or services that are promised to the customer.
Management has identified the following performance obligations in our contracts with customers:
1. Data Normalization: which includes data preparation, product and vendor mapping, product categorization, data enrichment and other data related services,
2. Software-as-a-service (“SaaS”): which is generated from clients’ access of and usage of our hosted software solutions on a subscription basis for a specified contract term, which is usually annually. In SaaS arrangements, the client cannot take possession of the software during the term of the contract and generally has the right to access and use the software and receive any software upgrades published during the subscription period,
3. Maintenance: which includes ongoing data cleansing and normalization, content enrichment, and optimization, and
4. Professional Services: mainly related to specific customer projects to manage and/or analyze data and review for cost reduction opportunities.
A contract will typically include Data Normalization, SaaS and Maintenance, which are distinct performance obligations and are accounted for separately. The transaction price is allocated to each separate performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. Significant judgement is required to determine the stand-alone selling price for each distinct performance obligation and is typically estimated based on observable transactions when these services are sold on a stand-alone basis. At contract inception, an assessment of the goods and services promised in the contracts with customers is performed and a performance obligation is identified for each distinct promise to transfer to the customer a good or service (or bundle of goods or services). To identify the performance obligations, management considers all the goods or services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices. Revenue is recognized when the performance obligation has been met. We consider control to have transferred upon delivery because we have a present right to payment at that time, we have transferred use of the good or service, and the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all the remaining benefits from, the good or service.
Our SaaS and Maintenance contracts typically have termination for convenience without penalty clauses and accordingly, are generally accounted for as month-to-month agreements. If it is determined that we have not satisfied a performance obligation, revenue recognition will be deferred until the performance obligation is deemed to be satisfied.
Revenue recognition for our performance obligations are as follows:
Data Normalization and Professional Services
Our Data Normalization and Professional Services are typically fixed fee. When these services are not combined with SaaS or Maintenance revenues as a single unit of accounting, these revenues are recognized as the services are rendered and when contractual milestones are achieved and accepted by the customer.
SaaS and Maintenance
SaaS and Maintenance revenues are recognized ratably over the contract terms beginning on the commencement date of each contract, which is the date on which our service is made available to customers.
We do have some contracts that have payment terms that differ from the timing of revenue recognition, which requires us to assess whether the transaction price for those contracts include a significant financing component. We have elected the practical expedient that permits an entity to not adjust for the effects of a significant financing component if it expects that at the contract inception, the period between when the entity transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less. We do not maintain contracts in which the period between when the entity transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service exceeds the one-year threshold.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $472,750 of remaining performance obligations recorded as deferred revenue. We expect to recognize sales relating to these existing performance obligations of during 2022.
Costs to Fulfill a Contract
Costs to fulfill a contract typically include costs related to satisfying performance obligations as well as general and administrative costs that are not explicitly chargeable to customer contracts. These expenses are recognized and expensed when incurred in accordance with ASC 340-40.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenues primarily represent data center hosting costs, consulting services and maintenance of our large data array that were incurred in delivering professional services and maintenance of our large data array during the periods presented.
Contract Balances
Contract assets arise when the revenue associated prior to our unconditional right to receive a payment under a contract with a customer (i.e., unbilled revenue) and are derecognized when either it becomes a receivable or the cash is received. There were no contract assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Contract liabilities arise when customers remit contractual cash payments in advance of our company satisfying our performance obligations under the contract and are derecognized when the revenue associated with the contract is recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied. Deferred revenue for contract liabilities were $472,750 and $2,025,333 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Income Taxes
Our company converted to a corporation from a limited liability company during 2018.
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, “Income Taxes.” Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of: (i) taxes payable or refundable for the current year and (ii) deferred tax consequences of temporary differences resulting from matters that have been recognized in an entity’s financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
Valuation allowances are provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we evaluated available evidence and concluded that we may not realize all the benefits of our deferred tax assets; therefore, a valuation allowance was established for our deferred tax assets.
ASC Topic 740-10-30 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC Topic 740-10-40 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. We have no material uncertain tax positions for any of the reporting periods presented.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, (the “Tax Act”) was enacted. The Tax Act significantly revised the U.S. corporate income tax regime by, including but not limited to, lowering the U.S. corporate income tax rate from 34% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, implementing a territorial tax system, imposing a one-time transition tax on previously untaxed accumulated earnings and profits of foreign subsidiaries, and creating new taxes on foreign sourced earnings. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we completed the accounting for tax effects of the Tax Act under ASC 740. There were no impacts to the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the authoritative guidance on share-based payments. Under the provisions of the guidance, stock-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the option or warrant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period.
The authoritative guidance also requires that the Company measure and recognize stock-based compensation expense upon modification of the term of stock award. The stock-based compensation expense for such modification is accounted for as a repurchase of the original award and the issuance of a new award.
Calculating stock-based compensation expense requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the stock-based awards, stock price volatility, and the pre-vesting option forfeiture rate. The Company estimates the expected life of options granted based on historical exercise patterns, which are believed to be representative of future behavior. The Company estimates the volatility of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant based on historical volatility. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent the Company’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and the Company uses different assumptions, its stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, the Company is required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares expected to vest. The Company estimates the forfeiture rate based on historical experience of its stock-based awards that are granted, exercised and cancelled. If the actual forfeiture rate is materially different from the estimate, stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what was recorded in the current period. The Company also grants performance based restricted stock awards to employees and consultants. These awards will vest if certain employee\consultant-specific or company-designated performance targets are achieved. If minimum performance thresholds are achieved, each award will convert into a designated number of the Company’s common stock. If minimum performance thresholds are not achieved, then no shares will be issued. Based upon the expected levels of achievement, stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The expected levels of achievement are reassessed over the requisite service periods and, to the extent that the expected levels of achievement change, stock-based compensation is adjusted in the period of change and recorded on the statements of operations and the remaining unrecognized stock-based compensation is recorded over the remaining requisite service period. Refer to Note 9, Stockholders’ Equity, for additional detail.
Loss Per Share
We compute earnings (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, “Earnings per Share” which requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income statement. Basic EPS is computed by dividing the loss available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 1,161,913 and 790,847, respectively, common stock equivalents outstanding.
Indemnification
We provide indemnification of varying scope to certain customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our software. In accordance with authoritative guidance for accounting for guarantees, we evaluate estimated losses for such indemnification. We consider such factors as the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. To date, no such claims have been filed against our company and no liability has been recorded in our financial statements.
As permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is, or was, serving at our company’s request in such capacity. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited. In addition, we have directors’ and officers’ liability insurance coverage that is intended to reduce our financial exposure and may enable us to recover any payments above the applicable policy retention.
In connection with the Class Action claims and investigations described in Item 3. Legal Proceedings of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company is obligated to indemnify its officers and directors for costs incurred in defending against these claims and investigations.
Contingencies
From time to time, we may be involved in legal and administrative proceedings and claims of various types. We record a liability in our consolidated financial statements for these matters when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Management reviews these estimates in each accounting period as additional information becomes known and adjusts the loss provision when appropriate. If the loss is not probable or cannot be reasonably estimated, a liability is not recorded in the consolidated financial statements. If a loss is probable but the amount of loss cannot be reasonably estimated, we disclose the loss contingency and an estimate of possible loss or range of loss (unless such an estimate cannot be made). We do not recognize gain contingencies until they are realized. Legal costs incurred in connection with loss contingencies are expensed as incurred. Refer to Note 8, Commitments and Contingencies, for further information.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related to allowance for doubtful accounts, the estimated useful lives and recoverability of long-lived assets, equity component of convertible debt, stock-based compensation, and deferred income tax asset valuation allowances. The Company bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by the Company may differ materially and adversely from the Company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by FASB that are adopted by the Company as of the specified effective date. If not discussed, management believes that the impact of recently issued standards, which are not yet effective, will not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements upon adoption.
Results of Operations
The COVID-19 Pandemic has disrupted our business and the business of our hospital customers.
Our operations and business have experienced disruption due to the unprecedented conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic which spread throughout the United States and the world. The Company has followed the recommendations of local health authorities to minimize exposure risk for its team members since the outbreak.
In addition, the Company’s customers (hospitals) also experienced extraordinary disruptions to their businesses and supply chains, while experiencing unprecedented demand for health care services related to COVID-19. As a result of these extraordinary disruptions to the Company’s customers’ business, the Company’s customers were focused on meeting the nation’s health care needs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the Company believes that its customers were not able to focus resources on expanding the utilization of the Company’s services, which has adversely impacted the Company’s growth prospects, at least until the adverse effects of the pandemic subside. In addition, the financial impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s hospital customers could cause the hospitals to delay payments due to the Company for services, which could negatively impact the Company’s cash flows.
The Company had sought to mitigate these impacts to revenue through the sale of personal protective equipment (“PPE”) and COVID-19 rapid test kits to the health care industry, including many of the Company’s hospital customers.
The sale of PPE and rapid test kits for COVID-19 represented a new business for the Company and was subject to the myriad risks associated with any new venture. The Company encountered great difficulty in attempting to secure reliable sources of supply for both COVID-19 Rapid Test Kits and PPE. The Company currently has no contracted supply of Rapid Test Kits or PPE. Since the inception of this business, the Company completed only minimal sales of COVID-19 rapid test kits and PPE. The Company does not expect to generate any significant revenue from the sale of PPE products or rapid test kits, and as of the date of this report, the Company has not generated any material revenue from the sale of PPE or rapid test kits.
The Company is no longer actively seeking to procure and sell Test Kits or PPE. Instead, the Company is focused on selling its current inventory of PPE. The Company may receive commissions for acting as an intermediary with respect to the sale of PPE and/or Test Kits. However, there is no assurance the Company will realize any material revenue from these activities.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Revenues
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4,632,529, compared to $5,213,188 in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decline in revenue is primarily related to decreases in revenues from PPE sales of approximately $410,000 as we have pivoted away from direct PPE inventory sales and a decrease of approximately $125,000 in ticket sales upon the suspension of our Cagetix operations due to COVID-19.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,782,509, compared to $3,515,279 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $732,770 decrease is primarily related to a decrease of approximately $103,000 in costs related to ticket sales revenue which was suspended in 2021 and decrease of approximately $127,000 in costs related to PPE inventory sales with the remaining decrease related to lowered salary costs of revenue in the current year.
Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $2,078,362 to $5,664,488 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $7,742,850 in the same period of 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in salary expense of approximately $70,000, a decrease in stock-based compensation (non-cash) of approximately $600,000, a decrease in legal and professional fees of $1,080,000, a decrease in travel expense of $170,000, a decrease in accounting fees of $40,000, and a decrease in commission expense of $170,000, partially offset by an increase in inventory expense of $367,000. We expect general and administrative expenses to remain relatively flat during 2022, unless we complete a capital raise, in which case we would expect expenses to grow as we ramp our sales force.
We had other expense of $1,357,339 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Other expense in 2020 related to net losses on the settlement of accounts payable due to the fair value of the shares issued in settlement being greater than the value of the accounts payable.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern
Management has concluded on our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 that conditions exist that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern since we may not have sufficient capital resources from operations and existing financing arrangements to meet our operating expenses and working capital requirements. As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of $1,527,830 and accumulated deficit of $24,011,291. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $3,814,468 and used $1,069,945 of cash in operations. We have historically incurred operating losses and may continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future. We believe that these conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. This may hinder our future ability to obtain financing or may force us to obtain financing on less favorable terms than would otherwise be available. If we are unable to develop sufficient revenues and additional customers for our products and services, we may not generate enough revenue to sustain our business, and we may fail, in which case our stockholders would suffer a total loss of their investment. There can be no assurance that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Recent Fundraising
On May 5, 2020, the Company obtained a $293,972 unsecured loan payable through the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which was enacted as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES ACT”). The funds were received from Bank of America through a loan agreement pursuant to the CARES Act. The CARES Act was established in order to enable small businesses to pay employees during the economic slowdown caused by COVID-19 by providing forgivable loans to qualifying businesses for up to 2.5 times their average monthly payroll costs. The amount borrowed under the CARES Act and used for payroll costs, rent, mortgage interest, and utility costs during the 24 week period after the date of loan disbursement is eligible to be forgiven provided that (a) the Company uses the PPP Funds during the eight week period after receipt thereof, and (b) the PPP Funds are only used to cover payroll costs (including benefits), rent, mortgage interest, and utility costs. While the full loan amount may be forgiven, the amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if, among other reasons, the Company does not maintain staffing or payroll levels or less than 60% of the loan proceeds are used for payroll costs. Principal and interest payments on any unforgiven portion of the PPP Funds (the “PPP Loan”) will be deferred to the date the SBA remits the borrower’s loan forgiveness amount to the lender or, if the borrower does not apply for loan forgiveness, 10 months after the end of the borrower’s loan forgiveness period for six months and will accrue interest at a fixed annual rate of 1.0% and carry a two year maturity date. There is no prepayment penalty on the CARES Act Loan. The Company expects the loan to be fully forgiven.
On March 17, 2021, we received $139,595 in financing from the U.S. government’s Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”). We entered into a loan agreement with Bank of America. This loan agreement was pursuant to the CARES Act. The CARES Act was established in order to enable small businesses to pay employees during the economic slowdown caused by COVID-19 by providing forgivable loans to qualifying businesses for up to 2.5 times their average monthly payroll costs. The amount borrowed under the CARES Act is eligible to be forgiven provided that (a) the Company uses the PPP Funds during the eight week period after receipt thereof, and (b) the PPP Funds are only used to cover payroll costs (including benefits), rent, mortgage interest, and utility costs. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if, among other reasons, the Company does not maintain staffing or payroll levels. Principal and interest payments on any unforgiven portion of the PPP Funds (the “PPP Loan”) will be deferred for six months and will accrue interest at a fixed annual rate of 1.0% and carry a two year maturity date. There is no prepayment penalty on the CARES Act Loan. The Company expects the loan to be fully forgiven.
On September 17, 2021, The Company issued units at $1.79 per unit comprised in the aggregate of 298,883 shares of common stock and 298,883 5 year warrants to purchase shares of common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of $525,000.
During May 2020, we received $515,000 from the sale of 135,527 shares of common stock (at a price of $3.80 per share) and warrants to purchase 169,409 shares of common stock, at an exercise price of $4.00 per share. Of the $515,000 investment, $125,000 is subject to execution of definitive documents.
Liquidity
We are currently experiencing a working capital deficiency, have limited cash on hand, and we are experiencing negative cash flows from operations. Consequently, we have an immediate need for additional capital to fund our operations and the implementation of our business plan.
Based on our current business plan, if we had sufficient capital resources, we anticipate that our operating activities would use approximately $400,000 in cash per month over the next twelve months, or approximately $4.8 million. Currently we have only limited cash on hand, and consequently, we are unable to implement our current business plan. Accordingly, we have an immediate need for additional capital to fund our operating activities.
In order to remedy this liquidity deficiency, we have cut spending and are actively seeking to raise additional funds through the sale of equity and debt securities. Ultimately, we will need to generate substantial positive operating cash flows. Our internal sources of funds will consist of cash flows from operations, but not until we begin to realize substantial additional revenues from the sale of our products and services. As previously stated, our operations are generating negative cash flows, and thus adversely affecting our liquidity. If we are able to secure sufficient funding in the first half of 2022 to fully implement our business plan, we expect that our operations could begin to generate positive cash flows by the end of 2022, which should ameliorate our liquidity deficiency. If we are unable to raise additional funds in the near term, we will not be able to fully implement our business plan, in which case there could be a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
In the event we do not generate sufficient funds from revenues or financing through the issuance of common stock or from debt financing, we will be unable to fully implement our business plan and pay our obligations as they become due, any of which circumstances would have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition, and results of operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be required should the Company be unable to recover the value of its assets or satisfy its liabilities (see Note 2 to the Financial Statements - Liquidity/Going Concern).
Based on our current limited availability of funds, we expect to spend minimal amounts on expansion of our sales organization, software development and capital expenditures. We expect to fund any future software development expenditures through a combination of cash flows from operations and proceeds from equity and/or debt financing. If we are unable to generate positive cash flows from operations, and/or raise additional funds (either through debt or equity), we will be unable to fund our software development expenditures, in which case, there could be an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
Cash Flows
Our operations through December 31, 2021 have resulted in negative cash flows from operations of $1,069,945. If we are able to raise additional capital during first half of 2022 and generate additional revenue through the acquisition of new customers, and provided we realize a reduction in legal and accounting expenses, which we anticipate, we believe we may begin to generate positive operating cash flows by the end of 2022. However, there is no assurance we will be able to increase our revenue sufficiently so as to generate positive operating cash flows within this time frame.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,069,945 for the year ended December 31, 2021, mainly related to the net loss of $3,814,46 and decreases of $452,284 in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $690,083 in deferred revenue, partially offset by non-cash stock-based compensation of $2,687,901 related to various equity awards to employees and non-employees, $163,917 in bad debt expense, and a $475,000 decrease in inventory.
Net cash used in operating activities was $959,070 for the year ended December 31, 2020, mainly related to the net loss of $7,402,350, a $523,440 increase in inventory and a $76,470 increase in prepaid expenses, partially offset by non-cash stock-based compensation of $3,284,570 related to various equity awards to employees and non-employees, $1,612,538 in non-cash losses related to the settlement of accounts payable, an $848,473 increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Investing Activities
The Company did not have any investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $764,595 for the year ended December 31, 2021. This consisted of $139,595 in proceeds from a loan payable, $100,000 advanced by the Company’s former CEO (also a significant shareholder), and $525,000 from a common stock placement.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $847,542 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to $515,000 in proceeds from equity financing and $293,972 in proceeds from a note payable.
Contractual Cash Obligations
Refer to Note 8, Commitments and Contingencies, in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional detail.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.