Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is provided to assist in understanding our Company, operations and current business environment and should be considered a supplement to, and read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes included within Part II - Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, as well as the discussion of our business and related risk factors in Part I - Item 1 Business and Part I - Item 1A Risk Factors, respectively.
Overview
We are a leading broadband services provider offering high-speed data (“HSD”), cable television (“Video”), and digital telephony (“Telephony”) services to residential customers and offer a full range of products and services to business customers. Our services are delivered across 14 markets via our advanced hybrid fiber-coax (“HFC”) network. Our footprint covers certain suburban areas within the states of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Michigan, South Carolina and Tennessee. At December 31, 2021, our broadband networks passed 1.9 million homes and businesses and served 532,900 customers.
During 2021, we continued to experience strong demand for our HSD service. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the average percentage of HSD only new connections was approximately 87% compared to an average percentage of approximately 80% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Customers also connected at higher speeds with approximately 88% of HSD only new connections purchasing 200MB or higher speeds during the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a 13% increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
We continue to focus on enhancing our network to meet changing customer preferences. In 2021, we extended 1 GIG capabilities to our Lansing, Michigan and Dothan, Alabama markets and now offer HSD speeds up to 1 GIG in approximately 99% of our footprint. Additionally, we extended the availability of WOWtv+, which is now offered in all of our markets.
On June 30, 2021, we announced two separate asset sales to two different buyers. On September 1, 2021, we completed the sale of our Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio markets and on November 1, 2021, we completed the sale of our Chicago, Illinois, Evansville, Indiana and Baltimore, Maryland markets. We utilized the majority of the total net proceeds of $1.8 billion to pay down outstanding debt in the third and fourth quarter of 2021 and to refinance our credit agreement in December of 2021. The divestitures strengthened our financial position and will help accelerate our broadband first strategy, which includes additional investments in edge-outs, greenfield strategies and commercial services.
We continue to monitor the impact of the global health crisis related to the outbreak of coronavirus, or COVID-19, on our business. The primary impact to the Company was its election to participate in several initiatives focused on keeping customers impacted by COVID-19 connected to services. These initiatives include the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) Keep Americans Connected Pledge, which expired on June 30, 2020, and the America’s Communications Association (“ACA”) Connects “K-12 Bridge to Broadband” program to help school districts and states provide internet access for students in low-income households.
Additionally, the Company participated in the FCC’s Emergency Broadband Benefit (“EBB”) program as outlined under the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021. Under this program, eligible households could apply for a discount of up to $50 per month towards broadband service. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately 14,700 customers enrolled under the EBB program. The Affordable Connectivity Program replaced the EBB program on December 31, 2021. Under the Affordable Connectivity Program, eligible households may receive a discount of up to $30 per month toward internet service. The Affordable Connectivity Program is limited to one monthly service discount.
We have identified other potential impacts to the business as the potential for increases in delinquent customer payments and/or adverse effects on our ability to procure materials and equipment. Thus far, we have not experienced either of these adverse effects throughout the duration of the global health crisis. However, we are not able to fully predict the overall impact of the global health crisis on our business if these events or other events occur in the future.
Key Transactions Impacting Operating Results and Financial Condition
Sale of Service Areas
On June 30, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Atlantic Broadband (OH), LLC, (“Atlantic”), a U.S. cable operator and subsidiary of Cogeco Communications, Inc. and Atlantic Broadband Finance, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Atlantic Purchase Agreement”), whereby Atlantic agreed to acquire the Company’s Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio service areas for approximately $1.125 billion, subject to adjustments, including customary working capital adjustments, as specified in the Atlantic Purchase Agreement.
On September 1, 2021, we completed the sale for the Ohio service areas receiving approximately $1.1 billion in net proceeds and recorded a gain on sale of $689.8 million. We utilized the net proceeds from the sale to repay a significant portion of our Term B loans and certain finance lease agreements. In conjunction with the closing of the Atlantic Purchase Agreement, we entered into a Transition Services Agreement with Atlantic to support post-transaction continuity of service during the transition period.
Additionally, on June 30, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Radiate HoldCo, LLC, a telecommunications holding company affiliated with RCN Telecom Services LLC, Grande Communications Networks, LLC and WaveDivision Holdings, LLC (collectively, “Astound Broadband”) (the “Astound Purchase Agreement”), whereby Radiate HoldCo, LLC agreed to acquire the Company’s Chicago, Illinois, Evansville, Indiana and Baltimore, Maryland markets for approximately $661.0 million, subject to adjustments, including customary working capital adjustments, as specified in the Astound Purchase Agreement.
On November 1, 2021, we completed the sale for the Chicago, Illinois, Evansville, Indiana and Baltimore, Maryland service areas receiving approximately $653.2 million in net proceeds and recorded a gain on sale of $311.5 million. We utilized the net proceeds from the sale to further repay our outstanding Term B loans. In conjunction with the closing of the Astound Purchase Agreement, we entered into a Transition Services Agreement with Astound to support post-transaction continuity of service during the transition period.
Refinancing of the Term B Loans and Revolving Credit Facility
On December 20, 2021, the Company entered into a new secured credit agreement with Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative agent, collateral agent and issuing bank (the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement consists of (i) a new Term Loan B in an aggregate principal amount of $730.0 million and (ii) a $250.0 million revolving credit commitment. The Term Loan B matures in December 2028 and bears interest at a rate equal to SOFR plus 3.00%, subject to a 50 basis point floor, and the revolving credit commitment bears interest at a rate equal to SOFR plus 2.75% and matures in December 2026. The Senior Secured Term B loans and Revolving Credit Facility are secured on a first-priority basis by a lien on substantially all of the Company’s assets, subject to certain exceptions and permitted liens.
Sale of Chicago Fiber Network
In December 2017, we finalized the sale of a portion of our fiber network in the Chicago market to a subsidiary of Verizon for $225.0 million in cash. In addition, we and a subsidiary of Verizon entered into a construction agreement pursuant to which we agreed to complete the build-out of the network in exchange for $50.0 million (which approximated our estimate to complete the network build-out), recognized over time as the remaining network elements were completed and accepted. We completed the network build-out during the third quarter of 2019. From project inception through completion, the Company has recorded a total loss on the Construction Services Agreement of $0.9 million.
Hurricane Michael
On October 10, 2018, Hurricane Michael made landfall in the Florida Panhandle, resulting in significant damage to our network infrastructure and widespread power outages and service disruptions for the majority of our customers in this service area. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we finalized the insurance claim related to the damages incurred from Hurricane Michael, receiving $9.6 million of business interruption insurance recoveries.
Crestview Investment
A significant block of the Company’s outstanding shares are held by affiliates of Crestview Partners, LLC (“Crestview”), a private equity firm based in New York. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 36% of our outstanding common shares were held by Crestview.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Critical accounting policies are defined as those policies that are reflective of significant judgments, estimates and uncertainties, which would potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements because of the judgment necessary to account for these matters and the significant estimates involved, which are susceptible to change.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Carrying Value. The net carrying value of our property, plant and equipment was $722.3 million and $720.9 million, representing approximately 38% and 29% of our total assets, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and include costs associated with the construction of cable transmission and distribution facilities and new service installations at customer locations. Capitalized costs include materials, labor and certain indirect costs attributable to the capitalization activity. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Upon sale or retirement of an asset, the cost and related depreciation are removed from the related accounts and resulting gains or losses are reflected in operating results. We make judgments regarding the installation and construction activities to be capitalized. We capitalize direct labor associated with capitalizable activities and indirect cost using standards developed from operational data, including the proportionate time to perform a new installation relative to the total technical operations activities and an evaluation of the nature of the indirect costs incurred to support capitalizable activities. Judgment is required to determine the extent to which indirect costs that have been incurred are related to capitalizable activities and, as a result, should be capitalized. Indirect costs include (i) employee benefits and payroll taxes associated with capitalized direct labor, (ii) direct variable costs of installation and construction vehicle costs, (iii) the direct variable costs of support personnel directly involved in assisting with installation activities, such as dispatchers and (iv) other indirect costs directly attributable to capitalizable activities.
Impairment of Property, Plant and Equipment. Long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the total of the expected undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset, a loss is recognized for the difference between the fair value and the carrying value of the asset. No impairments of long-lived assets were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of acquired franchise operating rights, franchise related customer relationships and goodwill. Franchise operating rights represent the value attributable to agreements with local franchising authorities, which allows access to homes in the public right of way. Our franchise operating rights were acquired through business combinations. We do not amortize cable franchise operating rights as we have determined that they have an indefinite life. Costs incurred in negotiating and renewing cable franchise agreements are expensed as incurred. Franchise related customer relationships represent the value of the benefit to us of acquiring the existing cable subscriber base and are amortized over the estimated life of the subscriber base, generally four years, on a straight-line basis. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identifiable net assets we acquired in business combinations.
We conduct our cable operations under the authority of state cable television franchises, except in Alabama and parts of Michigan where we continue to operate under local franchises. Our franchises have service terms that vary, but generally last from five to 15 years. All of our term-limited franchise agreements are subject to renewal. The renewal process for our state franchises is specified by state law and tends to be a simple process, requiring the filing of a renewal application with information no more burdensome than that contained in our original application.
Although renewal is not assured, there are provisions in the law that protect the Company from arbitrary or unreasonable denial. In most areas in which we operate, we are a “competitive” operator, meaning that we compete directly in the service area with at least one other franchised cable operator. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Cable Act”) says that “a franchising authority may not...unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise.” The 1992 Cable Act also provides a formal renewal process that protects cable operators that elect the process against arbitrary or unreasonable refusals to renew a franchise. In addition, on December 20, 2006, the FCC established rules and provided guidance that prohibit local franchising authorities from unreasonably refusing to award competitive franchises for the provision of cable services. In order to eliminate certain barriers to entry into the cable market, and to encourage investment in broadband facilities, the FCC preempted local laws, regulations, and requirements, including local level-playing-field provisions, to the extent they impose greater restrictions on market entry than those adopted under the order. On August 1, 2019, the FCC adopted a Third Report and Order concluding that its franchising rules and findings fully apply to state-level franchising actions and regulations. These orders have the potential to benefit us by facilitating our ability to obtain and renew cable service franchises.
In our experience, state and local franchising authorities encourage our entry into the market, as our competitive presence often leads to overall better service, more service options and lower prices. In our and our expert advisors’ experience, it has not been the practice for a franchising authority to deny a cable franchise renewal. We have never had a renewal denied.
Franchise Operating Rights. The net carrying value of our franchise operating rights was $620.1 million for both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, representing approximately 33% and 25% of total assets, respectively. See Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion of how we value and evaluate franchise operating rights for impairment.
The estimates and assumptions made in our impairment analysis are inherently subject to significant uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and there is no assurance that these results can be achieved. The primary assumptions for which there is a reasonable possibility of the occurrence of a variation that would significantly affect the measurement value include the assumptions regarding revenue growth, programming expense growth rates, the amount and timing of capital expenditures and the discount rate utilized.
We evaluate the recoverability of our franchise operating rights at least annually on October 1, or more frequently whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. As a result of the 2021 analysis, we did not identify any franchise operating rights assets in which the fair value was less than the carrying value, therefore we did not recognize any impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we recognized impairment charges of $14.0 million and $9.7 million, respectively.
Goodwill. The net carrying value of goodwill was $225.1 million for both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, representing approximately 12% and 9% of total assets, respectively. See Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion of how we value and evaluate goodwill for impairment.
Similar to franchise operating rights, we evaluate the recoverability of our goodwill annually on October 1, or more frequently whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. No such impairment charges were recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 as the result of the annual impairment test indicated the fair value of our goodwill exceeded the carrying value.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the difference is expected to reverse. Additionally, the impact of changes in the tax rates and laws on deferred taxes, if any, is reflected in the financial statements in the period of enactment. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. To the extent that a determination was made to establish or adjust a valuation allowance, the expense or benefit is recorded in the period in which the determination is made.
From time to time, we engage in transactions in which the tax consequences may be subject to uncertainty. Examples of such transactions include business acquisitions and dispositions, including dispositions designed to be tax free, issues related to consideration paid or received, investments and certain financing transactions. Significant judgment is required in assessing and estimating the tax consequences of these transactions. We prepare and file tax returns based on interpretation of tax laws and regulations. In the normal course of business, our tax returns are subject to examination by various taxing authorities. Such examinations may result in future tax, interest and penalty assessments by these taxing authorities. In determining our income tax provision for financial reporting purposes, we establish a reserve for uncertain income tax positions unless such positions are determined to be more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, based on their technical merits. That is, for financial reporting purposes, we only recognize tax benefits taken on the tax return that we believe are more likely than not of being sustained. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether positions taken on the tax return are more likely than not of being sustained.
We adjust our tax reserve estimates periodically because of ongoing examinations by, and settlements with, the various taxing authorities, as well as changes in tax laws, regulations and interpretations. The consolidated income tax provision of any given year includes adjustments to prior year income tax accruals that are considered appropriate and any related estimated interest. Our policy is to recognize, when applicable, interest and penalties on uncertain income tax positions as part of income tax provision.
Homes Passed and Customers
We report homes passed as the number of serviceable addresses, such as single residence homes, apartments and condominium units, and businesses passed by our broadband network and listed in our database. We report total subscribers as the number of subscribers who receive at least one of our HSD, Video or Telephony services, without regard to which or how many services they subscribe. We define each of the individual HSD subscribers, Video subscribers and Telephony subscribers as a revenue generating unit (“RGU”). The following table summarizes homes passed, total subscribers and total RGUs for our services as of each respective date and for comparability purposes, presents subscribers associated with the Company’s continuing operations as of each specified date prior to December 31, 2021:
(1) The Company combined certain billing systems during the second quarter of 2021, which standardized the statistical reporting of key metrics. The standardized reporting led to the following increases (decreases) at December 31, 2020: Homes passed 15,400, Total subscribers (4,200), HSD RGUs (700), Video RGUs (1,800), Telephony RGUs (600), and Total RGUs (3,100).
The following table displays the homes passed and subscribers related to the Company’s edge-out activities:
While we take appropriate steps to ensure subscriber information is presented on a consistent and accurate basis at any given balance sheet date, we periodically review our policies in light of the variability we may encounter across our different markets due to the nature and pricing of products, services and billing systems. Accordingly, we may from time to time make appropriate adjustments to our subscriber information based on such reviews.
Financial Statement Presentation
Revenue
Our operating revenue is primarily derived from monthly recurring charges for HSD, Video, Telephony and other business services to residential and business customers, in addition to other revenues.
● HSD revenue consists primarily of fixed monthly fees for data service and rental of modems.
● Video revenue consists primarily of fixed monthly fees for basic, premium and digital cable television services and rental of video converter equipment, as well as charges from optional services, such as pay-per-view, video-on-demand and other events available to the customer. The Company is required to pay certain cable franchising authorities an amount based on the percentage of gross revenue derived from video services. The Company generally passes these fees on to the customer, which is included in video revenue.
● Telephony revenue consists primarily of fixed monthly fees for local service and enhanced services, such as call waiting, voice mail and measured and flat rate long-distance service.
● Other business service revenue consists primarily of monthly recurring charges for session initiated protocol, web hosting, metro Ethernet, wireless backhaul, broadband carrier services and cloud infrastructure services provided to business customers.
● Other revenue consists primarily of revenue from line assurance warranty services provided to residential and business customers and revenue from late fees and advertising placement.
Revenues attributable to monthly subscription fees charged to customers for our HSD, Video and Telephony services provided by our broadband networks were 93% and 92% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The remaining percentage of total revenue represents non-subscription revenue primarily from other business services, line assurance warranty services and advertising placement.
Costs and Expenses
Our expenses primarily consist of operating, selling, general and administrative expenses, depreciation and amortization expense, and interest expense.
Operating expenses primarily include programming costs, data costs, transport costs and network access fees related to our HSD, Video and Telephony services, hardware/software expenses, network operations and maintenance services, customer service and call center expenses, bad debt, billing and collection expenses and franchise and other regulatory fees.
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include salaries and benefits of corporate and field management, sales and marketing personnel, human resources and related administrative costs.
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of our network infrastructure, including associated equipment, hardware and software, buildings and leasehold improvements, and finance lease obligations. Amortization is recognized on other intangible assets with definite lives primarily related to acquisitions. Depreciation and amortization expense is presented separately from operating and selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
We control our costs of operations by maintaining strict controls on expenditures. More specifically, we are focused on managing our cost structure by improving workforce productivity, increasing the effectiveness of our purchasing activities and maintaining discipline in customer acquisition. We expect programming expenses to continue to increase per Video subscriber due to a variety of factors, including increased demands by owners of some broadcast stations for carriage of other services or payments to those broadcasters for retransmission consent and annual increases imposed by programmers with additional selling power as a result of media consolidation. We have not been able to fully pass these increases on to our customers without the loss of customers, nor do we expect to be able to do so in the future.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $114.4 million, or 10%, as compared to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as follows:
Continuing Operations
Total revenue from continuing operations decreased $4.5 million, or 1%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Subscription Revenue
Total subscription revenue from continuing operations decreased $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The slight decrease was driven by a $63.1 million shift in service offering mix, as we continue to experience a reduction in Video and Telephony RGUs. This decrease was offset almost entirely by a $52.5 million increase in average revenue per unit (“ARPU”), as HSD customers continue to purchase higher speed tiers; coupled with HSD and Video rate increases issued in 2021 and an increase of $10.5 million in volume attributable exclusively to the addition of HSD subscribers. ARPU is calculated as subscription revenue for each of the HSD, Video and Telephony services divided by the average total RGUs for each service category for the respective period.
Other Business Services
Other business services revenue from continuing operations decreased $1.1 million, or 5%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in data center revenue.
Other
Other revenue from continuing operations decreased $3.3 million, or 10%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in advertising, service call fee, and line assurance revenue.
Operating Expenses (Excluding Depreciation and Amortization)
Operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization) from continuing operations decreased $28.8 million, or 7%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by decreases in direct operating expenses.
Additionally we recorded additional bad debt expense of $2.0 million from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2020, related to trade accounts receivable as a result of uncertainties around the economic positions of our customers impacted by the global health crisis. We did not incur such expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Incremental Contribution
Incremental contribution is defined as subscription services revenue less costs directly incurred from third parties in connection with the provision of such services to our customers (service direct expense). Incremental contribution from continuing operations increased $31.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase is primarily related to the decrease in programming expense. Programming expense from continuing operations decreased from $205.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $177.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is attributable to the decline in Video RGU’s.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses from continuing operations increased $5.0 million, or 3%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to increases in marketing, compensation (including stock compensation), professional service and legal expenses associated with the sale of five of our markets and the refinancing of our long-term debt, partially offset by decreases in costs associated with digital transformation initiatives.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses from continuing operations increased $18.3 million, or 12%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to the timing of assets placed in service and increases in equipment and vehicle finance lease activity.
Impairment Losses on Intangibles and Goodwill
The Company recognized non-cash impairment charges of nil and $14.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The primary driver of the impairment charge in 2020 was a decline in the estimated fair market value of certain indefinite-lived intangible assets, as indicated by the decline in the Company’s common stock and revisions to market-level forecasts. See Note 7 - Franchise Operating Rights & Goodwill for discussion of non-cash impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense from continuing operations decreased $36.5 million, or 28%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to lower interest rates on a lower outstanding principal balance, the significant repayment of debt in the third and fourth quarters of 2021, and the expiration of the interest rate swap agreement in May 2021.
Other Income
Other income from continuing operations increased $8.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily related to the Transition Services Agreements with Atlantic and Astound, which began on September 1, 2021 and November 1, 2021, respectively, to support post-transaction continuity of service during the transition periods.
Discontinued Operations
On September 1, 2021, we sold our Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio markets to Atlantic for approximately $1.125 billion, subject to adjustments, including customary working capital adjustments, as specified in the Atlantic Purchase Agreement. As a result of the sale, we recognized a gain on sale of $689.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Additionally on November 1, 2021, we completed the sale of our Chicago, Illinois, Evansville, Indiana, and Baltimore, Maryland markets to Astound Broadband for $661.0 million, subject to adjustments, including customary working capital adjustments, as specified in the Astound Purchase Agreement. As a result of the sale, we recognized a gain on sale of $311.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue from discontinued operations decreased $109.9 million, or 26%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decreases are primarily due to the divestitures of the Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio markets on September 1, 2021 and the Chicago, Illinois, Evansville, Indiana, and Baltimore, Maryland markets on November 1, 2021.
Operating expenses from discontinued operations (excluding depreciation and amortization) decreased $53.0 million, or 32%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, programming expense decreased $46.8 million over the corresponding periods. These decreases are primarily due to the divestitures mentioned above.
Discontinued operating expenses do not include general corporate overhead or continuing costs related to providing service per the transition service agreements. Certain costs of providing the transition service agreements will continue during the term of the agreements as services are provided; however, upon termination of the agreements, these costs are expected to be reduced. In addition, general corporate overhead costs are expected to be reduced over a three year period.
Income Tax Expense
We reported total income tax expense of $292.9 million and $7.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in income tax expense is primarily related to an increase in income before tax resulting from the asset sales when compared to the corresponding periods in 2020.
Use of Incremental Contribution
Incremental contribution is included herein because we believe that it is a key metric used by our management to assess the financial performance of the business by showing how the relative relationship of the various components of subscription services contributes to our overall consolidated historical results. Our management further believes that it provides useful information to investors in evaluating our financial condition and results of operations because the additional detail illustrates how an incremental dollar of revenue generates cash, before any unallocated costs are considered, which we believe is a key component of our overall strategy and important for understanding what drives our cash flow position relative to our historical results. Incremental contribution is defined by us as the components of subscription revenue, less costs directly incurred from third parties in connection with the provision of such services to our customers.
Incremental contribution is not made in accordance with GAAP and our use of the term incremental contribution varies from others in our industry. Incremental contribution should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, consolidated net income (loss) and operating income (loss) or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or operating cash flows, or as measures of liquidity. Incremental contribution has important limitations as an analytical tool and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP as it does not identify or allocate any other operating costs and expenses that are components of our income from operations to specific subscription revenues as we do not measure or record such costs and expenses in a manner that would allow attribution to a specific component of subscription revenue. Accordingly, incremental contribution should not be considered as an alternative to operating income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or operating cash flows, or as a measure of liquidity.
The following table provides a reconciliation of incremental contribution to income from operations, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the periods presented:
Previously Disclosed Results of Operations
For a complete narrative of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We completed the sale of five of our markets during the second half of 2021, utilizing the majority of the net proceeds to repay and refinance our long-term debt. At December 31, 2021, the principal amount of our outstanding consolidated debt aggregated to $741.4 million, of which $17.9 million is classified as current in our consolidated balance sheet as of such date. As of December 31, 2021, we had borrowing capacity of $250.0 million under our new Revolving Credit Facility. We are required to prepay principal amounts if we generate excess cash flow, as defined in the Credit Agreement.
Our primary funding requirements are for our ongoing operations, capital expenditures, outstanding debt obligations, including lease agreements, and strategic investments. As of December 31, 2021, we had $193.2 million of cash and cash equivalents. We believe that our existing cash balances, available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility, and operating cash flows will provide sufficient resources to fund our obligations and anticipated liquidity requirements over the next 12 months.
Our ability to fund operations, make capital expenditures, repay debt obligations and make future acquisitions and strategic investments depends on future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, including the impact of COVID-19, some of which are beyond our control.
Contractual Obligations
We have obligations to make future payments for goods and services under certain contractual arrangements. These contractual obligations secure the future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of our operations. In accordance with GAAP, the future rights and obligations pertaining to firm commitments, such as operating lease obligations and certain contractual purchase obligations, are not reflected as assets or liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The long term debt obligations are our principal payments on cash debt service obligations. Finance lease obligations are future lease payments on certain equipment and vehicles. Operating lease obligations are the future minimum rental payments required under the operating leases that have initial or remaining non-cancellable lease terms in excess of one year as of December 31, 2021.
The following table summarizes certain of our obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the estimated timing and effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in millions):
(1) Interest payments associated with our variable-rate debt have not been included in the table. Assuming that our $730.0 million of variable-rate Senior Secured Credit Facilities as of December 31, 2021 is held to maturity, and utilizing interest rates in effect at December 31, 2021, our annual interest payments (including commitment fees and letter of credit fees) on variable rate Senior Secured Credit Facilities as of December 31, 2021 is anticipated to be approximately $27.1 million for fiscal year 2022, $53.4 million for fiscal years 2023-2024, $52.3 million for the fiscal years 2025-2026 and $48.1 thereafter. The debt matures in December 2028. The future annual interest obligations noted herein are estimated only in relation to debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
(2) In addition to the above operating lease obligations, we also rent utility poles used in our operations. Generally, pole rentals are cancellable on short notice, but we anticipate that such rentals will recur. Rent expense for pole rental attachments was approximately $6.1 million, $5.2 million and $5.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $103.4 million from $277.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $174.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to the increase in income taxes paid as a result of the sale of five of our service areas in the second half of 2021, the reduction in operating income, including the impact from the aforementioned sale, and timing differences of our receivables and payables, partially offset by the decrease in interest paid.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $234.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $1,559.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The change is primarily attributable to proceeds received from the sale of our Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio, Chicago, Illinois, Evansville, Indiana, and Baltimore, Maryland markets, as well as a decrease in capital expenditures.
We have ongoing capital expenditure requirements related to the maintenance, expansion and technological upgrades of our network infrastructure. Capital expenditures are funded primarily through a combination of cash on hand and cash flow from operations. Our capital expenditures were $207.7 million and $234.1 million for years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The $26.4 million decrease from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily related to decreased expenditures related to customer premise equipment (“CPE”) partially offset by network enhancements focused on increasing bandwidth capacity, standardization and reliability to meet the needs of our customers.
The following table sets forth additional information regarding our capital expenditures for the periods presented:
(1) Customer premise equipment (“CPE”) includes equipment and installation costs incurred to deliver services to residential and business services customers. CPE includes the costs of acquiring and installing our set-top boxes and modems, as well as the cost of customer connections to our network.
(2) Scalable infrastructure includes costs, not directly related to customer acquisition activity, to support new customer growth and provide service enhancements (e.g., headend equipment).
(3) Line extensions include costs associated with new home development within our footprint and edge-outs (e.g., fiber / coaxial cable, amplifiers, electronic equipment, make-ready and design engineering).
(4) Support capital and other includes costs to modify or replace existing HFC network, including enhancements, and all other costs to support day-to-day operations, including land, buildings, vehicles, office equipment, tools and test equipment.
(5) Edge-outs represent costs to extend our network into new adjacent service areas, including the associated CPE.
(6) Business services represent costs associated with the build-out of our network to support business services customers, including the associated CPE.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities increased $1,500.8 million from $51.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1,552.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in net repayments of $1,490.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II-Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” for a description of new accounting pronouncements.