Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Report includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on December 1, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our Sponsor is Warburg Pincus Capital Corporation I-A
Sponsor, L.P. The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on March 4, 2021. On March 9, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 25,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $250.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $14.3 million, of which approximately $8.8 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. On April 16, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option, and the closing of the issuance and sale of the 3,342,178 over-allotment units occurred on April 20, 2021. The issuance by us of the over-allotment units at a price of $10.00 per such units resulted in total gross proceeds of approximately $33.4 million, and the incurrence of approximately $1.8 million in offering costs, of which approximately $1.2 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 5,333,333 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8.0 million. On April 20, 2021, simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the over-allotment units, we consummated the sale of an additional 445,624 private placement warrants pursuant to the over-allotment private placement, generating gross proceeds of approximately $668,000.
The proceeds from the initial public offering and the over-allotment units (approximately $283.4 million in the aggregate), together with certain of the proceeds from the private placements, were placed in our trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and will be invested in United States government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
under the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the proceeds from the initial public offering, the over-allotment units and the private placements, although substantially all of such proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the interest earned on the Trust Account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of our initial public offering, or March 9, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem our Class A ordinary shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Class A ordinary shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.2 million in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $0.6 million.
Our liquidity needs through December 31, 2021 and prior have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, a loan of approximately $78,000 from the Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note, dated December 9, 2020, where the Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 for the payment of costs related to our initial public offering, and the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the Trust Account. We repaid the promissory note in full on March 9, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans to the Company.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating an initial business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation, our initial public offering and our search for a business combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination at the earliest.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $17,000, which consisted of approximately $2.3 million in non-operating
gain resulting from the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, and offset by approximately $1.9 million in general and administrative expenses, and $397,000 in offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
For the period from December 1, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $13,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of any outstanding working capital loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to that certain Registration Rights Agreement, dated March 9, 2021, by and between us, the Sponsor and certain of our directors. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of our initial public offering to purchase up to 3,750,000 additional units at our initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On April 16, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option to purchase 3,342,178 over-allotment units.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.0 million and $0.7 million (approximately $5.7 million in the aggregate), paid upon the closing of our initial public offering and the sale of the over-allotment units, respectively. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.9 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commission will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the New York Stock Exchange through the earlier of consummation of our initial business combination or its liquidation, we agreed to reimburse the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us in the amount of $10,000 per month.
In addition, the Sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable an initial business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to the Sponsor, officers or directors, or their respective affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial business combination will be made from funds held outside the Trust Account.
We incurred $100,000 in general and administrative expenses (related party) in the accompanying statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had accrued approximately $10,000, for services in connection with such agreement on the balance sheet. There was no outstanding balance under this agreement as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
Our warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering and the fair value of the private placement warrants have been estimated using a binomial lattice model in a risk-neutral framework. As the transfer of private placement warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the private placement warrants having substantially the same terms as the Public Warrants, we determined that the fair value of each private placement warrant is equivalent to that of each public warrant. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current
liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of our initial public offering, 28,342,178 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet. There were no Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with each of the closing of our initial public offering and the closing of the over-allotment units, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units sold in our initial public offering and the over-allotment units and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 11,447,393 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period ended December 31, 2020. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
We have considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from weighted average number as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the interim period in which such contingency was satisfied to determine the dilutive impact of these shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06,
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06
also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 1, 2021 using a modified retrospective method of transition. Adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.