ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Williams Rowland Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on March 10, 2021. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination.
As of December 31, 2021, we have not yet commenced operations. All activity for the period from March 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”), which is described below. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds held in the Trust Account. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
Our Sponsors are Williams Rowland Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and Wrac, Ltd, a Guernsey company. The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on July 26, 2021. On July 29, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Common Stock included in the Units offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200 million. On August 5, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its option and purchased 3,000,000 additional Units, generating gross proceeds of $30 million (the “Over-Allotment”).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 9,900,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $9.9 million. Concurrent with the consummation of the Over-Allotment on August 5, 2021, the Sponsors purchased 1,200,000 additional Private Placement Warrants, generating proceeds of $1,200,000 in the Second Private Placement.
Transaction costs of the IPO and subsequent Over-Allotment exercise amounted to $16,074,841, comprised of $4,600,000 of underwriting discount, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting discount, $2,772,169 of fair value of shares transferred to Anchor Investors, and $652,672 of other offering costs.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement on July 29, 2021, and the Over-Allotment and Second Private Placement on August 5, 2021, approximately $234.6 million ($10.20 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement was placed in a Trust Account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, (the “Investment Company Act”)having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 29, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholder’s rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), our obligation under requirements of applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had $613,068 in our operating bank account and working capital of $309,265.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsors of $25,000 (see Notes to the Financial Statements) for the founder shares and the loan under an unsecured promissory note.
We anticipate that the $613,068 outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021, might not be sufficient to allow us to operate until January 29, 2023, the Combination Period, assuming that a Business Combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our Business Combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional Working Capital Loans from the initial stockholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
On September 7, 2021, we executed a promissory note to the Sponsors for an amount of $500,000 (the “Promissory Note”). The Promissory Note is not interest bearing and is repayable at the earlier of the date of when we consummate a Business Combination with another entity, the date on which we determine to liquidate or December 31, 2023. At the option of the Sponsors, in lieu of cash payment of the principal, the Sponsors may receive warrants to purchase Common Stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had borrowed $125,000 under the Promissory Note, which remained outstanding.
We can raise additional capital through Working Capital Loans from the initial stockholders, our officers, directors, or their respective affiliates, or through loans from third parties. None of the Sponsors, officers or directors are under any obligation, except as described above, to advance funds to, or to invest in, us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of our business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statements.
We have until January 29, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able consummate a Business Combination within the Combination Period. If a Business Combination is not consummated within the Combination Period, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the authoritative guidance FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) Topic 2014-15, “Disclosure of Uncertainties About an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern”, management has determined that the liquidity condition, mandatory liquidation, and subsequent dissolution, should we be unable to complete a Business Combination, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 29, 2023.
Results of Operations
All of our activity from March 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, was in preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from March 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a loss of $707,333, which consisted solely of formation and operating costs of $753,959, offset by trust interest income of $46,626.
Contractual Obligations
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter is entitled to $0.35 per unit, or approximately $7.0 million in the aggregate, which will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In connection with the consummation of the Over-Allotment on August 5, 2021, the underwriter was paid an additional fee of $600,000 upon closing of the Over-Allotment and approximately $1.05 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Administrative Support Agreement
We agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month, commencing on the date of listing on the NYSE, for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to members of the management team. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
The Company complies with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A-“Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting, fair value of founder shares transferred to Anchor Investors, and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the IPO. Offering costs amounted to $16,074,841, for the Initial Public Offering and subsequent over-allotment. Total amount of Offering costs is allocated between redeemable shares and Public Warrants based on their relative fair values.
Net Loss Per Share
The Company complies with the accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company applies the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption amount approximates fair value. Changes in fair value are not considered a dividend of the purposes of the numerator in the earnings per share calculation. Net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the shares of redeemable common stock and the shares of non-redeemable common stock by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted income per share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the IPO since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company deferred application of ASU 2020-06 and is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.