Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The Company is a global designer and manufacturer of advanced RF, microwave and millimeter wave components, modules, systems and instruments. Serving the wireless, telecommunication, satellite, military, aerospace, semiconductor and medical industries, Wireless Telecom Group products enable innovation across a wide range of traditional and emerging wireless technologies. With a unique set of high-performance products including peak power meters, signal analyzers, signal generators, phase noise analyzers, signal processing modules, LTE and 5G physical layer and stack software, power splitters and combiners, GPS repeaters, public safety monitors, noise sources, and programmable noise generators, Wireless Telecom Group supports the development, testing and deployment of wireless technologies around the globe.
In 2021, the Company was comprised of five brands - Microlab, Boonton, Noisecom, CommAgility and Holzworth organized as three product groups. Our product groups were organized as follows: Radio Frequency Components (“RFC”) was comprised of our Microlab brand; Radio, Baseband, Software (“RBS”) was comprised of our CommAgility brand; and Test and Measurement (“T&M”) was comprised of our Boonton, Noisecom and Holzworth brands. The financial condition and results of operations described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K include the 2021 results of Microlab. On March 1, 2022, we sold Microlab to RF Industries, Ltd. Accordingly, the Company currently is comprised of the T&M and RBS products groups.
Key 2021 Developments and Financial Results
In 2021 our consolidated revenue increased 18.0% from the prior year, driven primarily by our T&M and RBS revenues, as we experienced a recovery from COVID-19 related declines as well as strong demand for our T&M and RBS solutions. T&M product demand was driven by new product introductions, improved demand generation activities, and a rebound in customer spending outside the U.S. due in part to relaxed COVID-19 related restrictions. Also contributing to the overall increase in revenue were increased sales of our LTE and 5G software and services driven by new customer contracts for specialized applications and RBS digital signal processing cards.
Our consolidated gross margins were 50.9% in 2021 compared to 50.2% for the year ago period reflecting increased sales of our higher margin T&M solutions. Our 2021 GAAP operating loss decreased from $8.1 million in 2020 to $145,000 in 2021. The 2021 GAAP operating loss included a non-cash indefinite lived intangible asset impairment charge of $258,000 and an increase in our contingent consideration liability related to the Holzworth earnout of $386,000. The intangible asset impairment charge was recorded as part of our required annual impairment testing and was triggered primarily by the lower hardware sales at CommAgility as compared to prior years. We continue to be optimistic about CommAgility’s ability to grow software and services revenues as evidenced by our 2021 results which reflect a 140% growth from 2020 driven by new customers and applications. In addition, our recent 2020 acquisition of Holzworth in our T&M product group, continues to outperform our expectations resulting in an increase in the contingent consideration liability noted above of $386,000 related to that brand’s financial performance in 2021. The 2021 earn-out is the second and final earnout period for Holzworth.
In 2021 we generated $4.6 million of cash flow from operations, an increase of $1.6 million from the prior year period, and we continued to carefully manage our capital expenditures which totaled $524,000 for 2021. In June, we received forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program Loan in the amount of $2.0 million which is recognized as a gain on extinguishment of debt in other income in the consolidated statement of operations. In the third quarter we raised $563,000 in cash, net of agent commissions and professional fees, as part of our At-the-Market Common Stock Sales offering and later in the third quarter made a prepayment of our Muzinich term debt in the amount of $3.7 million. Overall, our debt less cash, or net debt, as of December 31, 2021 is zero, a reduction of $3.4 million of net debt from December 31, 2020.
The financial information presented herein includes: (i) Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020; (ii) Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income/(Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020; (iii) Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020; and (iv) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses for each period. The following represents a summary of the Company’s critical accounting policies, defined as those policies that the Company believes are: (a) the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and (b) that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Estimates and assumptions are made by management to assess the overall likelihood that an accounting estimate or assumption may require adjustment. It is reasonably possible that these estimates may ultimately differ materially from actual results. See Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for a description of all of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), (“Topic 606”) requires the Company to identify the performance obligations in our revenue arrangements - that is, those promised goods and services (or bundles of promised goods or services) that are distinct - and allocate the transaction price of the revenue arrangement to those performance obligations on the basis of estimated standalone selling prices (“SSP’s”).
Sales of hardware which include sales of radio frequency solutions, digital signal processing hardware, power meters, analyzers, noise/signal generators, phase noise analyzers and other components generally consist of one performance obligation which is satisfied upon shipment to the customer. When contract terms require transfer of control upon delivery at a customer’s location, revenue is recognized on the date of delivery. Sales of hardware to distributors that include a limited right of return are recorded net of expected returns.
Sale of software licenses in the CommAgility brand may involve multiple performance obligations including multiple software releases and consultancy services. In these cases transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation on the basis of SSP and revenue is recognized when the distinct performance obligation is satisfied. The company determines performance obligations and SSP’s in arrangements with multiple performance obligations in accordance with Topic 606 which requires significant judgement.
Services arrangements involving repairs and calibrations of the Company’s products are generally considered a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized as the services are rendered.
Certain software arrangements in the CommAgility brand may involve the transfer of software along with significant customization services. In these cases the customization services and software licenses are combined as one distinct performance obligation and revenue is recognized over time as the project is completed. The duration of these performance obligations are typically one year or less.
Leases
We lease office space and certain equipment under non-cancelable lease agreements. We apply ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) to our lease arrangements. In accordance with Topic 842, we assess all arrangements that convey the right to control the use of property, plant and equipment, at inception, to determine if it is, or contains, a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present in that arrangement. For those leases identified, we determine the lease classification, recognition, and measurement at the lease commencement date. For arrangements that contain a lease we: (i) identify lease and non-lease components; (ii) determine the consideration in the contract; (iii) determine whether the lease is an operating or financing lease; and (iv) recognize lease Right of Use (“ROU”) assets and corresponding lease liabilities. Lease liabilities are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. The corresponding ROU asset is measured from the initial lease liability, adjusted by (i) accrued or prepaid rents; (ii) remaining unamortized initial direct costs and lease incentives; and (iii) any impairments of the ROU asset. The interest rate implicit in our lease contracts is typically not readily determinable and as such, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date, which represents an internally developed rate that would be incurred to borrow, on a collateralized basis, over a similar term, an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
Business Combinations
The Company uses the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations which requires the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be recorded at their respective fair market value as of the acquisition date. Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are determined based upon the Company’s valuation and involves making significant estimates and assumptions based on facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. The Company uses a measurement period following the acquisition date to gather information that existed as of the acquisition date that is needed to determine the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The measurement period ends once all information is obtained, but no later than one year from the acquisition date.
Valuation of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired in a purchase business combination. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that goodwill might be impaired, by first performing a qualitative evaluation of events and circumstances impacting the reporting unit to determine the likelihood of goodwill impairment. Based on that qualitative evaluation, if we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, no further evaluation is necessary. Otherwise we perform a quantitative impairment test.
The Company has three reporting units with goodwill - Holzworth, Microlab and CommAgility. The Company performed a qualitative assessment in the fourth quarter of 2021 of each reporting unit. The qualitative assessment of Holzworth and Microlab did not indicate any impairment of goodwill. As a result of the reduced hardware sales from prior years, the Company performed a quantitative impairment test of the goodwill of the CommAgility reporting unit.
For goodwill impairment testing using the quantitative approach, the Company estimates the fair value of the selected reporting unit using the income approach and the market approach. Fair value under the income approach is derived primarily through the use of a discounted cash flow model based on our best estimate of amounts and timing of future revenues and cash flows and our most recent business and strategic plans. Fair value under the market approach is derived by applying a multiple to our best estimate of future revenue. The Company applies equal weighting to the income approach and the market approach to arrive at an estimated fair value. The estimated fair value is compared to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value, no impairment charge is recorded. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value an impairment charge is recorded to goodwill in the amount by which carrying value exceeds fair value. Both the income approach and market approach require judgmental assumptions about projected revenue growth, future operating margins, discount rates and terminal values over a multi-year period. There are inherent uncertainties related to these assumptions and management’s judgment in applying them to the analysis of goodwill impairment. While the Company believes it has made reasonable estimates and assumptions to calculate the fair value of its reporting units, it is possible a material change could occur.
The result of our quantitative analysis was that the estimated fair value of the CommAgility reporting unit exceeded its carrying value thus no goodwill impairment charge was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021. The excess of fair value above its carrying value was approximately 25% of the fair value. Recent operating performance, along with assumptions for specific customer opportunities, were considered in the key assumptions used during the fiscal 2021 impairment analysis. Management of the Company has determined the goodwill of CommAgility may have an increased likelihood of impairment if CommAgility is not able to execute against customer opportunities, and the long-term outlook for their cash flows are adversely impacted. Furthermore, changes in the long-term outlook may result in a change to other valuation assumptions. Factors monitored by management which could result in a change to CommAgility estimates include the outcome of customer requests for proposals and subsequent awards, labor market conditions and levels of overall economic activity.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $4.7 million related to the CommAgility reporting unit. The non-cash impairment charge was due to a number of factors that arose as part of our quantitative assessment as of the valuation date in the prior year, including an assessment of our historical results and the significant decline in hardware sales in 2020, the difficulty of predicting future customer demand, the uncertainty of future sales of 4G hardware cards, the uncertainty of the growth of 5G software and services revenues due to the early stages of 5G adoption for new technology and expectations for 5G deployments, the uncertainty of the impact of the COVID 19 pandemic on customer spending, and the uncertainty for enterprise spending and longer-term investment.
Due to the many variables inherent in the estimation of a reporting unit’s fair value and the relative size of our recorded goodwill, differences in assumptions may have a material effect on the results of our impairment analysis. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company’s consolidated goodwill balance of $11.5 million was comprised of $1.4 million related to the Microlab reporting unit, $6.0 million related to the Holzworth reporting unit and $4.1 million related to the CommAgility reporting unit.
Intangible and Long-lived Assets
Intangible assets include acquired technology, patents, non-competition agreements, customer relationships and tradenames. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated economic lives of the assets, which range from three to twelve years. Long-lived assets, including intangible assets with finite lives, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. Measurement of an impairment loss for long-lived assets that management expects to hold and use is based on the estimated fair value of the asset. Long-lived assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or estimated fair value less costs to sell. The estimated useful lives of intangible and long-lived assets are based on many factors including assumptions regarding the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition and other economic factors, expectations regarding the future use of the asset, and our historical experience with similar assets. The assumptions used to determine the estimated useful lives could change due to numerous factors including product demand, market conditions, technological developments, economic conditions and competition. Intangible assets determined to have indefinite useful lives are not amortized but are tested for impairment annually and more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an asset may be impaired.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $258,000 related to the CommAgility tradename. The non-cash impairment charge was due to a number of factors that arose as part of our quantitative assessment, most notably declining hardware sales since 2019. Additionally, the continued emergence of technical standards and the complexity of the specialized applications that our CommAgility software and related services would be integrated with as part of new customer projects were a factor in the tradename impairment analysis.
Income taxes
The Company records deferred taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes.” ASC 740 requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between tax basis of assets and liabilities and the amounts at which they are carried in the financial statements, based upon the enacted rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The Company establishes a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The Company periodically assesses the value of its deferred tax assets and determines the necessity for a valuation allowance.
Realization of the Company’s deferred tax assets is dependent upon the Company generating sufficient taxable income in the appropriate tax jurisdictions in future years to obtain benefit from the reversal of net deductible temporary differences and from utilization of net operating losses. The amount of deferred tax assets considered realizable is subject to adjustment in future periods if estimates of future taxable income are changed.
Uncertain tax positions
Under ASC 740, the Company must recognize and disclose uncertain tax positions only if it is more-likely-than-not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position. The amounts recognized in the financial statements attributable to such position, if any, are recorded if there is a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon the ultimate resolution of the position.
The Company has analyzed its filing positions in all of the jurisdictions where it is required to file income tax returns. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has identified its federal tax return, the state tax returns in New Jersey and Colorado and the United Kingdom as “major” tax jurisdictions, as defined in ASC 740, in which it is required to file income tax returns. Based on the evaluations noted above, the Company has concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition or disclosure in its consolidated financial statements.
Based on a review of tax positions for all open years and contingencies as set out in the Company’s Notes to the consolidated financial statements, no reserves for uncertain income tax positions have been recorded pursuant to ASC 740 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the Company does not anticipate that it is reasonably possible that any material increase or decrease in its unrecognized tax benefits will occur within the next twelve months.
Stock-based compensation
The Company follows the provisions of ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation” which requires that compensation expense be recognized based on the fair value of equity awards on the date of grant. The fair value of restricted share awards and restricted stock unit awards is determined using the market value of our common stock on the date of the grant. The fair value of stock options at the date of grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. When stock options are granted, the Company takes into consideration guidance under ASC 718 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 (SAB 107) when determining assumptions. The expected option life is derived from assumed exercise rates based upon historical exercise patterns and represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding. The expected volatility is based upon historical volatility of our shares using daily price observations over an observation period that approximates the expected life of the options. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve rate in effect at the time of grant for periods similar to the expected option life. The Company accounts for forfeitures for all equity awards when they occur.
Management estimates are necessary in determining compensation expense for stock options with performance-based vesting criteria. Compensation expense for this type of stock-based award is recognized over the period from the date the performance conditions are determined to be probable of occurring through the date the applicable conditions are expected to be met. If the performance conditions are not considered probable of being achieved, no expense is recognized until such time as the performance conditions are considered probable of being met, if ever. Management evaluates whether performance conditions are probable of occurring on a quarterly basis.
Inventories and Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (average cost) or net realizable value. The Company reviews inventory for excess and obsolescence based on best estimates of future demand, product lifecycle status and product development plans.
Allowances for doubtful accounts
The Company maintains allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required payments. A key consideration in estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts has been, and will continue to be, our customer’s payment history and aging of our accounts receivable balance.
Warranties
The Company generally offers standard warranties against product defects. We estimate future warranty costs to be incurred based on historical warranty claims experience including estimates of material and labor costs over the warranty period.
Comparison of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 with the year ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenues (in thousands)
Consolidated net revenues increased 18.0% due to higher sales of our T&M and RBS solutions from the prior year period. T&M sales increased due to new product introductions, improved demand generation activities, and a rebound in customer spending outside the U.S. due in part to relaxed COVID-19 related restrictions. RBS revenues increased due to higher sales of our LTE and 5G software and services driven by new customer contracts for specialized applications and higher sales of our digital signal processing cards. RFC revenues were flat with last year as carrier spending remained low in the first two quarters of 2021 due to the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic but increased as compared to the prior year in the third and fourth quarters.
Gross Profit (in thousands)
Consolidated gross profit increased $4.1 million primarily due to higher net revenues at our RBS and T&M product groups as compared to the prior year. Consolidated gross profit margin increased marginally from the prior year. RBS gross profit margin declined marginally due to higher mix of service revenues in 2021 as compared to 2020 which had a lower margin than software revenues. T&M gross profit margin increased 200 basis points from the prior year, which included certain one-time non-cash purchase accounting adjustments of $448,000. RFC gross profit margin declined 140 basis points from the prior year due to mix and continued market pricing pressures.
Operating Expenses (in thousands)
Consolidated research and development expenses decreased $839,000 or 13.1% from the prior year period due primarily to lower third party research and development expenses of $543,000 related to 2020 product development initiatives in our Boonton and CommAgility brands. The mix of third-party research and development expenses to internal expenses varies by project. We expect to continue third party investments in research and development dependent upon project deadlines, new product development opportunities and longer term product roadmap dependencies which, in turn, may create increases and decreases to research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue. Additionally, salaries expense declined from the prior year due primarily to our RBS engineers spending more time on customer service projects resulting in their salaries being classified as costs of revenue rather than research and development expense. These decreases were offset by an unfavorable foreign exchange impact of approximately $226,000 due to the strengthening of the Great British Pound (“GBP”) against the U.S. dollar as compared to the prior year.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $214,000 or 3.1% due primarily to higher commissions expense of $217,000 and unfavorable foreign exchange impact of $56,000 due to the strengthening of the GBP to the U.S. dollar as compared to the prior year offset by other miscellaneous declines in sales and marketing expenses from the prior year.
General and administrative expenses increased $2.0 million or 19.8% due primarily to higher salaries and benefits of $695,000 due to headcount increases at our RBS product group and the full year impact of our Chief Revenue Officer, a higher bonus accrual of $434,000, higher legal and merger and acquisition expenses of $514,000 related to the sale of Microlab, higher insurance costs of $122,000, higher consulting and other market research expenses related to our strategic review process of $300,000 and an unfavorable foreign exchange impact of $126,000 related to the strengthening of the GBP as compared to the prior year. This was partially offset by a reduction in stock compensation expense of $217,000 due to the reversal of expense related to certain performance based stock options which are not probable to vest due to the Microlab divestiture as well as the deferred Form S-3 cost expense of $255,000 that was incurred in the prior year.
Goodwill and intangible impairment charges in the current year relate to an impairment charge taken on our indefinite lived tradename asset at our CommAgility reporting unit as a result of our annual impairment testing. The goodwill and intangible impairment charge in the prior year relate to our CommAgility reporting unit and is the result of our annual goodwill impairment analysis.
The loss on change in fair value of contingent consideration in both 2020 and 2021 relate to the earnout consideration to be paid in connection with the Holzworth acquisition. The loss recognized in 2021 of $386,000 relates to the additional consideration earned in relation to the better than expected performance in fiscal year 2021, and the loss of $1.1 million recognized in 2020 relates to the better than expected performance in fiscal year 2020.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
The Company recorded a $2.0 million gain on extinguishment of debt in 2021, as we received notice from the SBA that our PPP loan was fully forgiven.
Other income/expense
Other income decreased $117,000 from the prior year due primarily to gains on sales of assets realized in 2020 and lower foreign currency exchange gains.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $158,000 due primarily to the higher interest rate on our term loan facility with Muzinich and the prepayment fee associated with the loan payment made in the third quarter of 2021.
Tax
Consolidated tax benefit decreased $136,000 from the prior year due primarily to higher taxable income in the US jurisdiction partially offset by taxable losses in the UK due in part to research and development deductions.
Net Income/(Loss)
The Company generated net income for the year of $1.5 million as compared to an $8.1 million net loss in the prior year due to higher gross profit and lower impairment and contingent consideration charges as compared to the prior year and the gain recognized on extinguishment of the PPP loan in the current year which were only partially offset by higher interest expense and a lower tax benefit in the current year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had three credit facilities - an asset based revolving loan which was subject to a borrowing base calculation (as defined) with Bank of America, N.A. (the “Credit Facility” or the “Revolver”), a term loan facility with Muzinich BDC Inc. (“Muzinich”) (the “Term Loan Facility”) which was used to finance the Holzworth acquisition in February 2020, and the Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Agreement (“CIBLS Loan”) with Lloyds Bank PLC (“Lloyds”).
On March 1, 2022 the Company completed the divestiture of Microlab and received proceeds of $23.9 million which is subject to final purchase price adjustments in accordance with the Purchase Agreement. Simultaneous with the Microlab close the Company used $4.2 million of such proceeds to repay its term loan related to the Term Loan Facility and approximately $700,000 to repay its outstanding revolver balance related to the Credit Facility and terminated both the Term Loan Facility and Credit Facility. The Microlab transaction generated approximately $18.0 million of cash net of certain expenses and holdbacks. We expect our cash balance and cash generated by operations will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for the next twelve months. Our ability to meet our cash requirements will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including the fact that the Company will no longer benefit from the performance of the Microlab brand which historically accounted for a substantial portion of our consolidated revenue and that we will be entirely dependent on the RBS and T&M product groups.
The Microlab divestiture will be treated as a sale of the assets and liabilities of Microlab to RF Industries for U.S. federal and applicable state income tax purposes. The Company has approximately $15.0 million of U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards and approximately $41.3 million of New Jersey state net operating loss carryforwards as of December 31, 2021. We expect to utilize all of our federal net operating loss carryforwards and approximately 50% of our state net operating loss carryforwards to offset the taxable gain generated from the Microlab divestiture. Accordingly, in the future, the Company could be subject to cash income taxes which would reduce our liquidity. Additionally, CommAgility benefits from a research and development deduction which significantly reduces the cash needed to pay taxes in the UK.
Credit Facilities in Effect During Fiscal 2021
Revolver
The Company entered into the Credit Facility with Bank of America, N.A. (“Bank of America”) on February 16, 2017. The Credit Facility provided for a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $760,000 (the “Term Loan”) and an asset based revolving loan (the “Revolver”), which was subject to a Borrowing Base Calculation (as defined in the Credit Facility) of up to a maximum availability of $9.0 million (“Revolver Commitment Amount”). The borrowing base was calculated as a percentage of eligible accounts receivable and inventory, as defined, subject to certain caps and limits. The borrowing base was calculated on a monthly basis and interest was calculated at LIBOR plus a margin. The proceeds of the Term Loan and Revolver were used to finance the acquisition of CommAgility in 2017.
In connection with the Holzworth acquisition, on February 7, 2020, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries (the “Borrowers”), and Bank of America entered into Amendment No. 5 to the Credit Facility (“BOA Amendment 5”). By entering into BOA Amendment 5, Holzworth, together with CommAgility Limited, became borrowers under the Credit Facility. The obligations of the Borrowers under the Credit Facility were guaranteed by Wireless Telecom Group, Ltd. CommAgility Limited and Wireless Telecom Group, Ltd. are both wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company. Additionally, the Company prepaid the remaining principal balance of the Term Loan in the amount of $304,000.
On May 4, 2020, the Company, its subsidiaries and Bank of America entered into Amendment No. 6 which, among other things, amended the definition of “Debt” to include the PPP loan as long as the proceeds were used for allowable purposes under the CARES Act (as defined below) and the Company promptly submitted an application for forgiveness and substantially all of the loan was forgiven. The Company received notice in June 2021 that the loan and accrued interest were fully forgiven, as described below.
On February 25, 2021, the Company, its subsidiaries and Bank of America entered into Amendment No. 7 which revised the Credit Facility to accommodate the changes to the deferred purchase price payments to and notes with the Holzworth sellers, as described above, and provided Bank of America’s consent to the Company entering into the Muzinich Second Amendment, as described below.
On September 28, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into Amendment No. 8 (“BOA Amendment 8”) in which Bank of America consented to the aforementioned principal prepayment of the Muzinich Term Loan Facility and amended the definition of Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio to treat the Muzinich principal prepayment as being made on October 1, 2020. Additionally, Bank of America and the Company agreed that, in accordance with the Credit Facility, the LIBOR should be replaced with a successor rate in accordance with the provisions of BOA Amendment 5. Accordingly, BOA Amendment 8 defines the LIBOR successor rate for loans denominated in U.S. dollars to be the Bloomberg Short-Term Bank Yield Index rate (“BSBY”), loans denominated in Sterling to be the Sterling Overnight Index Average Reference Rate (“SONIA”) and loans denominated in Euros to be the Euro Interbank Offered Rate (“EURIBOR”). Loans drawn after the effective date of BOA Amendment 8 bear interest as the successor rates named above plus the applicable margin, as defined.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no balance drawn on the Revolver and the interest rate was 2.00%.
Muzinch Term Loan Facility
In connection with the Holzworth acquisition, on February 7, 2020, the Company, as borrower, and its subsidiaries, as guarantors, and Muzinich BDC, Inc., as lender (“Muzinich”), entered into a Term Loan Facility, which provides for a term loan in the principal amount of $8.4 million (the “Initial Term Loan”). All proceeds of the Initial Term Loan were used to fund the cash portion of the purchase price for the Holzworth acquisition. Principal payments on the Initial Term Loan were $21,000 per quarter with a balloon payment at maturity which was February 7, 2025. The Term Loan Facility included an upfront fee of 2.50% of the aggregate principal amount of the Initial Term Loan. In connection with the Term Loan Facility, the Company incurred costs of $1.0 million, including the aforementioned 2.50% upfront fee to Muzinich, which were recorded as a reduction of the carrying amount of the debt and are being amortized over the term of the loan.
On May 4, 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment to the Term Loan Facility which, among other things, amended the definition of “Indebtedness” to include the PPP (as defined below) loan as long as the proceeds were used for allowable purposes under the CARES Act, the receipt of the loan did not violate the Credit Facility and the Company submitted an application for forgiveness and substantially all of the loan was forgiven. The Company received notice in June 2021 that the loan and accrued interest were fully forgiven, as described below.
On February 25, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement and Limited Waiver (“Amendment 2”) with Muzinich, in which Muzinich agreed to waive the Company’s obligation to comply with the consolidated leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenants in the Term Loan Facility for the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2020. We were not in compliance with such covenants primarily as a result of the impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on our consolidated financial results. Amendment 2, among other things, amended the definition of consolidated EBITDA to include certain cash tax benefits related to our U.K. tax jurisdiction and reduced our consolidated leverage ratio for the twelve month periods ended September 30, 2021 from 3.00 to 2.75, December 31, 2021 from 2.75 to 2.25, March 31, 2022 from 2.50 to 2.00 and June 30, 2022 from 2.25 to 2.00. Additionally, the interest rate margin was increased from 7.25% to 9.25% effective January 1, 2021 and would step down to 8.50% and 7.25% upon the Company achieving consolidated EBITDA on a trailing twelve-month basis of $4.0 million and $6.3 million, respectively. Muzinich and the Company also agreed on an excess cash flow payment of $428,000 which was made in March 2021 and Muzinich provided consent for the Company to change the deferred purchase price payments to and enter into notes with the Holzworth sellers in the amount of $750,000, as described above in Note 2.
On May 27, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into the Third Amendment to the Credit Agreement and Limited Waiver (“Amendment 3)” with Muzinich in which Muzinich, among other things, permitted CommAgility to enter into the CIBLS Loan Agreement with Lloyds Bank Plc. See description below.
On September 28, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into the Fourth Amendment to Credit Agreement and Limited Waiver (“Amendment 4”) with Muzinich. Amendment 4 was executed in connection with a prepayment of the principal balance of the Muzinich term loan in the amount of $3.7 million and accrued interest thereon of $95,000 on September 28, 2021. Additionally, the Company paid a prepayment fee of 2% of the prepayment amount or $74,000.
Under the terms of Amendment 4, the interest rate margin was decreased from 9.25% to 8.75% when trailing twelve month Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, excluding the U.K. R&D tax credit, was less than or equal to $4.0 million and decreased from 8.50% to 8.00% when trailing twelve month Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, excluding the U.K. R&D tax credit, is greater than $4.0 million but equal to or less than $6.3 million. Muzinich also agreed to waive compliance with the financial covenant set forth in Section 7.11(c) of the Credit Agreement from September 28, 2021 until March 31, 2022. Section 7.11(c) required the trailing four week average liquidity, as defined, of the Company’s CommAgility subsidiary to be no less than $1.0 million. The waiver of this covenant could be extended upon the consent of Muzinich. Additionally, under Amendment 4, the definition of Consolidated Interest Charges was amended to treat the aforementioned principal prepayment of $3.7 million as being made on October 1, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the principal balance on the Term Loan Facility was $4.1 million and the interest rate was 9.75%. On March 1, 2022 the Company repaid the outstanding principal balance and accrued interest on the Term Loan Facility and the Term Loan Facility was terminated.
PPP Loan
On May 4, 2020, the Company received $2.0 million pursuant to a loan from Bank of America N.A. under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) administered by the Small Business Association (“SBA”). The loan had an interest rate of 1% and a term of 24 months. A repayment schedule was not provided by Bank of America. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020 the full amount of the term loan was shown as due in May 2022. Funds from the loan were used only for certain permitted purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities. The CARES Act and the PPP provided a mechanism for forgiveness of up to the full amount of the loan upon application to the SBA for forgiveness by the Company. The Company applied for forgiveness of the loan and received notice that the loan and accrued interest were fully forgiven. The Company elected to account for the loan in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification 470 Debt. Accordingly, the Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt on the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income/(Loss) in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
CIBLS Loan
On May 27, 2021, CommAgility entered into the Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Agreement (“CIBLS Loan”) with Lloyds Bank PLC (“Lloyds”). Under the terms of the CIBLS Loan, CommAgility can draw up to a maximum of £250,000 for purposes of supporting daily business cash flow. The CIBLS Loan is repayable in 48 consecutive equal monthly installments beginning in month 13 after the initial loan drawdown (12 month principal repayment holiday). Interest is payable monthly at the official bank rate of the Bank of England plus an interest margin of 2.35% per annum. Interest payments are due monthly beginning in month 13 after the initial loan drawdown. The first twelve months of interest payments are paid by the U.K. government. The CIBLS Loan is secured by the assets of CommAgility subject to a Deed of Priority between Muzinich, Bank of America and Lloyds. The CIBLS Loan ranks subordinate to both the Muzinich Term Loan and Bank of America Credit Facility.
On July 1, 2021 CommAgility executed a draw down of the maximum amount of £250,000. As of December 31, 2021, $42,000 is included in short term debt and $295,000 is included in long term debt on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Sources and Uses of Cash
As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s consolidated cash balance was $4.5 million as compared to $4.9 million as of the prior year. No funds were drawn on our Revolver and we had availability under our borrowing base of $6.1 million as of December 31, 2021. The outstanding balances of our Term Loan Facility and CIBLS Loan were $4.1 million and $337,000, respectively.
Our primary sources of cash were cash generated from operations of $4.6 million, $562,000 of net proceeds related to shares sold under our at the market common stock offering and $345,000 related to the receipt of the CIBLS Loan, which was used to fund additional payments on the Muzinich term loan in the amount of $4.1 million and $1.3 million of payments related to Holzworth acquisition.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased from $3.0 million to $4.6 million primarily due to improved operating income offset by lower cash generated from working capital as compared to the prior year.
Investing Activities
Cash used by investing activities decreased from $8.6 million to $724,000 due to cash paid for the Holzworth acquisition in 2020 only partially offset by increased capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Cash from financing activities decreased from $6.3 million in the prior year to $4.2 million of cash used in the current year due primarily to the receipt of the $8.4 million Term Loan Facility, net of debt issuance costs and $2.0 million PPP loan in 2020 compared to $4.2 million of term loan repayments and $1.1 million of contingent consideration payments related to the Holzworth acquisition made in 2021.
Holzworth Deferred Purchase Price and Earnout
On February 19, 2021, the Company entered into the Second Amendment with Holzworth and Sellers. The Second Amendment, among other things, converts the second deferred purchase price of $750,000 into unsecured seller notes with interest at an annual rate of 6.5% starting from April 1, 2021 until final payment. The payment date has been changed from March 31, 2021 to three equal installments of $250,000, plus accrued interest, due on July 1, 2021, October 1, 2021 and January 1, 2022.
Additionally, the parties amended the payment dates of the earnout consideration. The payment date of the first earnout payment based on the financial results of the calendar year ended 2020 (“Year 1 Earnout”) has been amended from March 31, 2021 to (i) six (6) equal quarterly installments of 10% of the Year 1 Earnout payable on the last business day of each calendar quarter between June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2022 and (ii) one (1) installment payment equal to 40% of the Year 1 Earnout on December 31, 2022. The Year 1 Earnout is payable in cash or shares of the Company’s common stock based on the 90 trading day volume weighted average price immediately preceding final determination of the Year 1 Earnout or $2.19 per share. The estimated payment for the Year 1 Earnout is $3.4 million. The payment date for the second earnout payment which is based on the financial results of the calendar year ended 2021 (“Year 2 Earnout”) has been amended from March 31, 2022 to four equal quarterly installments payable on the last business day of each calendar quarter between March 31, 2022 and December 31, 2022. The Year 2 Earnout is also payable in cash or stock at the Company’s discretion. The aggregate earnout payments of the Year 1 Earnout and the Year 2 Earnout cannot exceed $7.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Earnout accrual was $2.9 million, of which $2.5 million is related to the Year 1 Earnout and $386,000 is related to the Year 2 Earnout and is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet.
The parties also amended the provisions with respect to restrictions on transfer to adjust for the change in timing of earnout payments, as described above. Finally, the parties added a requirement that any earned but unpaid earnout consideration will be accelerated in the event the Company desires to enter into a material asset or equity acquisition in the future.
On August 27, 2018 the Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 which was declared effective on September 17, 2018. On July 21, 2021, the Company entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. (the “Agent”) to issue and sell through the Agent, shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $12,000.000 (the “Shares”), as described in Note 4 - Equity. From July 21, 2021 through August 6, 2021, the Agent sold 254,701 shares of the company’s common stock for net proceeds of $739,000 after deducting sales commissions paid to the Agent in accordance with the terms of the Sales Agreement and $560,000 after deducting direct legal and accounting fees associated with the offering. The shelf registration statement expired on September 17, 2021 and was not renewed by the Company.
Purchase obligations consist of inventory that arises in the normal course of business operations. Future obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 consisted of the following:
Table of Contractual Obligations
Payments by year (in thousands)
The table of contractual obligations includes the Muzinich term loan facility which was repaid and terminated on March 1, 2022, in connection with the Microlab divestiture.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than contractual obligations incurred in the normal course of business, the Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Affecting the Company
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.