Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, strategies, prospects, objectives, expectations and intentions. The cautionary statements discussed in “Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as applying to all forward-looking statements wherever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed here. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, without limitation, those discussed in “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For the discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 2, 2021 compared to the year ended December 28, 2019, refer to "Part II-Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
We are a global wellness company powered by the world’s leading commercial weight management program and an award-winning digital subscription platform. We are focused on inspiring people to adopt healthy habits for real life and aim to democratize and deliver wellness for all. With nearly six decades of weight management experience, expertise and know-how, we are one of the most recognized and trusted brand names among weight-conscious consumers. We educate our members and provide them with guidance, digital tools and an inspiring community to enable them to develop healthy habits and focus on their overall health and wellness. WW-branded services and products include digital offerings provided through our apps and websites, workshops, consumer products, and various events and experiences. Our business has gone through a significant shift to a digital subscription model over the past several years and our primary sources of revenue are subscriptions for our digital products and for our workshops. Our “Digital” business refers to providing subscriptions to our digital product offerings, including Digital 360 and Personal Coaching + Digital. Our “Workshops + Digital” (formerly known as “Studio + Digital”) business refers to providing unlimited access to our workshops combined with our digital subscription product offerings to commitment plan subscribers. It also includes the provision of access to workshops for members who do not subscribe to commitment plans, including our “pay-as-you-go” members.
We operate in numerous countries around the world, including through our franchise operations. We have four reportable segments based on an integrated geographical structure as follows: North America, Continental Europe (CE), United Kingdom and Other. See the section entitled “Business-Business Organization and Global Operations” in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on these reportable segments and the countries in which we operate.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenues
We derive our revenues principally from:
•
Subscription Revenues. Our “Subscription Revenues” consist of “Digital Subscription Revenues” and “Workshops + Digital Fees” (formerly known as “Studio + Digital Fees”). “Digital Subscription Revenues” consist of the fees associated with subscriptions for our Digital offerings, including Digital 360 and Personal Coaching + Digital. “Workshops + Digital Fees” consist of the fees associated with our subscription plans for combined workshops and digital offerings and other payment arrangements for access to workshops.
•
In-studio product sales. We sell a range of consumer products, including bars, snacks, cookbooks and kitchen tools, in our studios.
•
E-commerce, licensing, franchise royalties and other. We generate revenues from sales of consumer products online through our e-commerce platforms and through our trusted partners. We license our trademarks and other intellectual property in certain categories of food, beverages and other relevant consumer products and services. We also co-brand or endorse with carefully selected branded consumer products and services. In addition, our franchisees typically pay us a royalty fee of 10% of their Workshops + Digital fee revenues as well as purchase products for sale in their workshops. We also generate revenues from publishing.
The following table sets forth our revenues by category for the past two fiscal years.
Revenue Sources
(in millions)
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
Total revenues for fiscal 2021 decreased 12.0% versus fiscal 2020 driven primarily by a decrease in Subscription Revenues. Additional revenue details are as follows:
•
Subscription Revenues. Subscription Revenues for fiscal 2021 decreased 10.4% versus fiscal 2020 due to a decrease in Workshops + Digital Fees, partially offset by an increase in Digital Subscription Revenues. Our Workshops + Digital products are priced at a premium compared to our Digital products. Workshops + Digital Fees were negatively impacted by both the lower number of Incoming Workshops + Digital Subscribers at the beginning of fiscal 2021 versus the beginning of fiscal 2020 and the significant recruitment decline in fiscal 2021 driven by the closure of certain of our studios and the limited reopening of others primarily related to the COVID-19 environment. End of Period Subscribers for fiscal 2021 decreased 5.8% versus the prior year. In fiscal 2021, recruitment declined compared to the prior year due to the COVID-19 environment and cycling against the successful launch of the myWW program in fiscal 2020. Partially mitigating these trends, member retention in the aggregate has improved over fiscal 2020 and was at historic highs in fiscal 2021. Recruitment and retention continue to be a key strategic focus.
•
In-studio product sales. In-studio product sales for fiscal 2021 decreased 45.7% versus fiscal 2020 as a result of the closure of our studios and reduced operations related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•
E-commerce, licensing, franchise royalties and other. All other revenues for fiscal 2021 decreased 15.7% versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to cycling against the revenue received in connection with the WW Presents: Oprah’s 2020 Vision tour in fiscal 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues primarily consists of expenses to operate our studios and workshops, costs to sell consumer products and costs to develop and operate our digital products. Operating costs primarily consist of salary expense paid to operations management, commissions and expenses paid to our employees, coaches and guides, studio room rent, customer service costs (both in-house and third-party), program material expenses, depreciation and amortization associated with field automation, credit card and fulfillment fees and training and other expenses. Cost to sell products includes costs of products purchased from our third-party suppliers, inventory reserves, royalties, and inbound and outbound shipping and related costs incurred in making our products available for sale or use. Costs to operate our digital products include salaries and related benefits, depreciation and amortization of website development, credit card processing fees and other costs incurred in developing our digital offerings.
Marketing Expenses
Marketing expenses primarily consist of costs to produce advertising and marketing materials as well as media costs to advertise our brand and products across multiple platforms (e.g., television, YouTube, social media, programmatic, audio, search, affiliate, branded content, electronic customer relationship marketing (eCRM), direct mail and public relations), costs paid to third-party agencies who help us develop our marketing campaigns and strategy, expenses in support of market research, as well as costs incurred in connection with local marketing and promotions.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of compensation, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, third-party consulting, temporary help, audit, legal and litigation expenses as well as facility costs and depreciation and amortization of systems in support of the business infrastructure and offices globally. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include amortization expense of certain of our intangible assets and certain one-time transaction expenses.
Gross Margin
The following table sets forth our gross profit and gross margin for the past two fiscal years, as adjusted for fiscal 2021 to exclude the impact of the 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of 2020 plan restructuring charges, and as adjusted for fiscal 2020 to exclude the impact of the 2020 plan restructuring charges. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for additional information.
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
(1)
The “As adjusted” measure is a non-GAAP financial measure that adjusts the consolidated statements of net income for fiscal 2021 to exclude the impact of the $16.7 million ($12.5 million after tax) of 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of $1.3 million ($1.0 million after tax) of 2020 plan restructuring charges, and for fiscal 2020 to exclude the impact of the $23.3 million ($17.4 million after tax) of 2020 plan restructuring charges. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for an explanation of our use of non-GAAP financial measures.
In fiscal 2021, excluding the impact of the 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of 2020 plan restructuring charges, the gross margin increase from fiscal 2020, excluding the impact of the 2020 plan restructuring charges, was driven primarily by a revenue mix shift to our higher margin Digital business and cycling against the lower margin revenues from the WW Presents: Oprah’s 2020 Vision tour, partially offset by an increase in fixed costs in our Digital business primarily related to Digital 360.
Operating Income Margin
The following table sets forth our operating income for the past two fiscal years, as adjusted for fiscal 2021 to exclude the impact of the 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of 2020 plan restructuring charges, and as adjusted for fiscal 2020 to exclude the impact of the 2020 plan restructuring charges, the Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the impairment charge for our goodwill related to our Brazil reporting unit:
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
(1)
The “As adjusted” measure is a non-GAAP financial measure that adjusts the consolidated statements of net income for fiscal 2021 to exclude the impact of the $21.5 million ($16.1 million after tax) of 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of $1.6 million ($1.2 million after tax) of 2020 plan restructuring charges, and for fiscal 2020 to exclude the impact of the $33.1 million ($24.8 million after tax) of 2020 plan restructuring charges, the $32.7 million ($24.5 million after tax) Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the $3.7 million ($2.7 million after tax) goodwill impairment charge related to our Brazil reporting unit. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for an explanation of our use of non-GAAP financial measures.
In fiscal 2021, excluding the impact of the 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of 2020 plan restructuring charges, the decrease in operating income margin from fiscal 2020, excluding the impact of the 2020 restructuring charges, the Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the goodwill impairment charge, was driven primarily by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue and an increase in marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue, partially offset by an increase in gross margin.
Material Trends
Performance Indicators
Our management team regularly reviews and analyzes a number of financial and operating metrics, including the key performance indicators listed below, in order to manage our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources, make decisions regarding corporate strategies and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We also believe that these key performance indicators are useful to both management and investors for forecasting purposes and to facilitate comparisons to our historical operating results. These metrics are supplemental to our GAAP results and include operational measures.
•
Revenues-Our “Subscription Revenues” consist of “Digital Subscription Revenues” and “Workshops + Digital Fees”. “Digital Subscription Revenues” consist of the fees associated with subscriptions for our Digital offerings, including Digital 360 and Personal Coaching + Digital. “Workshops + Digital Fees” consist of the fees associated with our subscription plans for combined workshops and digital offerings and other payment arrangements for access to workshops. In addition, “product sales and other” consists of sales of consumer products via e-commerce, in studios and through our trusted partners, revenues from licensing and publishing, other revenues (including revenues from the WW Presents: Oprah’s 2020 Vision tour), and, in the case of the consolidated financial results and Other reportable segment, franchise fees with respect to commitment plans and royalties.
•
Paid Weeks-The “Paid Weeks” metric reports paid weeks by WW customers in Company-owned operations for a given period as follows: (i) “Digital Paid Weeks” is the total paid subscription weeks for our digital subscription products (including Digital 360 and Personal Coaching + Digital); (ii) “Workshops + Digital Paid Weeks” (formerly known as “Studio + Digital Paid Weeks”) is the sum of total paid commitment plan weeks which include workshops and digital offerings and total “pay-as-you-go” weeks; and (iii) “Total Paid Weeks” is the sum of Digital Paid Weeks and Workshops + Digital Paid Weeks.
•
Incoming Subscribers-“Subscribers” refer to Digital subscribers and Workshops + Digital subscribers who participate in recur bill programs in Company-owned operations. The “Incoming Subscribers” metric reports WW subscribers in Company-owned operations at a given period start as follows: (i) “Incoming Digital Subscribers” is the total number of Digital, including Digital 360 and Personal Coaching + Digital, subscribers; (ii) “Incoming Workshops + Digital Subscribers” (formerly known as “Incoming Studio + Digital Subscribers”) is the total number of commitment plan subscribers that have access to combined workshops and digital offerings; and (iii) “Incoming Subscribers” is the sum of Incoming Digital Subscribers and Incoming Workshops + Digital Subscribers. Recruitment and retention are key drivers for this metric.
•
End of Period Subscribers-The “End of Period Subscribers” metric reports WW subscribers in Company-owned operations at a given period end as follows: (i) “End of Period Digital Subscribers” is the total number of Digital, including Digital 360 and Personal Coaching + Digital, subscribers; (ii) “End of Period Workshops + Digital Subscribers” (formerly known as “End of Period Studio + Digital Subscribers”) is the total number of commitment plan subscribers that have access to combined workshops and digital offerings; and (iii) “End of Period Subscribers” is the sum of End of Period Digital Subscribers and End of Period Workshops + Digital Subscribers. Recruitment and retention are key drivers for this metric.
•
Gross profit and operating expenses as a percentage of revenue.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The novel coronavirus (including its variants, COVID-19) pandemic continues to impact our business operations and the markets in which we operate. Additionally, we have seen significant shifts in consumer sentiment with respect to the weight loss and wellness marketplace as the pandemic evolves. COVID-19 had a significant effect on our reported results for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021. While the number of End of Period Subscribers at the end of fiscal 2021 was essentially flat compared to the pre-pandemic number at the end of fiscal 2019, it decreased 5.8% versus the end of fiscal 2020. While Digital recruitments were strong in the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, a subsequent turn in consumer sentiment has driven a decline in Digital recruitments, and recruitment projections for our Digital business are unpredictable. Our Workshops + Digital recruitments were dramatically impacted during the first year of the pandemic, and mix shifted toward our Digital business. This change in our mix, especially when amplified by the nature of our subscription business, has negatively impacted revenue and may continue to impact it in the future. The negative impact of COVID-19, including its impact on consumer sentiment, is expected to continue to impact the business in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. Over the longer term, it remains uncertain how the COVID-19 pandemic will impact consumer demand for our products and services and consumer preferences and behavior generally.
The extent to which our operations and business trends will continue in future periods to be impacted by, and any unforeseen costs will result from, the ongoing outbreak of COVID-19 will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. These developments include, among other things, the severity of any variant or surges in COVID-19 cases, new information about health implications, vaccine availability and hesitancy, and actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or treat its impact. This dynamic situation is driving uncertainly at the macroeconomic, local and consumer levels. We continue to actively monitor the ongoing global outbreak of COVID-19 and its impact and related developments.
In response to the public health crisis posed by COVID-19, in March 2020, we suspended our in-person workshops and moved quickly to transition these workshops to an entirely virtual experience. In June 2020, we began a phased re-opening with reduced operations of a limited number of our studio locations. During fiscal 2021, we selectively resumed in-person workshops where profitable and consistent with promoting the health and safety of our employees and members. However, during these uncertain times, we will continue to adhere to the requirements in local jurisdictions to close re-opened studios as necessary. We continue to evolve our workshop strategy as we evaluate our cost structure and respond to shifting consumer sentiment. This evolution may lead to further reduced operations. We continue to serve our members virtually, both via our Digital business and through virtual workshops. However, our Workshops + Digital business, including its business operations, number of subscribers and in-studio product sales, remain substantially affected by the evolving COVID-19 environment.
As we continue to address the impact of the pandemic, and the related evolving legal and consumer landscape, we are focused on how to best meet our members’ and consumers’ needs. We consolidated certain of our studios and continue to close certain other branded studio locations. The decision to re-open a studio location, if at all, or further consolidate studio locations, will be influenced by a number of factors, including applicable legal restrictions, consumer confidence and preferences, changes in consumer sentiment and behavior, and the protection of the health and safety of our employees and members, and will be dependent on cost efficiencies and alignment with our digital and brand strategy. The current number of our studio locations is significantly lower than that prior to the pandemic, and we expect it to remain below pre-COVID-19 levels. As a result, we have incurred, and we expect to continue to incur, significant costs associated with our real estate realignment.
While we expect the effects of the pandemic and the related responses to negatively impact our results of operations, cash flows and financial position, the uncertainty of the full extent of the duration and severity of the economic and operational impacts of COVID-19 means we cannot reasonably estimate the related financial impact at this time. For more information, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We continue to believe that our powerful communities and our ability to inspire people to adopt healthy habits will be invaluable to people across the globe as they continue to acclimate to new social and economic environments, and that they uniquely position us in the markets in which we operate.
Market Trends
We believe that our revenues and profitability can be sensitive to major trends in the wellness and weight management industries. In particular, we believe that our business could be adversely impacted by:
•
increased competition from weight loss and wellness apps;
•
reduced consumer interest in commercial weight loss and diet programs;
•
the development of more effective or more favorably perceived weight management methods or technologies, including by the pharmaceutical, genetics and biotechnology industries;
•
a failure to develop and market new, innovative services and products, to enhance our existing services and products, or to successfully expand into new channels of distribution or respond to consumer trends or sentiment, including consumer focus on integrated lifestyle and fitness approaches;
•
a failure to successfully implement new strategic initiatives;
•
a decrease in the effectiveness of our marketing, advertising, and social media programs or an increase in the effectiveness of our competitors’ similar programs;
•
an impairment of our brands and other intellectual property;
•
a failure of our technology or systems to perform as designed;
•
any event or condition, including health epidemics and natural disasters, that may discourage or impede people from gathering with others or accessing resources; and
•
a downturn in general economic conditions or consumer confidence.
North America Metrics and Business Trends
In fiscal 2021, North America Total Paid Weeks decreased 4.2% versus the prior year. The decrease in North America Total Paid Weeks was driven primarily by lower recruitments versus the prior year due to the COVID-19 environment and cycling against the successful launch of the myWW program in fiscal 2020.
Continental Europe Metrics and Business Trends
In fiscal 2021, Continental Europe Total Paid Weeks increased 0.3% versus the prior year, driven primarily by the higher number of Incoming Digital Subscribers at the beginning of fiscal 2021 versus the beginning of fiscal 2020, offset by lower recruitments versus the prior year due to the COVID-19 environment.
United Kingdom Metrics and Business Trends
In fiscal 2021, UK Total Paid Weeks decreased 19.0% versus the prior year. The decrease in UK Total Paid Weeks was driven primarily by lower recruitments versus the prior year due to the COVID-19 environment and cycling against the successful launch of the myWW program in fiscal 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated results presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, we have disclosed non-GAAP financial measures of operating results that exclude or adjust certain items. Gross profit, gross profit margin, operating income and operating income margin are discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K both as reported (on a GAAP basis) and as adjusted (on a non-GAAP basis), as applicable, with respect to (i) fiscal 2021 to exclude the net impact of (x) charges associated with our previously disclosed 2021 organizational restructuring plan and (y) the reversal of certain of the charges associated with our previously disclosed 2020 organizational restructuring plan and (ii) fiscal 2020 to exclude the impact of (x) charges associated with our previously disclosed 2020 organizational restructuring plan, (y) the one-time stock compensation expense associated with the previously disclosed option granted to Ms. Oprah Winfrey in connection with the Company extending its partnership with Ms. Winfrey (the “Winfrey Stock Compensation expense”) and (z) the impairment charge for our goodwill related to our Brazil reporting unit. We generally refer to such non-GAAP measures as follows: (i) with respect to the adjustments for fiscal 2021, as excluding or adjusting for the net impact of restructuring charges; and (ii) with respect to the adjustments for fiscal 2020, as excluding or adjusting for the impact of the restructuring charges, the Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the goodwill impairment charge. We also present within this Annual Report on Form 10-K the non-GAAP financial measures: earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation (“EBITDAS”); earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, early extinguishment of debt, restructuring charges (including the net impact where applicable) and goodwill impairment (“Adjusted EBITDAS”); total debt less unamortized deferred financing costs, unamortized debt discount and cash on hand (i.e., net debt); and a net debt/Adjusted EBITDAS ratio. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-EBITDAS, Adjusted EBITDAS and Net Debt” for the reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP financial measure in each case. Our management believes these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful supplemental information to investors regarding the performance of our business and are useful for period-over-period comparisons of the performance of our business. While we believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our business, this information should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be the same as similarly entitled measures reported by other companies.
Use of Constant Currency
As exchange rates are an important factor in understanding period-to-period comparisons, we believe in certain cases the presentation of results on a constant currency basis in addition to reported results helps improve investors’ ability to understand our operating results and evaluate our performance in comparison to prior periods. Constant currency information compares results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant period-over-period. We use results on a constant currency basis as one measure to evaluate our performance. In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we calculate constant currency by calculating current-year results using prior-year foreign currency exchange rates. We generally refer to such amounts calculated on a constant currency basis as excluding or adjusting for the impact of foreign currency or being on a constant currency basis. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP and are not meant to be considered in isolation. Results on a constant currency basis, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and are not measures of performance presented in accordance with GAAP.
Critical Accounting Estimates
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to the impairment analysis for goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (1) the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made, and (2) changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, or use of different estimates that we reasonably could have used in the current period, would have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. Based on this criteria, we believe the following accounting policies are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most significant judgments and estimates. In addition, there are other items within our financial statements that require estimation, but are not deemed critical as defined above. Changes in estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on our financial statements.
Franchise Rights Acquired
Finite-lived franchise rights acquired are amortized over the remaining contractual period, which is generally less than one year. Indefinite-lived franchise rights acquired are tested on an annual basis for impairment.
In performing the impairment analysis for our indefinite-lived franchise rights acquired, the fair value for our franchise rights acquired is estimated using a discounted cash flow approach referred to as the hypothetical start-up approach for our franchise rights related to our Workshops + Digital business and a relief from royalty methodology for our franchise rights related to our Digital business. The aggregate estimated fair value for these rights is then compared to the carrying value of the unit of account for those franchise rights. We have determined the appropriate unit of account for purposes of assessing impairment to be the combination of the rights in both the Workshops + Digital business and the Digital business in the country in which the applicable acquisition occurred. The net book values of these franchise rights in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand as of the January 1, 2022 balance sheet date were $698.4 million, $60.1 million, $12.2 million, $6.5 million and $4.8 million, respectively.
In our hypothetical start-up approach analysis for fiscal 2021, we assumed that the year of maturity was reached after 7 years. Subsequent to the year of maturity, we estimated future cash flows for the Workshops + Digital business in each country based on assumptions regarding revenue growth and operating income margins. In our relief from royalty approach analysis for fiscal 2021, the cash flows associated with the Digital business in each country were based on the expected Digital revenue for such country and the application of a royalty rate based on current market terms. The cash flows for the Workshops + Digital and the Digital businesses were discounted utilizing rates which were calculated using the weighted-average cost of capital, which included the cost of equity and the cost of debt.
Goodwill
In performing the impairment analysis for goodwill, the fair value for our reporting units is estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. This approach involves projecting future cash flows attributable to the reporting unit and discounting those estimated cash flows using an appropriate discount rate. The estimated fair value is then compared to the carrying value of the reporting unit. We have determined the appropriate reporting unit for purposes of assessing annual impairment to be the country for all reporting units. The net book values of goodwill in the United States, Canada and other countries as of the January 1, 2022 balance sheet date were $105.1 million, $42.4 million and $9.9 million, respectively.
For all of our reporting units tested as of May 9, 2021, we estimated future cash flows by utilizing the historical debt-free cash flows (cash flows provided by operations less capital expenditures) attributable to that country and then applied expected future operating income growth rates for such country. We utilized operating income as the basis for measuring our potential growth because we believe it is the best indicator of the performance of our business. We then discounted the estimated future cash flows utilizing a discount rate which was calculated using the weighted-average cost of capital, which included the cost of equity and the cost of debt.
Indefinite-Lived Franchise Rights Acquired and Goodwill Annual Impairment Test
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets, including franchise rights acquired with indefinite lives, and goodwill for potential impairment on at least an annual basis or more often if events so require. We performed fair value impairment testing as of May 9, 2021 and May 3, 2020, each the first day of fiscal May, on our indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill.
In performing our annual impairment analysis as of May 9, 2021 and May 3, 2020, we determined that the carrying amounts of our franchise rights acquired with indefinite lives units of account and goodwill reporting units did not exceed their respective fair values and, therefore, no impairment existed.
When determining fair value, we utilize various assumptions, including projections of future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. A change in these underlying assumptions could cause a change in the results of the impairment assessments and, as such, could cause fair value to be less than the carrying amounts and result in an impairment of those assets. In the event such a result occurred, we would be required to record a corresponding charge, which would impact earnings. We would also be required to reduce the carrying amounts of the related assets on our balance sheet.
In performing our annual impairment analysis, we also considered the trading value of both our equity and debt. If the trading values of both our equity and debt were to significantly decline from their current levels, we may have to take an impairment charge at the appropriate time, which could be material. For additional information on risks associated with our recognizing asset impairment charges, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Based on the results of our May 9, 2021 annual franchise rights acquired impairment analysis performed for all of our units of account, all units, except for New Zealand, had an estimated fair value at least 45% higher than the respective unit’s carrying amount. Collectively, these units of account represent 99.4% of our total franchise rights acquired as of the January 1, 2022 balance sheet date. Based on the results of our annual franchise rights acquired impairment test performed for our New Zealand unit of account, which holds 0.6% of our franchise rights acquired as of the January 1, 2022 balance sheet date, the estimated fair value of this unit of account exceeded its carrying value by approximately 10%. Accordingly, a change in the underlying assumptions for New Zealand may change the results of the impairment assessment and, as such, could result in an impairment of the franchise rights acquired related to New Zealand, for which the net book value was $4.8 million as of January 1, 2022.
In performing this impairment analysis for fiscal 2021, in our hypothetical start-up approach analysis, for the year of maturity, we assumed Workshops + Digital revenue (comprised of Workshops + Digital Fees and revenues from products sold to members in studios) growth of (41.5%) to 5.6% in the year of maturity from fiscal 2020, in each case, earned in the applicable country and assumed cumulative annual revenue growth rates for the years beyond the year of maturity of 1.8%. For the year of maturity and beyond, we assumed operating income margin rates of 7.1% to 11.7%. In our relief from royalty approach, we assumed Digital revenue growth in each country of 17.9% to 28.3% in fiscal 2021 and of 4.7% to 26.8% in fiscal 2022.
Based on the results of our May 9, 2021 annual goodwill impairment test performed for all of our reporting units, there was significant headroom in the goodwill impairment analysis for those units, with the difference between the carrying value and the fair value exceeding 100%.
The following are the more significant assumptions utilized in our annual impairment analyses for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020:
Canada Indefinite-Lived Franchise Rights Acquired Interim Impairment Test
Our Canada unit of account had a net book value of $60.1 million, 7.7% of our franchise rights acquired as of the January 1, 2022 balance sheet date. Given the lower headroom in the May 9, 2021 annual franchise rights acquired impairment test for this unit relative to the other units of account and the decline in business performance through fiscal 2021 (which may continue into fiscal 2022), we performed an interim impairment analysis as of January 1, 2022. In this test, the estimated fair value of this unit of account exceeded its carrying value by approximately 3%. Therefore, we did not record an impairment for the Canada unit of account.
Any impairment test is highly dependent on the assumptions used. The most significant assumptions at issue are the discount rate applied and the Digital revenue growth rate used. In the interim impairment analysis, we applied a discount rate of 9.0% based on our actual weighted-average cost of capital, which included the cost of equity and the cost of debt. We projected Digital revenues based upon our current and past performance. Changes in these assumptions would have a significant impact on the valuation model. Holding all other assumptions constant, a hypothetical 50 basis point increase in our discount rate assumption would decrease the fair value by approximately 8%, which would result in an impairment. Holding all other assumptions constant, a hypothetical 1% reduction in projected Digital revenues for each year in the analysis would decrease the fair value by approximately 5%, which would also result in an impairment.
Brazil Goodwill Impairment
With respect to our Brazil reporting unit, during the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we made a strategic decision to shift to an exclusively Digital business in that country. We determined that this decision, together with the negative impact of COVID-19, the ongoing challenging economic environment in Brazil and our reduced expectations regarding the reporting unit’s future operating cash flows, required us to perform an interim goodwill impairment analysis. In performing this discounted cash flow analysis, we determined that the carrying amount of this reporting unit exceeded its fair value and as a result recorded an impairment charge of $3.7 million, which comprised the remaining balance of goodwill for this reporting unit.
As it related to our goodwill impairment analysis for Brazil, we estimated future debt-free cash flows in contemplation of our growth strategies for that market. In developing these projections, we considered the growth strategies under the current market conditions in Brazil. We then discounted the estimated future cash flows utilizing a discount rate which was calculated using the weighted-average cost of capital, which included the cost of equity and the cost of debt.
Critical Accounting Policies
Information concerning our critical accounting policies is set forth in Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements, contained in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL 2021 (52 weeks) COMPARED TO FISCAL 2020 (53 weeks)
The Company’s fiscal year ends on the Saturday closest to December 31st and consists of either 52- or 53-week periods. Fiscal 2021 contained 52 weeks, while fiscal 2020 contained 53 weeks. The first week of fiscal 2020, which began on December 29, 2019 and ended on January 4, 2020, contributed an additional $25.5 million in fiscal 2020 net revenues. Due to the timing of the first week of fiscal 2020, additional marketing expense drove a decline of $7.5 million in fiscal 2020 operating income. The first week of fiscal 2020 also contributed 3.2 million of additional Digital Paid Weeks, 1.3 million of additional Workshops + Digital Paid Weeks and 4.5 million of additional Total Paid Weeks to fiscal 2020. The additional week in fiscal 2020 also resulted in an additional week of interest expense for that year.
The table below sets forth selected financial information for fiscal 2021 from our consolidated statements of net income for fiscal 2021 versus selected financial information for fiscal 2020 from our consolidated statements of net income for fiscal 2020.
Summary of Selected Financial Data
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
*Note: Percentage in excess of 100.0%.
Certain results for fiscal 2021 are adjusted to exclude the impact of the $21.5 million of 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of $1.6 million of 2020 plan restructuring charges. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above. The table below sets forth a reconciliation of certain of those components of our selected financial data for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 which have been adjusted.
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
(1)
The “As adjusted” measure is a non-GAAP financial measure that adjusts the consolidated statements of net income for fiscal 2021 to exclude the impact of the $21.5 million ($16.1 million after tax) of 2021 plan restructuring charges and the reversal of $1.6 million ($1.2 million after tax) of 2020 plan restructuring charges. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above for an explanation of our use of non-GAAP financial measures.
Certain results for fiscal 2020 are adjusted to exclude the impact of the $33.1 million of 2020 plan restructuring charges, the $32.7 million Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the $3.7 million goodwill impairment charge related to our Brazil reporting unit. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above. The table below sets forth a reconciliation of certain of those components of our selected financial data for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 which have been adjusted.
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
(1)
The “As adjusted” measure is a non-GAAP financial measure that adjusts the consolidated statements of net income for fiscal 2020 to exclude the impact of the $33.1 million ($24.8 million after tax) of 2020 plan restructuring charges, the $32.7 million ($24.5 million after tax) Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the $3.7 million ($2.7 million after tax) goodwill impairment charge. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above for an explanation of our use of non-GAAP financial measures.
Consolidated Results
Revenues
Revenues for fiscal 2021 were $1,212.5 million, a decrease of $165.7 million, or 12.0%, versus fiscal 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, which positively impacted our revenues in fiscal 2021 by $23.2 million, revenues for fiscal 2021 would have decreased 13.7% versus the prior year. This decrease was driven primarily by lower revenues related to Workshops + Digital Fees as a result of the lower number of subscribers at the beginning of fiscal 2021 and throughout the fiscal year as compared to the prior year period due to the COVID-19 pandemic. See “-Segment Results” for additional details on revenues.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues for fiscal 2021 decreased $114.2 million, or 19.0%, versus the prior year. Excluding the net impact of the $15.4 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of the $23.3 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2020, total cost of revenues for fiscal 2021 would have decreased by 18.4%, or 19.7% on a constant currency basis, versus the prior year.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased $51.5 million, or 6.6%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, which positively impacted gross profit in fiscal 2021 by $15.9 million, gross profit for fiscal 2021 would have decreased 8.7% versus the prior year. Excluding the net impact of the $15.4 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of the $23.3 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2020, gross profit for fiscal 2021 would have decreased by 7.4%, or 9.4% on a constant currency basis, versus the prior year primarily due to the decrease in revenues. Gross margin for fiscal 2021 increased 3.5% to 59.9% versus 56.4% for fiscal 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, gross margin for fiscal 2021 would have increased 3.3% to 59.7% versus the prior year. Excluding the net impact of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of restructuring charges in fiscal 2020, gross margin for fiscal 2021 would have increased 3.0% to 61.2% versus the prior year. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, the net impact of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of restructuring charges in fiscal 2020, gross margin for fiscal 2021 would have increased 2.9% to 61.0% versus the prior year. The gross margin increase was driven primarily by a revenue mix shift to our higher margin Digital business and cycling against the lower margin revenues from the WW Presents: Oprah’s 2020 Vision tour, partially offset by an increase in fixed costs in our Digital business primarily related to Digital 360.
Marketing
Marketing expenses for fiscal 2021 increased $0.7 million, or 0.3%, versus fiscal 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, which increased marketing expenses in fiscal 2021 by $5.9 million, marketing expenses for fiscal 2021 would have decreased 2.0% versus fiscal 2020. Marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue increased to 21.6% in fiscal 2021 as compared to 18.9% in fiscal 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 decreased $28.7 million, or 9.6%, versus fiscal 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, which increased selling, general and administrative expenses in fiscal 2021 by $3.2 million, selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 would have decreased 10.7% versus the prior year. Excluding the net impact of the $4.5 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of both the $32.7 million Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the $9.8 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 would have increased by 3.7%, or 2.4% on a constant currency basis, versus the prior year. This increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was driven primarily by higher employee compensation and related expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue increased to 22.2% in fiscal 2021 as compared to 21.6% in fiscal 2020.
Impairment
In performing our interim impairment analysis for our Brazil reporting unit during the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we determined that, based on the fair values calculated, the carrying amount of goodwill related to our Brazil reporting unit exceeded our fair value and recorded an impairment charge of $3.7 million in fiscal 2020.
Operating Income
Operating income for fiscal 2021 decreased $19.9 million, or 9.2%, versus fiscal 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, which positively impacted operating income in fiscal 2021 by $6.8 million, operating income for fiscal 2021 would have decreased 12.3% versus the prior year. Excluding the net impact of the $19.9 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of the $33.1 million of restructuring charges, the $32.7 million Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the $3.7 million goodwill impairment charge related to our Brazil reporting unit in fiscal 2020, operating income for fiscal 2021 would have decreased by 24.3%, or 26.7% on a constant currency basis, versus the prior year. This decrease in operating income was driven primarily by a decrease in gross profit as compared to the prior year. Operating income margin for fiscal 2021 increased 0.5% to 16.2% from 15.7% for fiscal 2020. Excluding the net impact of restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 and the impact of restructuring charges, the Winfrey Stock Compensation expense and the goodwill impairment charge in fiscal 2020, operating income margin for fiscal 2021 would have decreased by 2.9%, or 3.1% on a constant currency basis, versus the prior year. This decrease in operating income margin was driven primarily by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue and an increase in marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue, partially offset by an increase in gross margin, versus the prior year.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for fiscal 2021 decreased $35.4 million, or 28.7%, versus fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest expense was driven primarily by lower interest rates under our New Term Loan Facility (as defined below) and on our Senior Secured Notes (as defined below) as a result of our April 2021 debt refinancing (as defined below). The effective interest rate on our debt, based on interest incurred (which includes amortization of our deferred financing costs and debt discount) and our average borrowings during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 and excluding the impact of our interest rate swaps then in effect, decreased to 5.15% per annum at the end of fiscal 2021 from 6.94% per annum at the end of fiscal 2020. Including the impact of our interest rate swaps then in effect, the effective interest rate on our debt, based on interest incurred (which includes amortization of our deferred financing costs and debt discount) and our average borrowings during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, decreased to 5.85% per annum at the end of fiscal 2021 from 7.72% per annum at the end of fiscal 2020. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Long-Term Debt” for additional details regarding our debt, including interest rates and payments thereon. For additional details on our interest rate swaps, see “