Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Our operations are organized around the following principal activities:
Media:
The Media segment reflects the production and monetization of long-form and short-form video content across various platforms, including WWE Network, broadcast and pay television, digital and social media, as well as filmed entertainment. Across these platforms, revenues principally consist of content rights fees associated with the distribution of our programming content, subscriptions to WWE Network, and advertising and sponsorships. Effective March 18, 2021, the domestic monetization of WWE Network is generated from content license fees and certain shared sponsorship revenues from NBCU. Media segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the upfront revenue recognition related to the delivery of certain intellectual property rights under this agreement.
Live Events:
Live events provide ongoing content for our media platforms. Live Event segment revenues consist primarily of ticket sales, revenues from events for which we receive a fixed fee, as well as the sale of travel packages associated with the Company’s global live events. As a result of the global spread of COVID-19, these revenues had been greatly limited from March 2020 through the first half of 2021. We held our annual WrestleMania events on April 10 and 11, 2021 with ticketed audiences, and on July 16, 2021, we resumed our domestic and international live event touring schedules.
Consumer Products:
The Consumer Products segment engages in the merchandising of WWE branded products, such as video games, toys and apparel, through licensing arrangements and direct-to-consumer sales. Revenues principally consist of royalties and licensee fees related to WWE branded products, and sales of merchandise distributed at our live events and through eCommerce platforms.
Results of Operations
The Company presents Adjusted OIBDA as the primary measure of segment profit (loss). The Company defines Adjusted OIBDA as operating income before depreciation and amortization, excluding stock-based compensation, certain impairment charges and other non-recurring material items. Adjusted OIBDA includes depreciation and amortization expenses directly related to supporting the operations of our segments, including content production asset amortization, depreciation and amortization of costs related to content delivery and technology assets utilized for WWE Network, as well as amortization of right-of-use assets related to finance leases of equipment used to produce and broadcast our live events. The Company believes the presentation of Adjusted OIBDA is relevant and useful for investors because it allows investors to view our segment performance in the same manner as the primary method used by management to evaluate segment performance and make decisions about allocating resources. Additionally, we believe that Adjusted OIBDA is a primary measure used by media investors, analysts and peers for comparative purposes.
Adjusted OIBDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. A limitation of Adjusted OIBDA is that it excludes depreciation and amortization, which represents the periodic charge for certain fixed assets and intangible assets used in our business. Additionally, Adjusted OIBDA excludes stock-based compensation, a non-cash expense that may vary between periods with limited correlation to underlying operating performance, as well as other non-recurring material items. Adjusted OIBDA should not be regarded as an alternative to operating income or net income as an indicator of operating performance, or to the statement of cash flows as a measure of liquidity, nor should it be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that operating income is the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted OIBDA.
Unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses largely relate to corporate functions such as finance, investor relations, community relations, corporate communications, information technology, legal, human resources and our Board of Directors. These unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses will be shown, as applicable, as a reconciling item in tables where segment and consolidated results are both shown.
Summary
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
(dollars in millions, except where noted)
The following tables present our consolidated results followed by our Adjusted OIBDA results:
(1)Our consolidated net revenues increased by $121.0 million, or 12%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was driven by $42.4 million of higher ticket and merchandise sales due to the return of ticketed live events for a portion of year, coupled with $37.5 million in incremental revenues primarily associated with the contractual escalations of our key domestic distribution agreements for our flagship programs, RAW and SmackDown. Additionally, the current year includes increased network revenues of $29.7 million, primarily driven by the upfront revenue recognition related to the delivery of certain WWE Network intellectual property rights to NBCU, coupled with content license fees associated with the delivery of new WWE Network content. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(2)Our consolidated operating expenses increased by $58.7 million, or 11%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was driven by higher content creation and event-related costs associated with the production of our weekly, in-ring content, as well as our premium live events. In the current year, we incurred $38.3 million of higher production-related costs within our Media segment, primarily driven by the resumption of live event touring, including WrestleMania and SummerSlam, and the production of content utilizing the higher cost environment of WWE ThunderDome. During the prior year, we produced a significant portion of our content, including WrestleMania, at our lower cost performance center. We also incurred $16.7 million of higher event-related costs within our Live Events segment, primarily driven by the impact of additional events associated with the return to live event touring. Additionally, the increase was driven by higher management incentive compensation costs of $13.8 million that resulted from improved operating performance, partially offset by a decline of $8.0 million in network-related expenses driven by the transition of the domestic WWE Network to NBCU in March 2021. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(3)Our consolidated general and administrative expenses increased by $15.6 million, or 15%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by $9.5 million of additional staff-related costs, including the impact of $6.8 million of incremental severance expenses. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(1)Other adjustments in 2021 include severance expenses primarily associated with the combination of WWE’s television, digital and studios teams into one organization. Other adjustments in 2020 include severance expenses associated with a reduction in our workforce as a result of COVID-19.
Media
The following tables present the performance results and key drivers for our Media segment:
(1)Network revenues consist primarily of license fees associated with the domestic distribution of WWE Network content to NBCU (effective March 18, 2021), as well as subscription fees from customers of WWE Network and license fees associated with our international licensed partner agreements. Network revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the upfront revenue recognition related to the delivery of certain WWE Network intellectual property rights to NBCU during the first quarter of 2021.
(2)Core content rights fees consist primarily of licensing revenues from the distribution of our flagship programs, RAW and SmackDown, as well as our NXT programming, through global broadcast, pay television and digital platforms.
(3)Advertising and sponsorships revenues within our Media segment consist primarily of advertising revenues from the Company’s content on third-party social media platforms and sponsorship fees from sponsors who promote their products utilizing the Company’s media platforms, including promotion on the Company’s digital websites and on-air promotional media spots.
(4)Other revenues within our Media segment reflect revenues from the distribution of other WWE content, including, but not limited to, certain live in-ring programming content in international markets, scripted, reality and other programming, as well as theatrical and direct-to-home video releases.
Media revenues increased by $68.0 million, or 8%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in core content rights fees increased by $37.5 million, or 7%, driven primarily by the contractual escalations of our key domestic distribution agreements for our flagship programs, RAW and SmackDown. Additionally, our Network revenues increased by $29.7 million, or 16%, primarily driven by the upfront revenue recognition related to the delivery of certain WWE Network intellectual
property rights to NBCU during the first quarter of 2021, coupled with content license fees associated with the delivery of new WWE Network content.
Media Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of revenues remained flat in 2021 as compared to 2020, as the incremental core content and network revenues, as discussed above, were mostly offset by $38.3 million of additional production-related costs associated with our weekly, in-ring content, and our premium live events. These increased costs were primarily driven by our return to live event touring and the production of content from WWE ThunderDome in the current year, as compared to content production from our lower cost performance center for a significant portion of the prior year. Additionally, the current year includes increased management incentive compensation costs of $12.1 million resulting from improved operating performance, partially offset by a decline of $8.0 million in network-related expenses driven by the transition of WWE Network to NBCU in March 2021.
Live Events
The following tables present the performance results and key drivers for our Live Events segment:
(1)Advertising and sponsorships revenues within our Live Events segment primarily consists of fees from advertisers and sponsors who promote their products utilizing the Company’s live events (i.e., presenting sponsor of fan engagement events and advertising signage at the event).
(2)Other revenues within our Live Events segment primarily consists of the sale of travel packages associated with the Company’s global live events, as well as revenues from events for which the Company receives a fixed fee.
(3)Metrics exclude the events for our domestic and United Kingdom NXT brands. These are our developmental brands that typically conduct their events in smaller venues with lower ticket prices. We have conducted 30 NXT events in 2021. Due to COVID-19, these events have been conducted without ticketed attendance. Prior to COVID-19, we conducted 44 ticketed NXT events with paid attendance of 40,900 and average ticket prices of $37.36 in 2020.
Live events revenues, which include revenues from ticket sales and travel packages, increased by $37.9 million, or 190%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. Revenues from our ticket sales increased by $35.5 million, or 230%, due to the return of ticketed events in 2021, which began with WrestleMania in April followed by resumption of our domestic and international touring schedules in July. After resuming our domestic and international touring schedules, average attendance increased by 5% and average ticket prices increased by 43% in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Live Events Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of revenues increased in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was driven by the increase in ticket sales, as discussed above, partially offset by increased event-related costs associated with conducting 59 additional events in the current year.
Consumer Products
The following tables present the performance results and key drivers for our Consumer Products segment:
Consumer Products revenues increased by $15.1 million, or 18%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. Consumer product licensing revenues increased by $10.3 million, or 25%, primarily due to growth attributable to the Company’s franchise video game and toys. Venue merchandise revenues increased by $6.9 million, or 216%, primarily driven by the return of merchandise sales at our ticketed events during 2021. This increase was partially offset by a decline in eCommerce revenues of $2.1 million, or 5%, primarily due to a 19% decrease in the volume of online merchandise orders which was driven, in part, by changes in consumer spending habits in the prior year as a result of COVID-19. The decline in orders was partially offset by a 16% increase in average revenue per order.
Consumer Products Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of revenues increased in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by increased revenues, as discussed above.
Corporate
Unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses largely relate to corporate administrative functions, including finance, investor relations, community relations, corporate communications, information technology, legal, human resources and our Board of Directors. The Company does not allocate these general and administrative expenses to its business segments.
(1)Other adjustments in 2021 include severance expenses primarily associated with the combination of WWE’s television, digital and studios teams into one organization. Other adjustments in 2020 include severance expenses associated with a reduction in our workforce as a result of COVID-19. Our policy is to record Company-wide severance expenses as unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses.
Corporate Adjusted OIBDA decreased by $16.0 million, or 18%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by $9.8 million of additional staff-related costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
(dollars in millions)
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $1.7 million, or 4%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The current year includes a benefit of $1.0 million from the recognition of an infrastructure tax credit.
Interest Expense
(dollars in millions)
Interest expense, which relates primarily to interest and amortization associated with our convertible notes, our real estate and equipment finance leases, the revolving credit facility and mortgage, declined by $2.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. The prior year included $2.6 million of additional expenses associated with the amounts outstanding under the Company’s Revolving Credit Facility.
Other Income (Expense), Net
(dollars in millions)
Other income (expense), net, which is comprised of interest income, gains and losses recorded on our equity investments, realized translation gains and losses, and rental income, increased by $9.3 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. During 2021, the Company recognized a gain of $6.7 million on the partial termination of approximately 33,000 rentable square feet as part of an amendment to its new Stamford headquarters lease. Additionally, the prior year included a net loss of $2.4 million associated with impairment charges and valuation adjustments related to our equity investments.
Income Taxes
(dollars in millions)
The effective tax rate remained flat in 2021 as compared to 2020.
‎
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $415.8 million and $593.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our short-term investments consist primarily of U.S. Treasury securities, corporate bonds and government agency bonds. Our debt balance totaled $222.8 million and $316.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and includes the carrying value of $201.1 and $194.7 million related to our convertible senior notes due 2023 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our debt balance as of December 31, 2020 also included $100.0 million of borrowings outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility (defined below).
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted business operations and created significant volatility and disruption to financial markets. Significant uncertainty remains as to the potential impact of COVID-19 and its variants on our operations, and on the global economy as a whole. While restrictions have lessened and we have resumed our domestic and international live event touring schedules, the extent and duration of the pandemic could continue to disrupt global markets and may affect our ability to generate cash from operations. Additionally, please refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, which provides a discussion of risk factors related to COVID-19.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investment balances, along with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our ongoing operating requirements for at least the next twelve months, inclusive of dividend payments, debt service, content production activities, planned capital expenditures and for any discretionary repurchase of shares of our common stock under our approved share repurchase program (see below for further details). The Company also has available capacity of $200.0 million under its Revolving Credit Facility (defined below), which may be used, as needed, for general corporate purposes.
In February 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program of up to $500.0 million of our common stock. Repurchases may be made from time to time at management’s discretion subject to certain pre-approved parameters and in accordance with all applicable securities and other laws and regulations. The extent to which WWE repurchases its shares, and the timing of such repurchases, will depend upon a variety of factors, including liquidity, capital needs of the business, market conditions, regulatory requirements and other corporate considerations. Repurchases under this program may be funded by one or a combination of existing cash balances and free cash flow. The stock repurchase program does not obligate the Company to repurchase any minimum dollar amount or number of shares, and may be modified, suspended or discontinued at any time. We repurchased 3,251,313 shares of our common stock in the open market for an aggregate cost of $165.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
As it relates to our Convertible Notes (defined below), which pursuant to the terms are currently convertible, we believe that if note holders elect to convert their notes within the next twelve months, the Company has sufficient means to settle the Convertible Notes using any combination of existing cash and cash equivalents and investment balances, borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, cash generated from operations or through the issuance of shares.
Debt Summary and Borrowing Capacity
The Company has $215.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.375% convertible senior notes (the "Convertible Notes") due December 15, 2023. See Note 11, Convertible Debt, and Note 3, Earnings Per Share, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the Convertible Notes, including the dilutive nature of the Convertible Notes.
In May 2019, the Company entered into an amended and restated $200.0 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility with a syndicated group of banks, with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. acting as Administrative Agent (the "Revolving Credit Facility"). The Revolving Credit Facility has a maturity date of May 24, 2024. In April 2020, as a precautionary measure to further strengthen liquidity due to the impact of COVID-19, the Company borrowed $200.0 million under its Revolving Credit Facility. In December 2020, the Company repaid $100.0 million of the borrowings, and in January 2021, the Company repaid the remaining $100.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with the provisions of our Revolving Credit Facility, there were no amounts outstanding, and the Company had available capacity under the terms of the facility of $200.0 million.
In September 2016, the Company acquired land and a building located in Stamford, Connecticut adjacent to our production facility. In connection with the acquisition, we assumed future obligations under a loan agreement, in the principal amount of $23.0 million, which loan is secured by a mortgage on the property. Pursuant to the loan agreement, the assets of WWE Real Estate, a subsidiary of the Company, represent collateral for the underlying mortgage, therefore these assets will not be available to satisfy debts and obligations due to any other creditors of the Company. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amounts outstanding of the mortgage were $21.7 million and $22.1 million, respectively.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash generated from operating activities was $178.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $319.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $141.3 million decrease in the current year was driven by the timing of collections
associated with our large-scale international events and WWE Network revenues, as well as a decrease in non-cash adjustments, which were partially offset by higher net income.
During 2021, the Company spent $17.7 million on content production activities, including WWE’s Most Wanted Treasures, A&E: Biography, WWE Evil, and various programs for WWE Network, as compared to $25.6 million in 2020. We anticipate spending approximately $40 million to $50 million on content production during the year ending December 31, 2022. In 2021, we received content production incentives of $15.4 million, as compared to $9.5 million in 2020. During the year ending December 31, 2022, we anticipate receiving $15 million to $20 million in content production incentives.
Our accounts receivable represents a significant portion of our current assets and relate principally to a limited number of distributors and licensees. At December 31, 2021, our two largest receivable balances from customers were 38% and 26% of our gross accounts receivable. Changes in the financial condition or operations of our distributors, customers or licensees may result in increased delayed payments or non-payments which would adversely impact our cash flows from operating activities and/or our results of operations. We believe credit risk with respect to accounts receivable is limited due to the generally high credit quality of the Company’s major customers.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $188.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash provided of $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the current year, we purchased $374.5 million of short-term investments and received proceeds from the maturities and sales of our short-term investments of $222.1 million, as compared to purchases of $153.9 million and proceeds of $182.3 million in the prior year. Additionally, we sold certain marketable equity investments during 2020 and collected net proceeds of $11.7 million. Capital expenditures in 2021 increased by $11.6 million as compared to 2020, as we have resumed the construction activity on the Company’s new global headquarters space in Stamford, Connecticut. Capital expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2022 are estimated to range between $280 million and $310 million, with a large portion of this spend associated with the Company’s new global headquarters. During 2021, the Company also received tax credits of $4.3 million relating to our infrastructure improvements in conjunction with capital projects to support our increased content production efforts.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $317.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash provided of $39.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, the Company paid $165.6 million for stock repurchases under its approved stock repurchase program and repaid $100.0 million from borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. During 2020, the Company received proceeds of $200.0 million from borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and repaid $100.0 million of those borrowings. The Company made dividend payments of $36.4 million and $37.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Additionally, the Company made employee payroll withholding tax payments of $5.6 million and $11.1 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to net settlement upon vesting of employee equity awards.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into various contracts under which we have commitments to make contractually required payments, including:
Scheduled principal and fixed interest payments under our assumed mortgage in connection with an owned building in Stamford, Connecticut.
Convertible Notes with fixed semi-annual interest payments.
Various operating leases for facilities, sales offices and equipment with terms generally ranging from one to ten years.
Finance lease for the Company’s new headquarters building with an accounting lease term of 30 years in addition to finance leases of certain equipment utilized in our television production operations with contractual terms generally five years or less (see Note 8, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information).
Service contracts with certain vendors and independent contractors, including our talent, with terms ranging from one to twenty years.
Service agreement obligations related to WWE Network (excluding future performance-based payments which are variable in nature).
Our aggregate minimum payment obligations under these contracts as of December 31, 2021 are as follows (dollars in millions):
(1)Convertible debt obligations assume that no notes are converted prior to the December 15, 2023 maturity date. See Note 11, Convertible Debt, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(2)Operating and finance lease obligations disclosed in the table above are presented on an undiscounted basis. See Note 8, Leases, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the discounted amounts which include the amounts for imputed interest.
(3)Finance lease payments include $358.4 million related to options to extend our global headquarters lease that are reasonably certain of being exercised.
Our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021 includes $0.1 million in liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions (including interest and penalties), which are not included in the table above. The Company does not expect to pay any significant settlements related to these uncertain tax positions in 2022.
Seasonality
Our operating results are not materially affected by seasonal factors; however, we may produce several large-scale premier events throughout the year, including WrestleMania, which result in increased revenues and expenses during the periods in which these events occur. WrestleMania typically occurs late in our first quarter or early second quarter, while certain other large-scale premier events may not have set recurring dates. Revenues from our licensing and direct sale of consumer products, including our internet sites, varies from period to period depending on the volume and extent of licensing agreements and marketing and promotion programs entered into during any particular period of time, as well as the commercial success of the media exposure of our characters and brand. The timing of these events, as well as the continued introduction of new product offerings and revenue generating outlets, can and will cause fluctuations in quarterly revenues and earnings.
Inflation
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, inflation did not have a material effect on our business. Widely reported inflation has occurred, however, and may be ongoing into the foreseeable future. Depending on the severity and persistence of these inflationary pressures, we could see in the future a negative impact on our customers’ demand, or ability to pay (including an impact on the collectability of our accounts receivable), for our goods and services.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and contingent liabilities. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making estimates about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. The accuracy of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a range of possible outcomes and a number of underlying variables, many of which are beyond our control. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following judgments and estimates are critical in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition with Multiple Performance Obligations
Most of our contracts have one performance obligation and all consideration is allocated to that performance obligation. In contracts that have multiple performance obligations, which may include the production of live events, content licenses, and advertising and sponsorship rights, we allocate the transaction price to each identified performance obligation based upon their relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling prices are determined using observable standalone selling prices when available as well as estimates of standalone selling prices using adjusted market assessment and expected cost plus margin approaches to estimate the price for individual components. Judgment is required to determine the standalone selling prices and estimate the portion of the transaction price allocated to each performance obligation.
Content Production Assets, Net
The Company is primarily a content producer with content production assets consisting of feature films, non-live event episodic television series, and original programming content for WWE Network. Feature film titles are predominantly monetized on their own through exploitation and exhibition through individual film distribution arrangements or by sale to a third party. The non-live event episodic television series are predominantly monetized on their own through individual television distribution arrangements. The original WWE Network programming content are predominantly monetized as a film group through the collection of licensing fees from distribution partners or through the collection of monthly subscription fees from WWE Network.
Amounts capitalized for content production assets typically include development costs, production costs, production overhead, and employee salaries and are net of any film production incentives associated with our feature films. Content production assets related to our feature films are amortized in the proportion that revenues bear to management’s estimates of the ultimate revenue expected to be recognized from exploitation, exhibition or sale. Content production assets related to non-live event episodic television series are expensed upon delivery of the completed programming content to the individual television distributors. Our programming content distributed on the WWE Network is expensed based upon delivery to distribution partners or based on viewership consumption patterns if on the subscription-based WWE Network.
Unamortized content production costs are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of a film predominantly monetized on its own or a film group may be less than its unamortized costs. As it relates to our unamortized feature film production assets, if estimates for a feature film’s ultimate revenues and/or costs are revised and indicate a significant decline in a film’s profitability or if events or circumstances change that indicate that we should assess whether the fair value of a film is less than its unamortized film costs, we calculate the film's estimated fair value using a discounted cash flows model. If fair value is less than the unamortized cost, the film is written down to fair value. Our estimate of ultimate revenues for feature films includes revenues from all sources for ten years from the date of a film’s initial release. We estimate the ultimate revenues based on industry and Company specific trends, the historical performance of similar films, the star power of the lead actors, and the genre of the film. Prior to the release of a feature film and throughout its life, we revise our estimates of revenues based on expected future results, actual results and other known factors affecting the various distribution markets. As it relates to our unamortized non-live event episodic television series content assets, if conditions indicate a potential impairment, and the estimated future cash flows using a discounted cash flow model are not sufficient to recover the unamortized asset, the asset is written down to fair value. As it relates to our unamortized original WWE Network programming content assets, which are predominantly monetized as film group, we review in aggregate at a group level when an event or change in circumstances indicates a change in the expected usefulness of the content or that the fair value may be less than unamortized cost. In addition, if we determine that a program will not likely air, we expense the remaining unamortized asset.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $13.8 million and $15.4 million, respectively, in capitalized content production costs. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded aggregate impairment charges of $0.3 million, $3.2 million, and $1.3 million, respectively, related to our content production assets. No assurance can be given that additional unfavorable changes impacting the monetization of our content portfolio will not occur, which, in turn, may result in additional impairment charges that might materially affect our results of operations and financial condition.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our accounts receivable relate principally to a limited number of distributors and licensees that produce consumer products containing our intellectual property. Adverse changes in general economic conditions and/or contraction in global credit markets could precipitate liquidity problems among our key distributors, increasing our exposure to bad debts which could negatively impact our results of operations and financial condition. We estimate the collectability of our receivables and establish allowances for the amount of account receivable that we estimate to be uncollectible. We base these allowances on our historical collection experience, the length of time our accounts receivable are outstanding, the financial condition of individual customers and current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay. Changes in the financial condition of a single major customer, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional allowances or reductions that may be required. At December 31, 2021, our two largest receivable balances from customers were 38% and 26% of our gross accounts receivable. At December 31, 2020, there were no
customers that individually exceeded 10% of our gross accounts receivable balance. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our allowance for doubtful accounts was $5.2 million and $4.1 million, respectively.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax liabilities and assets are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the differences between the book and tax basis of particular assets and liabilities, using tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided to offset deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax assets valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our deferred tax assets (net of valuation reserve) were $13.1 million and $10.1 million, respectively. The increase in our net deferred tax asset balance in 2021 was primarily driven by a reduction in deferred tax liabilities related to bonus depreciation for fixed assets. We believe that it is more likely than not that we will have sufficient taxable income in the future to realize these deferred tax assets and as such have not recorded a valuation allowance to reduce the net carrying value. If we determine it is more likely than not that we will not have sufficient taxable income to realize these assets, we may need to record a valuation allowance in the future.
We use a two-step approach in recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by assessing whether they are more likely than not sustainable, based solely on their technical merits, upon examination, and including resolution of any related appeals or litigation process. The second step is to measure the associated tax benefit of each position, as the largest amount that we believe is more likely than not realizable. Differences between the amount of tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our income tax returns and the amount of tax benefits recognized in our financial statements represent our unrecognized income tax benefits, which we record as a liability. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized income tax benefits as a component of income tax expense. At December 31, 2021, our unrecognized tax benefits including interest and penalties totaled $0.1 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth under Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements, is incorporated herein by reference.
Cautionary Statement for Purposes of the “Safe Harbor” Provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a “safe harbor” for certain statements that are forward-looking and are not based on historical facts. When used in this Form 10-K and our other SEC filings, our press releases and comments made in earnings calls, investor presentations or otherwise to the public, the words “may,” “will,” “could,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “continue,” “project,” “intend,” “estimate,” “believe,” “expect” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain such words. These statements relate to our future plans, objectives, expectations and intentions and are not historical facts and accordingly involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results or the performance by us to be materially different from future results or performance expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. The following factors, among others, could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements made in this Form 10-K and our other SEC filings, in press releases, earnings calls and other statements made by our authorized officers: (i) risks relating to the ongoing coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic may continue to negatively affect world economies as well as our industry, business and results of operations; (ii) risks relating to entering, maintaining and renewing major distribution agreements; (iii) risks relating to a rapidly evolving and highly competitive media landscape; (iv) risks relating to WWE Network; (v) risks related to the computer systems, content delivery and online operations of WWE and our business partners; (vi) risks relating to privacy norms and regulations; (vii) our need to continue to develop creative and entertaining programs and events; (viii) our need to retain or continue to recruit key performers; (ix) the risk of a decline in the popularity of our brand of sports entertainment, including as a result of changes in the social and political climate; (x) the possible unexpected loss of the services of Vincent K. McMahon; (xi) possible adverse changes in the regulatory atmosphere and related private sector initiatives; (xii) the highly competitive, rapidly changing and increasingly fragmented nature of the markets in which we operate and/or our inability to compete effectively, especially against competitors with greater financial resources or marketplace presence; (xiii) uncertainties associated with international markets including possible disruptions and reputational risks; (xiv) our difficulty or inability to promote and conduct our live events and/or other businesses if we do not comply with applicable regulations; (xv) our dependence on our intellectual property rights, our need to protect those rights, and the risks of our infringement of others’ intellectual property rights; (xvi) risks relating to the complexity of our rights agreements across distribution mechanisms and geographical areas; (xvii) the risk of substantial liability in the
event of accidents or injuries occurring during our physically demanding events; (xviii) exposure to risks relating to large public events as well as travel to and from such events; (xix); a variety of risks as we expand into new or complementary businesses and/or make strategic investments and/or acquisitions; (xx) risks relating to our accounts receivable; (xxi) risks related to our new leased corporate headquarters and media production facilities; (xxii) potential substantial liabilities if litigation is resolved unfavorably; (xxiii) a change in tax laws in key jurisdictions could materially increase our tax expense; (xxiv) risks inherent in our feature film business; (xxv) risks relating to a possible decline in general economic conditions and disruption in financial markets, including any resulting from COVID-19; (xxvi) risks relating to our indebtedness, including our convertible notes; (xxvii) our potential failure to meet market expectations for our financial performance; (xxviii) through his beneficial ownership of a substantial majority of our Class B common stock, our controlling stockholder, Vincent K. McMahon, exercises control over our affairs, and his interests may conflict with the holders of our Class A common stock; (xxix) risks associated with our share repurchase program; (xxx) a substantial number of shares are eligible for sale by Mr. McMahon and members of his family or trusts established for their benefit, and the sale, or the perception of possible sales, of those shares could lower our stock price; and (xxxi) risks related to the volatility of our Class A common stock. In addition, our dividend is dependent on a number of factors, including, among other things, our liquidity and historical and projected cash flow, strategic plan (including alternative uses of capital), our financial results and condition, contractual and legal restrictions on the payment of dividends (including under our revolving credit facility), general economic and competitive conditions and such other factors as our Board of Directors may consider relevant. Forward-looking statements made by the Company speak only as of the date made, are subject to change without any obligation on the part of the Company to update or revise them, and undue reliance should not be placed on these statements. For more information about risks and uncertainties associated with the Company's business, please refer to the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and "Risk Factors" sections of this Form 10-K and our other SEC filings.