ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements as of and for the two years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under the section heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors” above and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
INTRODUCTION
Westwater Resources, Inc. is a 44-year-old public company focused on developing battery-grade natural graphite materials. Westwater now is focused on battery-grade natural graphite materials after its acquisition of Alabama Graphite in April 2018. Combined with the anticipated construction of the Coosa Plant near Kellyton, Alabama, the Company is executing an exploration plan to further investigate the size and extent of mineral concentrations at the Coosa Deposit, located near Rockford, Alabama, and to increase our knowledge of the deposit as a whole.
SUMMARY OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
In October 2021, Westwater completed the DFS for Phase I of the Coosa Plant. The DFS defined the key technological components for the Phase I of the Coosa Plant, assessed the processes, equipment and facilities required, and provided the design of Phase I of the Coosa Plant. The DFS also affirmed management’s evaluation and assessment of the entire project and its associated financial investment. Phase I of the Coosa Plant is expected to produce 3,700 mt of ULTRA-CSPG™ per year, and 3,800 mt of SPG Fines per year for 35 years. Phase I production is anticipated to commence in 2023. Phase II of the Coosa Plant is expected to increase production to 15,800 mt of ULTRA-CSPG™ and 16,600 mt of SPG Fines per year. Phase II will be the subject of an updated definitive feasibility study, upon completion and commissioning of Phase I of the Coosa Plant.
Westwater has contracted with several world-renowned engineering and technology organizations to engineer, procure and construct Phase I of the Coosa Plant, notably:
●Samuel Engineering organized, coordinated and developed the overall DFS and is providing the plant engineering and design required for plant construction.
●Dorfner Anzaplan engineered and designed the purification process and designed and operated the pilot program.
In November 2021, Westwater established the construction management process and team. Key partners in the team were hired: Fite Construction as the construction manager; and Samuels Engineering for engineering and procurement. Construction activities began in December 2021. We are working to secure other contractors and have focused on ordering specialized equipment that have long lead times from manufacturers that were identified in, and were part of, the DFS.
On October 11, 2021, Westwater announced that its Board of Directors approved the purchase of two buildings adjacent to the plant. The two structures total 90,000 square feet of enclosed space, and will be used for administration, training, lab work and warehousing. The two structures saved Westwater money and construction time as compared to building them from the ground-up.
Westwater continued exploration activities through 2021 with a drilling program on the Coosa Deposit, which is also designed to evaluate the economic viability of vanadium. Core test samples were sent to independent laboratories for analysis, and the results from the drilling will be analyzed and evaluated for inclusion in our resource estimate in 2022.
Also, in 2021 Westwater completed the production of over 13 mt of purified graphite from its pilot program for performance testing. Westwater sent samples to a number of potential customers, and those samples are under evaluation. The Westwater sales and marketing team engaged with a number of potential customers, and on November 17, 2021 Westwater announced a Letter of Intent to negotiate the terms for the potential sale of 125-150 mt of CSPG for lithium-ion batteries to a battery materials manufacturer, with delivery currently expected in 2023, subject to the commissioning and operation of a pilot plant and a full-scale plant by the counterparty, the Company meeting certain quality and packaging specifications, and customary conditions.
For additional information related to the recent development above and other 2021 business developments please see “Key Business and Corporate Developments in 2021” under Item 1. Description of Business in this Annual Report.
The COVID-19 Pandemic and our Actions to Ensure Safety
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated COVID-19 as a global pandemic. The pandemic spread outside of China during the first quarter of 2020 and has impacted businesses and economies throughout the world. In the U.S., many state and local governments have, based on local conditions, either recommended or mandated actions to slow the transmission of COVID-19. These measures range from limitations on crowd size to masking to mandatory orders for non-essential citizens to test and quarantine. Borders between many countries have been closed to contain the spread of COVID-19. Uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic has introduced significant volatility in the financial markets.
To the extent that the COVID-19 pandemic continues or worsens, including by reason of the emergence of variant strains of the virus, local governments or governmental agencies may impose additional restrictions. The result of COVID-19 and those restrictions could result in a number of adverse impacts to Westwater’s business, including but not limited to additional disruption to the economy, additional work restrictions, and supply chains being interrupted, slowed, or rendered inoperable. As a result, it may be challenging to obtain and process raw materials to support business needs, and individuals could become ill, quarantined, or otherwise unable to work and/or travel due to health reasons or governmental restrictions. Governments may also impose other laws, regulations or taxes which could adversely impact Westwater’s business, financial condition or results of operations. The potential effects of COVID-19 could also impact Westwater in a number of other ways including, but not limited to, laws and regulations affecting business, the availability of future borrowings, the cost of borrowings, and potential impairment of the carrying value of long-lived tangible assets.
This pandemic, and the uncertain economic conditions it has created, could adversely affect our operations, major facilities, or employees’ health. Westwater has the following priorities while managing business activities during this period of volatility and uncertainty:
● First, to ensure the health and safety of our employees and the communities where they work.
● Second, to work with our business partners to maintain the advanced graphite product development schedule in a safe and measured manner.
● Third, to ensure the Company has access to adequate financial liquidity to support key operations and business activities.
Westwater’s corporate business activities are largely unaffected at this time by the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to March 1, 2021, Westwater reduced utilization of its offices and initiated remote working arrangements to ensure that some employees were able to work remotely using systems that already were in place. On March 1, 2021, Westwater reopened its Centennial corporate facility and allowed employees to return to the office to work together with appropriate health protocols in place. Westwater’s continued focus on the health and safety of employees, the safety of operations, and the safety of the communities in which our employees live and work remains paramount. To that end, Westwater has continued to restrict unnecessary travel, and ensured that employees are permitted to take time off due to illness or the illness of those around them without penalty.
Equity Financings
Capital Raises during the Year ended December 31, 2021
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold approximately 6.1 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $34.6 million pursuant to the 2020 Lincoln Park PA. Additionally, the Company sold approximately 10.0 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $49.5 million pursuant to the ATM Offering Agreement with Cantor. These shares were sold pursuant to a prospectus supplement filed on August 20, 2021, and in accordance with Rule 424(b)(5) as a takedown off the Company’s shelf registration statement, which had been declared effective by the Commission on July 8, 2021.
As a result of the equity financing activities above, the Company received total net proceeds of $84.1 million, resulting in a cash balance of approximately $115.3 million at December 31, 2021. The significant treasury balance is sufficient to fund the Company’s 2022 operating budget as well the Company’s remaining product development costs, and the Company anticipates making a continued investment in Phase I of the Coosa Plant throughout 2022.
Transfer of Common Stock Listing to the NYSE American Stock Exchange
On March 8, 2021, the Company, acting pursuant to authorization from its Board of Directors, determined to voluntarily withdraw the listing of the Company's common stock, par value $0.001 per share, from The Nasdaq Capital Market (“Nasdaq”) and transfer the listing to the NYSE American. The Company informed Nasdaq on March 8, 2021, of its intent to transfer the listing of its common stock to the NYSE American. The Company’s listing and trading of its common stock on Nasdaq ended at market close on March 18, 2021, and trading began on the NYSE American on March 19, 2021. The Company’s common stock continues to trade under the ticker symbol “WWR” on the NYSE American.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary
Our net loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16.1 million, or $0.49 per share, as compared with a net loss from continuing operations of $13.9 million, or $1.58 per share for the same period in 2020. The $2.2 million increase in our net loss from continuing operations was due primarily to increases in product development, exploration expenses, general and administrative, and arbitration costs; offset partially by a gain related to the sale of enCore common stock of $2.1 million.
Product development expenses
Product development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $6.0 million, an increase of $1.9 million compared to the prior year. Product development costs were primarily comprised of expenses for our DFS, which began in February 2021 and was completed in October 2021, and our product development program that continued through the end of 2021. The product development program includes costs incurred to collaborate with outside experts for lab work, product testing and other auxiliary costs associated with the Coosa Project.
Exploration expenses
Exploration expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $1.1 million. During 2021, we launched an exploration plan to further investigate the size and extent of graphite concentrations at the Coosa Deposit, and to evaluate vanadium mineralization to determine any economic potential.
General and administrative expenses
Significant expenditures for general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were:
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $3.2 million as compared with 2020. The primary drivers of this increase is due to higher costs related to an increase in stock compensation, higher public company expenses related to the annual shareholder meeting and moving to the NYSE American from the NASDAQ, and higher costs related to the Company’s sales and marketing efforts that began in the third quarter of 2020. The increase is offset partially by lower personnel costs due to the sale of our uranium business at December 31, 2020.
Arbitration Costs
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Westwater incurred legal and expert consulting costs of $2.2 million associated with the Request for Arbitration against the Republic of Turkey. This represents an increase of $0.7 million compared to the prior year. For further reference, see discussion at Part I, Item 3 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Mineral property expenses
Mineral property expenses were $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately $0.1 million compared to the prior year. The increase in mineral property expenses was due to higher payments to land and surface owners for increased activities related to our exploration program.
Non-operating income and expenses
The Company recorded a $2.1 million gain on the sale of enCore shares during the year ended December 31, 2021. As part of the sale of uranium assets to enCore on December, 31, 2020, Westwater received shares of enCore common stock. The enCore common stock was originally valued at $1.5 million at December 31, 2020, and sold during the fourth quarter of 2021 for net proceeds of $3.6 million.
Net Loss from Discontinued Operations
Westwater sold its uranium business on December 31, 2020. As a result, the net loss from discontinued operations was $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 3 and Note 12 to the financial statements for additional information.
FINANCIAL POSITION
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was ($16.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with ($15.2) million for the prior year. The $1.7 million increase in cash used in operating activities was due primarily to increased graphite product development, exploration, general and administrative, and arbitration costs.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was ($2.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with ($4.1) million of cash used in investing activities for the prior year. The decrease was primarily a result of cash received of $3.6 million, net of fees, related to the sale of enCore common shares in the fourth quarter of 2021; offset by capital expenditures related to Phase I of the Coosa Plant of ($3.4) million and deposits on processing equipment related to Phase I of Coosa Plant of ($2.7) million. The ($4.1) million in cash used in 2020 was primarily related to cash transferred upon the sales of the uranium assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $63.9 million in 2020. Cash inflow for both years was from the sales of common stock through the Company’s ATM Offering Agreement, and the 2020 Lincoln Park PA, and a previous purchase agreement with Lincoln Park which terminated in May 2020. The $20.0 million increase in 2021 was primarily due to greater shelf registration capacity with which to offer registered shares under the ATM Offering Agreement.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company last recorded revenues from operations in 2009. Since 2009, the Company has relied on equity financings, debt financings and asset sales to fund its operations. The Company expects to rely on debt and equity financing to fund its operations into the near future. The Company will also continue its cost reduction initiatives to identify ways to reduce its cash expenditures.
In 2016, the Company began to expand its business plan into acquisition and development of energy-related materials. Between 2016 and 2020 the Company obtained mineral leases in Nevada and Utah and evaluated a green-fields exploration program for lithium. In 2018, the Company acquired Alabama Graphite for the purpose of developing the only commercial sized graphite mineral deposit in the contiguous United States and production of advanced graphite products for use in batteries. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company made the strategic decision to focus most of its resources on its graphite business, discontinuing its investment in its lithium mineral properties and selling its uranium business.
As of December 31, 2021, execution of the business plan for development of the Coosa Project was underway, with the completion of its pilot program for processing flake graphite into battery-grade graphite products. The start-up of operations for the pilot program commenced in the fourth quarter of 2020 and completed during the fourth quarter of 2021. The Company used the data generated from the pilot program to inform the requirements and specifications for building the Coosa Plant. Pursuant to the DFS for Phase I of the Coosa Plant, the estimated remaining capital expenditures to construct the commercial plant as of December 31, 2021 are approximately $198 million. Subject to financing, the Company expects the construction phase for Phase I of the Coosa Plant to continue through 2022 and be completed in the first half of 2023, at which time the Company expects to begin generating revenues from sales of battery-grade graphite products.
At December 31, 2021 the Company’s cash balances were $115.3 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold approximately 10.0 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $49.5 million pursuant to its ATM Offering Agreement and approximately 6.1 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $34.6 million pursuant to the 2020 Lincoln Park PA. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $47.7 million remaining available for
future sales under the ATM Offering Agreement and has 9,700,252 shares of common stock available for future sales pursuant to the 2020 Lincoln Park PA.
Management believes the Company’s current cash balance is sufficient to fund its planned non-discretionary expenditures through 2022. The Company may use the ATM Offering Agreement and the 2020 Lincoln Park PA to support construction of Phase I of the Coosa Plant.
While the Company has been successful in the past in raising funds through equity and debt financings as well as through the sale of non-core assets, no assurance can be given that additional financing will be available in amounts sufficient to meet its needs, or on terms acceptable to the Company. Stock price volatility and uncertain economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the recent emergence of variant strains of the virus, could significantly impact the Company’s ability to raise funds through equity financing. Market conditions, including but not limited to, inflation and supply chain disruptions could adversely impact the planned cost of Phase I of the Coosa Plant. Along with evaluating the continued use of the ATM Offering Agreement and the 2020 Lincoln Park PA, the Company may consider project financing for additional funding needed to complete Phase I of the Coosa Plant. The alternative sources of project financing could include, but are not limited to, convertible debt or pursuing a partnership or joint venture. In the event funds are not available for project financing to complete construction of Phase I of the Coosa Plant in 2023, the Company expects to be able to fund its non-discretionary expenditures, however, the Company may be required to change its planned business development strategies.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe our most critical accounting policies involve those requiring the use of significant estimates and assumptions in determining values or projecting future costs.
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
The Company reviews and evaluates its long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Impairment is considered to exist if the total estimated future cash flows on an undiscounted basis are less than the carrying amount of the assets. An impairment loss is measured and recorded based on discounted estimated future cash flows or upon an estimate of fair value that may be received in an exchange transaction. Future cash flows are estimated based on quantities of recoverable minerals, expected commodity prices, production levels and operating costs of production and capital, based upon the projected remaining future graphite or vanadium production from each project. Existing proven and probable reserves and value beyond proven and probable reserves, including mineralization that is not part of the measured, indicated or inferred resource base, are included when determining the fair value of mine site reporting units at acquisition and, subsequently, in determining whether the assets are impaired. The term “recoverable minerals” refers to the estimated amount of graphite or vanadium that will be obtained after taking into account losses during processing and treatment. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of future cash flows from other asset groups. The Company’s estimates of future cash flows are based on numerous assumptions and it is likely that actual future cash flows will be significantly different than the estimates, as actual future quantities of recoverable minerals, graphite prices, production levels and operating costs of production and availability and cost of capital are each subject to significant risks and uncertainties.
No impairment was recorded in 2021. During 2020, we recorded impairments of $5.2 million to reduce the Company’s former uranium assets which were sold in December 2020. The $5.2 million impairment is included in net loss from discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations.
ACCOUNTING FOR GOVERNMENT GRANTS
On June 22, 2021, AGP entered into incentive agreements with the State of Alabama and local municipalities for the siting of the Coosa Plant. The incentive agreements provide certain tax credits and incentives under the Alabama Jobs Act in connection with the construction of the processing facility. Additionally, in connection with and in contemplation of the incentive agreements, on July 23, 2021, AGP entered into a land lease with the Lake Martin Area Industrial Development Authority. The lease provides AGP rights to approximately 70 acres to construct and operate its commercial graphite processing facility in Coosa County, Alabama. The lease has a term of 10-years, a nominal lease payment, and transfer of title to AGP at the end of the lease term. Further, the lease provides AGP the option to purchase the land for a nominal amount during the term of the lease. The incentive agreements and the lease are accounted for by the Company as a government grant.
U.S. GAAP does not contain authoritative accounting standards for incentives and grants provided by governmental entities to a for-profit entity. Absent authoritative accounting standards, interpretative guidance issued and commonly applied by financial statement preparers allows for the selection of accounting policies amongst acceptable alternatives. Based on facts and circumstances outlined below, the Company determined it most appropriate to account for the land received from the local municipality as an in-substance government grant by analogy to International Accounting Standards 20 (“IAS 20”), Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance. Under the provisions of IAS 20, government grants “are assistance by government in the form of transfers of resources to an entity in return for past or future compliance with certain conditions relating to the operating activities of the entity.” A government grant is recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the Company will meet the terms for receiving and realizing the benefit of the grant. IAS 20 does not define “reasonable assurance”, however, based on certain interpretations, it is analogous to “probable” as defined in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 450-20-20 under U.S. GAAP, which is the definition the Company has applied to its determination of recognizing the land grant as of December 31, 2021. Under IAS 20, government grants are recognized in earnings on a systematic basis over the periods in which the Company recognizes costs for which the grant is intended to compensate (i.e. qualified expenses). Further, IAS 20 permits for the recognition in earnings either separately under a general heading such as other income, or as a reduction of the related expenses. The Company has elected to recognize government grant income separately within other income to present a clearer distinction in its financial statements between its operating income and the amount of net income resulting from the land grant.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company realized the fair value of the land of $1.4 million as an increase to Property, Plant, and Equipment with a corresponding obligation recorded in Other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. The land represents a non-depreciable asset on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet and will evaluate the land for impairment according to its policy on long-lived assets discussed above. The corresponding obligation recorded in Other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet will be amortized to other income over the life of the Coosa Plant once placed in service.