Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Plan of Operation
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events. You can identify these statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. They use of words such as “anticipate”, “estimate”, “expect”, “project”, “intend”, “plan”, “believe”, and other words and terms of similar meaning in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. From time to time, we also may provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release to the public.
Overview
Worldwide Strategies Inc. is a digital health and fitness technology company that provides fitness experiences and solutions through a mobile application available on Apple iOS and Google Android devices. Our data-driven wellness platform allows people to set and track fitness and nutrition goals, integrates with wearable fitness devices and offers community features, enabling users to compete and support each other as they work towards achieving their personal fitness and wellness goals. We plan to develop our platform into a single destination for fitness and wellbeing, offering content and products to our users based on their specific needs on their personal health and wellness journey.
Recent Developments
On October 22, 2022, we successfully terminated a license agreement for certain intellectual property we had previously licensed and had not been able to commercialize. In connection with the termination of the license we were able to cancel 90,000 shares of our issued and outstanding Series B Preferred Stock and 1.2 million issued and outstanding shares of Series A Preferred stock; subsequent to the termination of the license agreement.
We successfully negotiated an amendment to our asset purchase agreement with Fitwell Limited, to remove the financing contingency and accelerate the closing of the purchase of the Fitwell assets. As of October 18, 2022, we successfully completed the purchase of the Fitwell assets, which includes a copy of the source code and data sets for a comprehensive health and fitness platform. In connection with the purchase of the Fitwell assets, we issued a promissory note for $0.5 million and issued 2 million shares of common stock as consideration for the purchase, and an additional 2.8 million shares for services rendered, and to be rendered in the future, for the benefit of the Company.
Significant Recent Developments Regarding COVID-19
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly spreading outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus designated COVID-19. The pandemic has significantly impacted economic conditions in the United States. The long-term impact of COVID-19 on the economy and on our business remains uncertain, the duration and scope of which cannot currently be predicted. Please refer to the matters discussed under the caption “Risk Factors”.
Results of Operations During the Year Ended July 31, 2022 As Compared to The Year Ended July 31, 2021
Net Loss
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021 we incurred net losses of approximately $79,000 and $1.4 million respectively.
Revenue
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, we generated no revenue.
Expenses
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, we incurred expenses of approximately $79,000 and $1.4 million respectively. The decrease of $1.3 million in expenses for the year ended July 31, 2022 was primarily related to stock compensation expense of approximately $1.3 million for the year ended July 31, 2021. For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021 we incurred interest expense of approximately $50,000 and $48,000 primarily in relation to the promissory notes outstanding.
Liquidity
Currently, we rely on our management to provide us with the capital needed to run our business on a day-to-day basis.
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021 we incurred net losses of approximately $79,000 and $1.4 million respectively. As of July 31, 2022 and 2021, we had no cash on hand and current liabilities of $1.0 million and $0.9 million. During the year ended July 31, 2022 our CEO and CFO provided loans to us in the amount of approximately $30,000.
We will seek additional funds through equity or debt financing, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate partners, licensees or others, and from other sources, which may have the effect of diluting the holdings of existing shareholders.
The Company has no current arrangements with respect to, or sources of, such additional financing and we do not anticipate that existing shareholders will provide any portion of our future financing requirements.
No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available when needed or that such financing will be available on terms acceptable to the Company. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay or terminate expenditures for certain of its programs that it would otherwise seek to develop and commercialize. This would have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Going Concern
The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on the financial statements for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, includes an explanatory paragraph relating to the uncertainty of our ability to continue as a going concern. We have incurred recurring losses, incurred liabilities in excess of assets over the past year, and have an accumulated deficit of $15.5 million. Based upon current operating levels, we will be required to obtain additional capital in order to sustain our operations through July 31, 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
On August 1, 2012, the Company adopted ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. ASC 820 defines fair value, establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosures of fair value measurement and enhances disclosure requirements for fair value measures. The three levels are defined as follows:
· Level 1 inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
· Level 2 inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
· Level 3 inputs to valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair measurement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of July 31, 2022 and 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Act of 1934.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of July 31, 2022 and 2021, we did not have any contractual obligations.