Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
The Company is a leading global designer, marketer and licensor of branded footwear, apparel and accessories. The Company’s vision statement is “to build a family of the most admired performance and lifestyle brands on earth” and the Company seeks to fulfill this vision by offering innovative products and compelling brand propositions; complementing its footwear brands with strong apparel and accessories offerings; expanding its global consumer-direct footprint; and delivering supply chain excellence.
The Company’s brands are marketed in approximately 170 countries and territories at January 1, 2022, including through owned operations in the U.S., Canada, the United Kingdom and certain countries in continental Europe and Asia Pacific. In other regions (Latin America, portions of Europe and Asia Pacific, the Middle East and Africa), the Company relies on a network of third-party distributors, licensees and joint ventures. At January 1, 2022, the Company operated 143 retail stores in the U.S., United Kingdom, and Canada and 65 consumer-direct eCommerce sites.
On July 31, 2021, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to acquire 100% of the outstanding shares of Lady Leisure InvestCo Limited. The acquisition was completed on August 2, 2021 for $417.4 million, which is net of acquired cash of $7.4 million. Lady Leisure InvestCo Limited owns the Sweaty Betty® brand and activewear business, a premium women’s activewear brand. The acquisition was funded with cash on hand and borrowings under the Company’s Revolving Facility.
The following discussion includes a comparison of the Company's results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2021 and 2020. A discussion of a comparison of the Company's results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2020 and 2019 has been omitted from this Form 10-K but may be found in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Known Trends Impacting Our Business
The global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the Company’s business. Most importantly, the Company remains focused on the health and safety of its employees, customers and partners around the world. In accordance with regulatory guidance and protocols promulgated by health authorities and government officials, the Company continues to execute a number of enhanced business practices including temporary office closures, travel restrictions, enhanced cleaning procedures and social distancing designed to protect all employees, customers and partners.
Following the onset of the pandemic, the Company further prioritized brand investments in the Company’s owned eCommerce sites. The Company’s brands’ online growth accelerated due to the investments in this channel and consumer preference changes in favor of digital purchases. The Company continues to prioritize eCommerce investments including digital leadership, marketing investments in digital platforms, developing richer content and storytelling, and optimizing digital user experiences to increase conversion. The Company is offering incremental exclusive products through owned eCommerce sites, and the Company has enhanced the online customer shopping experience.
During the third quarter of 2021, a significant portion of the Company’s contract manufacturer’s production capacity in Vietnam was subject to government mandated shutdowns due to COVID-19. Contract manufacturers in certain other Asia Pacific countries were also subject to closures, reduced capacity and production delays due to COVID-19. Factories reopened during October 2021, although some did not reopen at full capacity. These production capacity restraints significantly negatively impacted, and are expected to continue to significantly negatively impact, the Company’s previously planned inventory production and in turn, deliveries to wholesale customers.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a material adverse impact, and is expected to continue to have an adverse impact, on the Company’s financial results. In addition to the contract manufacturer closures during the third quarter discussed above, the effects of the pandemic caused disruption in the global supply chain due to vessel shortages, containers damaged and lost in transit, labor and container shortages and U.S. port congestion that resulted in transportation delays that interrupted the flow of the Company’s inventory and caused delays of shipments to wholesale partners during fiscal 2021. The Company expects certain aspects of the disruption in the global supply chain to continue, which may negatively impact results in fiscal 2022.
Expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic incurred in fiscal 2021 included $26.1 million of costs primarily for incremental air freight cost to expedite the delivery of inventory resulting from production and shipping delays. Expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic incurred in fiscal 2020 included $37.6 million of costs related to severance expenses, credit loss expenses, air freight related to production delays, facility exit costs and other costs.
The Company continues to monitor the ongoing impacts of COVID-19, including developments that are outside the Company’s control, such as the planned return to full production of factories in Vietnam and certain other Asia Pacific countries and the planned shift of production capacity to other countries following factory closures. These developments and other potential impacts of COVID-19, such as new or prolonged factory closures and other adverse impacts on the global supply chain affecting the planned delivery of inventory, could materially adversely impact revenue growth as well as profitability in future periods.
2021 FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
•Revenue was $2,414.9 million for 2021, representing an increase of 34.8% compared to the prior year's revenue of $1,791.1 million. The increase reflects a 23.6% increase from the Michigan Group, a 34.5% increase from the Boston Group and a 18.8% increase on Sweaty Betty® revenue of $117.3 million. Changes in foreign exchange rates increased revenue by $25.3 million during 2021. Owned eCommerce revenue increased 39.7% during 2021 compared to 2020.
•Gross margin for 2021 was 42.6%, an increase of 150 basis points from 2020.
•The effective tax rate in 2021 was 16.6%, compared to 24.7% in 2020.
•Diluted earnings per share in 2021 was $0.81, compared to a diluted loss per share of $1.70 in 2020.
•The Company declared cash dividends of $0.40 per share in 2021 and 2020.
•Cash flow provided by operating activities was $86.8 million and $309.1 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Compared to the prior year, inventory increased $122.4 million, or 50.3%.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of the Company’s results of operations and liquidity and capital resources. This section should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes, which are included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
REVENUE
Revenue was $2,414.9 million for 2021, representing an increase of 34.8% compared to the prior year's revenue of $1,791.1 million. The change in revenue reflected a 23.6% increase from the Michigan Group and a 34.5% increase from the Boston Group. The Michigan Group's revenue increase was driven by high-forties increase from Hytest®, low-thirties increase from Cat®, high-twenties increase from Wolverine®, mid-twenties increase from Hush Puppies®, low-twenties increase from Harley-
Davidson®, low-twenties increase from Merrell®, and low-teens increase from Bates®. The Boston Group’s revenue increase was driven by high-fifties increase from Saucony®, high-twenties increase from Kids’, and mid-twenties increase from Sperry®. International revenue represented 34.8%, and 31.1% of total reported revenues in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Sweaty Betty® contributed $117.3 million to the current year revenue increase. Changes in foreign exchange rates increased revenue by $25.3 million during 2021. Owned eCommerce revenue increased during 2021 by 39.7% compared to 2020, including a 21.4% contribution from the Sweaty Betty® acquisition.
GROSS MARGIN
For 2021, the Company’s gross margin was 42.6%, compared to 41.1% in 2020. The gross margin increase was driven by favorable product mix and average selling price through the Company's direct to consumer channel (110 basis points), the contribution from the Sweaty Betty® acquisition (80 basis points), and favorable product mix and average selling price across the Company's brands mainly attributable to Saucony®, Merrell® and Wolverine® (80 basis points), partially offset by incremental air freight costs resulting from production and shipping delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic (140 basis points).
OPERATING EXPENSES
Operating expenses increased $1.5 million in 2021, to $874.2 million. The increase was driven by higher general and administrative costs ($61.7 million), higher advertising costs ($59.8 million), higher environmental and other related costs, net of recoveries ($45.3 million), higher selling costs ($34.2 million), higher incentive compensation costs ($22.5 million), higher distribution costs ($16.9 million), higher acquisition costs ($7.5 million), and higher product development costs ($5.1 million). These increases were partially offset by lower impairment of intangible assets ($222.2 million) and lower non-operating costs incurred due to the COVID-19 pandemic ($29.4 million). Environmental and other related costs were $73.9 million and $19.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in environmental and other related costs in 2021 is due to settlement accruals recorded. See Note 17 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
INTEREST, OTHER AND TAXES
Net interest expense was $37.4 million in 2021 compared to $43.6 million in 2020. Interest expense decreased in the current year due to the lower average debt balances outstanding on the Company's credit facility.
The Company incurred $34.0 million of debt extinguishment and other costs in connection with the extinguishment of the $250.0 million senior notes due on September 1, 2026 and $300.0 million senior notes due on May 15, 2025. The Company also incurred $0.3 million of debt extinguishment and other costs in connection with the 2021 Replacement Facility Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement entered into on October 21, 2021.
The effective tax rate in 2021 was 16.6%, compared to 24.7% in 2020. The Company recognized discrete tax benefits in 2021 which reduced the tax expense on pretax income, resulting in a lower effective tax rate. In 2020, the Company also recognized discrete tax benefits however such benefits increased the tax benefit recognized from the pretax loss, resulting in a higher effective tax rate.
Other expense was $3.7 million in 2021 compared to other income of $2.1 million in 2020. The increase in expense was driven by higher non-service pension costs ($4.9 million) and higher losses from equity method investments ($1.8 million), partially offset by higher sublease income ($1.7 million).
REPORTABLE SEGMENTS
The Company’s portfolio of brands is organized into the following two operating segments, which the Company has determined to be reportable segments.
•Wolverine Michigan Group, consisting of Merrell® footwear and apparel, Cat® footwear, Wolverine® footwear and apparel, Chaco® footwear, Hush Puppies® footwear and apparel, Bates® uniform footwear, Harley-Davidson® footwear and Hytest® safety footwear; and
•Wolverine Boston Group, consisting of Sperry® footwear, Saucony® footwear and apparel, Keds® footwear and the Kids' footwear business, which includes the Stride Rite® licensed business, as well as Kids' footwear offerings from Saucony®, Sperry®, Keds®, Merrell®, Hush Puppies® and Cat®.
The Company also reports “Other” and “Corporate” categories. The Other category consists of the Sweaty Betty® activewear business, the Company’s leather marketing operations, sourcing operations that include third-party commission revenues and multi-branded consumer-direct retail stores. The Corporate category consists of unallocated corporate expenses, such as corporate employee costs, costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, impairment of intangible assets and environmental and other related costs.
The reportable segment results for years 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
Further information regarding the reportable segments can be found in Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements.
Wolverine Michigan Group
The Michigan Group’s revenue increased $247.9 million, or 23.6%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was driven by high-forties increase from Hytest®, low-thirties increase from Cat®, high-twenties increase from Wolverine®, mid-twenties increase from Hush Puppies®, low-twenties increase from Harley-Davidson®, low-twenties increase from Merrell®, and low-teens increase from Bates®. The increase across all brands is due to economic recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic experienced in the prior period as a result of the closure of brick-and-mortar stores in 2020, as well as accelerated growth from Merrell®, Cat® and Wolverine® resulting from strength in the outdoor and work categories.
The Michigan Group’s operating profit increased $65.4 million, or 36.4%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The operating profit increase was due to the revenue increases and a 100 basis point increase in gross margin, partially offset by a $50.9 million increase in selling, general and administrative costs. The increase in gross margin in the current year period was due to improved product mix, including higher margin eCommerce sales, partially offset by increased product and shipping costs including air freight. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2021 was primarily due to higher advertising costs and higher employee costs.
Wolverine Boston Group
The Boston Group’s revenue increased $239.8 million, or 34.5%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was driven by high-fifties increase from Saucony®, high-twenties increase from Kids’ and mid-twenties increase from Sperry®. The increase across all brands is due to economic recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic experienced in the prior period as a result of closure of brick-and-mortar stores in 2020, as well as accelerated growth from Saucony® resulting from strength in the running category and innovative product launches.
The Boston Group’s operating profit increased $61.2 million, or 69.5%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The operating profit increase was due to the revenue increases and a 40 basis point increase in gross margin, partially offset by a $46.0 million increase in selling, general and administrative costs. The increase in gross margin in the current year period was due to improved product mix including higher margin eCommerce sales, partially offset by increased product and shipping costs including air freight. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2021 was primarily due to higher advertising costs and higher employee costs.
Other
The Other category's revenue increased $136.1 million, or 308.6%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The revenue increase was driven by low-forties increase in the performance leathers business and an $117.3 million contribution from the Sweaty Betty® acquisition.
Corporate
Corporate expenses decreased $153.5 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the impairment of the Sperry trade name in 2020 ($222.2 million) and lower non-operating costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic ($29.2 million), partially offset by higher environmental and other related costs ($45.3 million), higher incentive compensation and bonus expense ($28.4 million), higher wages and employee cost ($13.1 million), and higher acquisition costs ($7.5 million).
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
(1)Amounts are net of both borrowings, if any, and outstanding standby letters of credit issued in accordance with the terms of the Revolving Facility.
Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents of $161.7 million as of January 1, 2022 were $185.7 million lower compared to January 2, 2021. The decrease is due primarily to the acquisition of Sweaty Betty® for $417.4 million, share repurchases of $39.6 million, cash dividends paid of $33.5 million, additions to property, plant, and equipment of $17.6 million, shares acquired related to employee stock plans of $14.1 million and payments of debt issuance and debt extinguishment costs of $10.4 million, partially offset by net revolver borrowings of $225.0 million, cash provided by operating activities of $86.8 million, and net borrowings of long-term debt of $20.0 million. The Company had $769.2 million of borrowing capacity available under the Revolving Facility as of January 1, 2022. Cash and cash equivalents located in foreign jurisdictions totaled $133.4 million as of January 1, 2022.
The Company funded the purchase price for the Sweaty Betty® acquisition through a combination of cash on hand and borrowings under the Revolving Facility.
Cash flow from operating activities is expected to be sufficient to meet the Company’s working capital needs for the foreseeable future. Any excess cash flow from operating activities is expected to be used to fund organic growth initiatives, reduce debt, pay dividends, pursue acquisitions and for general corporate purposes.
The Company may purchase up to an additional $447.8 million of shares under its existing common stock repurchase program which expires in 2023. The common stock repurchase program does not obligate the Company to acquire any shares and may be suspended at any time. The Company repurchased $39.6 million and $21.0 million of shares during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
A detailed discussion of environmental remediation costs is found in Note 17 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has established a reserve for estimated environmental remediation costs based upon an evaluation of currently available facts with respect to each individual affected site. As of January 1, 2022, the Company has a reserve of $85.7 million, of which $24.5 million is expected to be paid in the next 12 months and is recorded as a current obligation in other accrued liabilities, with the remaining $61.2 million recorded in other liabilities and expected to be paid over the course of up to 25 years. The Company's remediation activity at its former Tannery site and sites where the Company disposed of Tannery byproducts is ongoing. It is difficult to estimate the cost of environmental compliance and remediation given the uncertainties regarding the interpretation and enforcement of applicable environmental laws and regulations, the extent of environmental contamination and the existence of alternative cleanup methods. Future developments may occur that could materially change the Company’s current cost estimates.
Note 17 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements also includes a detailed discussion of environmental litigation matters. The Company has established an accrual in the amount of $50.7 million, and made related payments of $0.6 million, with respect to certain of these matters for the year ended January 1, 2022, as discussed in Note 17. The Company expects to disburse payments during 2022 equal to the remainder of the established accrual.
Developments may occur that could materially change the Company’s current cost estimates. The Company adjusts recorded liabilities as further information develops or circumstances change.
The future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s statement of operations and cash flows remains uncertain. The actions the Company has taken and continues to take to improve the Company’s liquidity are discussed above in this Item 7 and below under “Financing Arrangements.”
The Company expects to meet its contractual obligations through its typical sources of liquidity in the normal course of business, such as coash from operating activities, and believes it has the financial resources to satisfy these contractual obligations. The Company had the following contractual obligations due by period at January 1, 2022:
(1)Includes principal and interest payments on the Company’s long-term debt. Estimated future interest payments on outstanding debt obligations are based on interest rates as of January 1, 2022. Actual cash outflows may differ significantly due to changes in underlying interest rates.
(2)Purchase obligations related primarily to inventory and capital expenditure commitments.
(3)Under the terms of a Consent Decree resolving certain civil and regulatory actions, the Company is obligated to contribute towards the costs of extending municipal water lines, developing a replacement wellfield and making certain improvements to Plainfield Township’s existing water treatment plant, all subject to an aggregate cap of $69.5 million. During 2021 and 2020, the Company made payments of $12.9 and $9.7 million towards the total cap, respectively. Due to the uncertainty of the timing and amounts related to the Company's other environmental remediation costs, they have been excluded from this table. See Note 17 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(4)The total amount of unrecognized tax benefits on the consolidated balance sheet at January 1, 2022 is $10.9 million. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes. As a result, this amount is not included in the table above.
Financing Arrangements
On October 21, 2021, the Company entered into a 2021 Replacement Facility Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement (the “Amendment”) to the Company's Credit Facility (as amended and restated, the "Credit Agreement"). The Amendment amended and restated the Credit Agreement to, among other things: (i) provide for a term loan A facility (the “Term Facility”) in an aggregate principal amount of $200.0 million, which replaced the existing term loan A; (ii) provide for an increased revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility” and, together with the Term Facility, the “Senior Credit Facilities”) with total commitments of $1.0 billion, an increase of $200.0 million from the existing Revolving Facility; and (iii) set the LIBOR floor to 0.000%, a decrease of 0.750%. The maturity date of the loans under the Senior Credit Facilities was extended to October 21, 2026. The Amendment provides for a debt capacity of up to an aggregate debt amount (including outstanding term loan principal and revolver commitment amounts in addition to permitted incremental debt) not to exceed $2.0 billion unless certain specified conditions set forth in the amended senior credit facility are met. The Term Facility requires quarterly principal payments with a balloon payment due on October 21, 2026.
On August 26, 2021, the Company issued $550.0 million aggregate principal debt amount of 4.000% senior notes due on August 15, 2029. Related interest payments are due semi-annually beginning February 15, 2022. The senior notes are guaranteed by substantially all of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries. The proceeds from the senior notes were used to extinguish the Company’s $250.0 million senior notes due on September 1, 2026 and $300.0 million senior notes due on May 15, 2025.
As of January 1, 2022, the Company was in compliance with all covenants and performance ratios under the Credit Agreement.
The Company’s debt at January 1, 2022 totaled $966.8 million compared to $722.5 million at January 2, 2021. The Company expects to use the current borrowings to fund organic growth initiatives, reduce debt, pay dividends, pursue acquisitions and for general corporate purposes. The increased debt position resulted from borrowings under the Revolving Facility to fund the Sweaty Betty® acquisition as well as the new Term Facility's increased principal balance resulting from the Amendment.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes cash flow activities:
Operating Activities
The principal source of the Company’s operating cash flow is net earnings, including cash receipts from the sale of the Company’s products, net of costs of goods sold.
Cash from operations during 2021 was lower compared to 2020, due primarily to an increase in net working capital representing a use of cash of $88.4 million. Working capital balances were unfavorably impacted by an increase in inventories of $77.2 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $49.2 million, and an increase in other operating assets of $2.3 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $23.0 million and an increase in other operating liabilities of $15.7 million. Operating cash flows were favorably impacted by stock-based compensation expense of $38.1 million, environmental and other related costs of $33.7 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $33.2 million, pension expense of $14.0 million and debt extinguishment costs of $5.8 million, partially offset by deferred income taxes of $14.7 million.
Investing Activities
The Company acquired the Sweaty Betty® brand and activewear business in 2021 resulting in a net cash payment of $417.4 million. The Company also made capital expenditures of $17.6 million and $10.3 million in years 2021 and 2020, respectively, for building improvements, new retail stores, distribution operations improvements and information system enhancements. The Company also received $26.8 million of proceeds during the second quarter of 2020 related to a company-owned life insurance policy. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company made a contingent consideration payment of $5.5 million related to the Saucony® Italy distributor acquisition.
Financing Activities
The current year debt activity includes net borrowings under the Revolving Facility of $225.0 million. The current year revolver borrowings were used to fund a portion of the Sweaty Betty® brand and activewear business acquisition. On August 26, 2021, the Company issued $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes, and the proceeds from these senior notes were used to extinguish the Company’s $250.0 million senior notes due on September 1, 2026 and $300.0 million senior notes due on May 15, 2025. The October 21, 2021 Replacement Facility Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement also provided for a term facility that replaced the prior term loan A, resulting in a $20.0 million increase in long-term debt. Payments of debt issuance costs of $10.4 million were associated with the current year debt transactions. The prior year activity included net revolving credit payments of $360.0 million, net long-term debt borrowings of $287.5 million that included issuance of senior notes and quarterly term loan payments, and payments of debt issuance costs of $6.4 million.
The Company paid $14.1 million and $24.8 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, in connection with shares or units withheld to pay employee taxes related to awards under stock incentive plans and received $17.1 million and $9.8 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company also repurchased $39.6 million and $21.0 million of its common stock during 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company received $4.8 million and $1.8 million from noncontrolling owners of the Company’s China joint venture to support the growth of the joint venture in 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2020, the Company terminated an interest rate swap and the fair value of the swap of $7.3 million was repaid.
The Company declared cash dividends of $0.40 per share in each of 2021 and 2020. Dividends paid totaled $33.5 million and $33.6 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. A quarterly dividend of $0.10 per share was declared on February 9, 2022 to shareholders of record on April 1, 2022.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 2 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to new accounting standards.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ("U.S. GAAP"), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates these estimates. Estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Historically, actual results have not been materially different from the Company’s estimates. However, actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company has identified the following critical accounting policies used in determining estimates and assumptions in the amounts reported. Management believes that an understanding of these policies is important to an overall understanding of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Performance Obligations
Revenue is recognized upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers, in an amount that reflects the expected consideration to be received in exchange for those goods or services. The Company identifies the performance obligation in the contract, determines the transaction price, allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations, and recognizes revenue upon completion of the performance obligation. Revenue is recognized net of variable consideration and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Control of the Company's goods and services, and associated revenue, are transferred to customers at a point in time. The Company’s contract revenue consist of wholesale revenue and consumer-direct revenue. Wholesale revenue is recognized for products sourced by the Company when control transfers to the customer generally occurring upon the purchase, shipment or delivery of branded products or to the customer. Consumer-direct includes eCommerce revenue that is recognized for products sourced by the Company when control transfers to the customer once the related goods have been shipped and retail store revenue recognized at time of sale. The point of purchase or shipment was evaluated to best represent when control transfers based on the Company’s right of payment for the goods, the customer’s legal title to the asset, the transfer of physical possession and the customer having the risks and rewards of the goods. Payment terms for the Company's revenue vary by sales channel. Standard credit terms apply to the Company's wholesale receivables, while payment is rendered at the time of sale within the consumer-direct channel.
Revenue is recorded at the net sales price (“transaction price”), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established. Components of variable consideration include trade discounts and allowances, product returns, customer markdowns, customer rebates and other sales incentives relating to the sale of the Company’s products. These reserves are based on the amounts earned, or to be claimed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes, which are probability-weighted in accordance with the expected value method for relevant factors such as current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect the Company’s best estimates of the amount of consideration to which it is entitled based on the terms of the respective underlying contracts. Revenue recognized during the year ended January 1, 2022, related to the Company’s contract liabilities was nominal.
Inventory
The Company values its inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined by the last-in, first out ("LIFO") method for certain domestic finished goods inventories. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method for all raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods inventories in foreign countries and certain domestic finished goods inventories. The average cost of inventory is used for finished goods inventories of the Company’s consumer-direct business and Sweaty Betty® inventory. The Company has applied these inventory cost valuation methods consistently from year to year.
The Company reduces the carrying value of its inventories to the lower of cost or net realizable value for excess or obsolete inventories based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If the Company were to determine that the estimated realizable value of its inventory is less than the carrying value of such inventory, the Company would provide a reserve for such difference as a charge to cost of sales. If actual market conditions are different from those projected, adjustments to those inventory reserves may be required. The adjustments would increase or decrease the Company’s cost of sales and net income in the period in which they were realized or recorded. Inventory quantities are verified at various times throughout the year by performing physical inventory counts and subsequently comparing those results to perpetual inventory
balances. If the Company determines that adjustments to the inventory quantities are appropriate, an adjustment to the Company’s cost of goods sold and inventory is recorded in the period in which such determination was made.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, the consolidated financial statements reflect the operations of an acquired business starting from the acquisition date.
All assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. The Company allocates the purchase price of an acquired business to the fair values of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with any excess purchase price recorded as goodwill. Contingent consideration, if any, is included in the purchase price and is recognized at its fair value on the acquisition date. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be recorded, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
The determination of fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities requires estimates and the use of valuation techniques and requires management to make judgments that may involve the use of significant estimates. For intangible assets acquired in a business combination, the Company typically uses the income method. Significant estimates used in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates, among other items. If the actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used, the amounts recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements may be exposed to potential impairment of the intangible assets and goodwill as discussed in the "Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangibles" section below. Refer to Note 19 “Business Acquisitions” for additional discussion.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
Goodwill and intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives are not amortized, but are subject to impairment tests at least annually. The Company reviews the carrying amounts of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets by reporting unit at least annually, or when indicators of impairment are present, to determine if such assets may be impaired. If the carrying amounts of these assets are not recoverable based upon discounted cash flow and market approach analyses, the carrying amounts of such assets are reduced by the estimated difference between the carrying values and estimated fair values. The Company includes assumptions about expected future operating performance, which are derived from internal projections and operating plans, as part of a discounted cash flow analysis to estimate fair value.
For goodwill, if the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, no further review is required. However, if the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, the Company records an impairment charge equal to the excess of the recorded goodwill over the fair value of the goodwill.
The Company may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are less than their carrying value. The Company would not be required to quantitatively determine the fair value unless the Company determines, based on the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than the carrying value.
The Company performs its annual testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment at the beginning of the fourth quarter of the fiscal year for all reporting units. The Company did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill during years 2021, 2020 and 2019. No impairment charges were recognized for the Company's intangible assets during years 2021 and 2019. In the fourth quarter of 2020, after the completion of the annual impairment testing, the Company recorded a $222.2 million impairment charge for the Sperry trade name. Refer to Note 4, “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” for additional discussion on the Sperry trade name impairment.
Environmental
The Company establishes a reserve for estimated environmental remediation costs based upon the evaluation of currently-available facts with respect to each individual affected site. The costs are recorded on an undiscounted basis when they are probable and reasonably estimable, generally no later than the completion of feasibility studies, the Company’s commitment to a plan of action, or approval by regulatory agencies. Liabilities for estimated costs of environmental remediation are based primarily upon third-party environmental studies, other internal analysis and the extent of the contamination and the nature of required remedial actions at each site. The Company records adjustments to the estimated costs if there are changes in the scope of the required remediation activity, extent of contamination, governmental regulations or remediation technologies. Environmental costs relating to existing conditions caused by past operations that do not contribute to current or future revenues are expensed as incurred. Refer to Note 17, “Litigation and Contingencies” for additional discussion on estimated environmental remediation costs.
Assets related to potential recoveries from other responsible parties are recognized when a definitive agreement is reached and collection of cash is realizable. Recoveries of covered losses under insurance policies are recognized only when realization of the claim is deemed probable.
The Company is subject to legal proceedings and claims related to the environmental matters as described in Note 17 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company routinely assesses the legal and factual circumstances of each matter and the likelihood of any adverse outcomes in these matters, as well as ranges of possible losses. Assessments of lawsuits and claims can involve a series of complex judgments about future events and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. The Company accrues an estimated liability for legal proceeding claims that are both probable and estimable and reserves may change in future periods due to new developments in each matter. For further discussion, refer to Note 17 “Litigation and Contingencies”.
Retirement Benefits
The determination of the obligation and expense for retirement benefits depends upon the selection of certain actuarial assumptions used in calculating such amounts. These assumptions include, among others, the discount rate, expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, mortality rates and rates of increase in compensation. These assumptions are reviewed with the Company’s actuaries and updated annually based on relevant external and internal factors and information, including, but not limited to, long-term expected asset returns, rates of termination, regulatory requirements and plan changes.
The Company utilizes a bond matching calculation to determine the discount rate used to calculate its year-end pension liability and subsequent year pension expense. A hypothetical bond portfolio is created based on a presumed purchase of individual bonds to settle the plans' expected future benefit payments. The discount rate is the resulting yield of the hypothetical bond portfolio. The bonds selected are listed as high grade by at least two recognized ratings agency and are non-callable, currently purchasable and non-prepayable. The calculated discount rate was 3.09% at January 1, 2022, compared to 2.85% at January 2, 2021. Pension expense is also impacted by the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, which the Company has determined to be 6.75% and 6.75% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. This rate is based on both actual historical rates of return experienced by the pension assets and the long-term rate of return of a composite portfolio of equity and fixed income securities that reflects the approximate diversification of the pension assets.
Income Taxes
The Company maintains certain strategic management and operational activities in overseas subsidiaries, and its foreign earnings are taxed at rates that have generally been lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate. A significant amount of the Company’s earnings are generated by its Canadian, European and Asian subsidiaries and, to a lesser extent, in jurisdictions that are not subject to income tax. Income tax audits associated with the allocation of this income and other complex issues may require an extended period of time to resolve and may result in income tax adjustments if changes to the income allocation are required between jurisdictions with different income tax rates. Because income tax adjustments in certain jurisdictions can be significant, the Company records accruals representing management’s best estimate of the resolution of these matters. To the extent additional information becomes available, such accruals are adjusted to reflect the revised estimated outcome. The carrying value of the Company’s deferred tax assets assumes that the Company will be able to generate sufficient taxable income in future years to utilize these deferred tax assets. If these assumptions change, the Company may be required to record valuation allowances against its gross deferred tax assets in future years, which would cause the Company to record additional income tax expense in its consolidated statements of operations. Management evaluates the potential that the Company will be able to realize its gross deferred tax assets and assesses the need for valuation allowances on a quarterly basis.
On a periodic basis, the Company estimates the full year effective tax rate and records a quarterly income tax provision in accordance with the projected full year rate. As the year progresses, that estimate is refined based upon actual events and the distribution of earnings in each tax jurisdiction during the year. This continual estimation process periodically results in a change to the expected effective tax rate for the year. When this occurs, the Company adjusts the income tax provision during the quarter in which the change in estimate occurs so that the year-to-date provision reflects the revised anticipated annual rate.
The Company intends to repatriate cash held in foreign jurisdictions and has recorded a deferred tax liability related to estimated state taxes and foreign withholding taxes on the future dividends received in the U.S. from the foreign subsidiaries.
The Company intends to permanently reinvest all non-cash undistributed earnings outside of the U.S. and has, therefore not established a deferred tax liability on that amount of foreign unremitted earnings. However, if these non-cash undistributed earnings were repatriated, the Company would be required to accrue and pay applicable U.S. taxes and withholding taxes payable to various countries. It is not practicable to estimate the amount of the deferred tax liability associated with these non-cash unremitted earnings due to the complexity of the hypothetical calculation.