Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussion of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a designer, developer, and operator of integrated resorts featuring luxury hotel rooms, high-end retail space, an array of dining and entertainment options, meeting and convention facilities, and gaming, all supported by an unparalleled focus on our guests, our people, and our community. Through our approximately 72% ownership of Wynn Macau, Limited ("WML"), we operate two integrated resorts in the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China ("Macau"), Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau (collectively, our "Macau Operations"). In Las Vegas, Nevada, we operate and, with the exception of certain retail space, own 100% of Wynn Las Vegas. Additionally, we are a 50.1% owner and managing member of a joint venture that owns and leases certain retail space at Wynn Las Vegas (the "Retail Joint Venture"). We refer to Wynn Las Vegas, Encore, an expansion at Wynn Las Vegas, and the Retail Joint Venture as our Las Vegas Operations. On June 23, 2019, we opened Encore Boston Harbor, an integrated resort in Everett, Massachusetts. In addition, we hold an approximately 74% interest in Wynn Interactive Ltd. ("Wynn Interactive"), which operates our digital sports betting and casino gaming business.
Recent Developments Related to COVID-19
Macau Operations
Visitation to Macau has fallen significantly since the outbreak of COVID-19, driven by the strong deterrent effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on travel and social activities, quarantine measures put in place in Macau and elsewhere, travel and entry restrictions and conditions in Macau, the PRC, Hong Kong and Taiwan involving COVID-19 testing, among other things, and the suspension or reduced accessibility of transportation to and from Macau. Beginning in June 2020, certain restrictions and conditions have eased to allow for visitation to Macau as some regions continue to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. Quarantine-free travel, subject to COVID-19 safeguards such as testing and the usual visa requirements, has been reintroduced between Macau and most areas and cities within the PRC, and in September 2020, PRC authorities fully resumed the IVS exit visa program, which permits individual PRC citizens from nearly 50 PRC cities to travel to Macau for tourism purposes. While total visitation from PRC to Macau increased meaningfully in 2021 compared to 2020, total visitation from PRC to Macau remained 74.8% below 2019 levels. Given the evolving conditions created by and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, measures that have been lifted may be reintroduced if there are adverse developments in the COVID-19 situation in Macau and other regions with access to Macau, and the Company is currently unable to determine when protective measures and the suspension of certain offerings in effect at our Macau Operations will be lifted. Given the uncertainty around the extent and timing of the potential future spread or mitigation of COVID-19 and around the imposition or relaxation of protective measures, management cannot reasonably estimate the impact to the Company's future results of operations, cash flows, or financial condition.
Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Company’s Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor each implemented certain COVID-19 specific protective measures, such as limiting the number of seats per table game, slot machine spacing, temperature checks, mask protection, and suspension of certain entertainment and nightlife offerings. Over the course of the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company's Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor have each incrementally resumed full operations, including reopening gaming areas to 100% of capacity and restoring seven-day-per-week hotel operations, as permitted by governmental authorities and in response to increased customer demand. Given the evolving conditions created by and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, measures that have been lifted may be reintroduced if there are adverse developments in the COVID-19 situation, and management cannot reasonably estimate the impact of such developments to the Company's future results of operations, cash flows, or financial condition.
Macau Gaming Concession
The term of the Company's concession agreement with the Macau government ends on June 26, 2022. If the term of this concession agreement is not extended or renewed or is not replaced by a new gaming concession, all of the Company's gaming operations and related equipment in Macau will be automatically transferred to the Macau government without compensation on that date and the Company will cease to generate gaming revenues from its Macau Operations. In addition, under the indentures governing the Company's $4.7 billion aggregate principal amount of WML Senior Notes and the facility agreement governing the WM Cayman II Revolver, upon the occurrence of any event after which the Company does not own or manage casino or gaming areas or operate casino games of fortune and chance in Macau in substantially the same manner as of the issue date of the respective senior notes or the date of the facility agreement, for a period of 10 consecutive days or more in the case of the WML Senior Notes or a period of 30 consecutive days or more in the case of the WM Cayman II Revolver, and such event has a material adverse effect on the financial condition, business, properties or results of operations of WML and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, holders of the WML Senior Notes can require the Company to repurchase all or any part of the WML Senior Notes at par, plus any accrued and unpaid interest (the "Special Put Option"), and any amounts owed under the WM Cayman II Revolver may become immediately due and payable (the "Property Mandatory Prepayment Event").
In January 2022, the Macau government published a draft of its proposed revisions to the gaming law. The Company is monitoring developments with respect to the Macau government's concession renewal or extension process, and at this time believes that its concession will be renewed or extended beyond June 26, 2022. The failure to extend or renew the Company's concession or obtain a new concession and the resulting ability of the WML Senior Note holders to exercise the Special Put Option and triggering of the Property Mandatory Prepayment Event would have a material adverse effect on the Company's business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Key Operating Measures
Certain key operating measures specific to the gaming industry are included in our discussion of our operational performance for the periods for which the Consolidated Statements of Operations are presented. These key operating measures are presented as supplemental disclosures because management and/or certain investors use these measures to better understand period-over-period fluctuations in our casino and hotel operating revenues. These key operating measures are defined below:
•Table drop in mass market for our Macau Operations is the amount of cash that is deposited in a gaming table's drop box plus cash chips purchased at the casino cage.
•Table drop for our Las Vegas Operations is the amount of cash and net markers issued that are deposited in a gaming table's drop box.
•Table drop for Encore Boston Harbor is the amount of cash and gross markers issued that are deposited in a gaming table's drop box.
•Rolling chips are non-negotiable identifiable chips that are used to track turnover for purposes of calculating incentives within our Macau Operations' VIP program.
•Turnover is the sum of all losing rolling chip wagers within our Macau Operations' VIP program.
•Table games win is the amount of table drop or turnover that is retained and recorded as casino revenues. Table games win is before discounts, commissions and the allocation of casino revenues to rooms, food and beverage and other revenues for services provided to casino customers on a complimentary basis. Table games win does not include poker rake.
•Slot machine win is the amount of handle (representing the total amount wagered) that is retained by us and is recorded as casino revenues. Slot machine win is after adjustment for progressive accruals and free play, but before discounts and the allocation of casino revenues to rooms, food and beverage and other revenues for services provided to casino customers on a complimentary basis.
•Poker rake is the portion of cash wagered by patrons in our poker rooms that is retained by the casino as a service fee, after adjustment for progressive accruals, but before the allocation of casino revenues to rooms, food and beverage and other revenues for services provided to casino customers on a complimentary basis. Poker tables are not included in our measure of average number of table games.
•Average daily rate ("ADR") is calculated by dividing total room revenues, including complimentaries (less service charges, if any), by total rooms occupied.
•Revenue per available room ("REVPAR") is calculated by dividing total room revenues, including complimentaries (less service charges, if any), by total rooms available.
•Occupancy is calculated by dividing total occupied rooms, including complimentary rooms, by the total rooms available.
Below is a discussion of the methodologies used to calculate win percentages at our resorts.
In our VIP operations in Macau, customers primarily purchase rolling chips from the casino cage and can only use them to make wagers. Winning wagers are paid in cash chips. The loss of the rolling chips in the VIP operations is recorded as turnover and provides a base for calculating VIP win percentage. It is customary in Macau to measure VIP play using this rolling chip method. We expect our win as a percentage of turnover from these operations to be within the range of 2.7% to 3.0%.
In our mass market operations in Macau, customers may purchase cash chips at either the gaming tables or at the casino cage. The measurements from our VIP and mass market operations are not comparable as the measurement method used in our mass market operations tracks the initial purchase of chips at the table and at the casino cage, while the measurement method from our VIP operations tracks the sum of all losing wagers. Accordingly, the base measurement from the VIP operations is much larger than the base measurement from the mass market operations. As a result, the expected win percentage with the same amount of gaming win is lower in the VIP operations when compared to the mass market operations.
In Las Vegas, customers purchase chips at the gaming tables in exchange for cash and markers. Customers may then redeem markers at the gaming tables or at the casino cage. The cash and markers, net of redemptions, used to purchase chips are deposited in the gaming table's drop box. This is the base of measurement that we use for calculating win percentage. Each type of table game has its own theoretical win percentage. Our expected table games win percentage is 22% to 26%.
At Encore Boston Harbor, customers purchase chips at the gaming tables in exchange for cash and markers. Customers may then redeem markers only at the casino cage. The cash and gross markers used to purchase chips are deposited in the gaming table's drop box. This is the base of measurement that we use for calculating win percentage. Each type of table game has its own theoretical win percentage. Our expected table games win percentage is 18% to 22%.
Results of Operations
Summary annual results
The following table summarizes our financial results for the periods presented (in thousands, except per share data):
NM - not meaningful.
(1) See Item 8 - "Financial Statements and Supplemental Data," Note 20, "Segment Information," for a reconciliation of Adjusted Property EBITDA to net loss attributable to Wynn Resorts, Limited.
The increase in operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by increases of $377.6 million, $151.4 million, $755.7 million, and $329.9 million from Wynn Palace, Wynn Macau, our Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively, as a result of increased mass market gaming volumes at Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau, and increased gaming volumes at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively, as well as increases in hotel occupancy, nightlife offerings, and covers at restaurants at our Las Vegas Operations. In addition, each of the Company's properties was subject to partial or full closure for varying lengths of time during 2020.
The decrease in net loss attributable to Wynn Resorts, Limited for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to increased operating revenues at our integrated resort properties, partially offset by increased operating expenses primarily due to increased gaming tax expense driven by the increase in casino revenues at each property, increased marketing and promotional expenses at Wynn Interactive, and higher operating costs associated with higher business volumes at our resort properties in general.
The increase in Adjusted Property EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by increased operating revenues at our integrated resort properties, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Adjusted Property EBITDA increased $241.3 million, $91.4 million, $587.2 million, and $233.8 million at Wynn Palace, Wynn Macau, our Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively, and decreased $260.0 million at Wynn Interactive.
Financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating revenues
The following table presents our operating revenues (in thousands):
The following table presents our casino and non-casino operating revenues (in thousands):
Casino revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 56.7% of operating revenues, compared to 59.0% for the same period of 2020. Non-casino revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 43.3% of operating revenues, compared to 41.0% for the same period of 2020.
Casino revenues
Casino revenues increased primarily due to increased table drop, table games win and slot machine win at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor, and increased mass market table drop and table games win at our Macau Operations. Our Las Vegas Operations were closed to the public from March 17, 2020 until June 4, 2020. Encore Boston Harbor was closed to the public from March 15, 2020 until July 10, 2020. Our casino operations in Macau were closed for a 15-day period in February 2020. The table below sets forth our casino revenues and associated key operating measures (dollars in thousands, except for win per unit per day):
In response to the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in early 2020, each of our properties was subject to partial or full closure for varying lengths of time during 2020, and each has since reopened with certain COVID-19 specific protective measures in place.
(1) Our casino operations in Macau were closed for a 15-day period in February 2020 and resumed operations on a reduced basis on February 20, 2020.
(2) Our Las Vegas Operations closed on March 17, 2020 and reopened on June 4, 2020. On October 19, 2020, Encore at Wynn Las Vegas adjusted its operating schedule to five days/four nights each week due to reduced customer demand levels. This adjusted operating schedule remained in effect through the first quarter of 2021, and on April 8, 2021, Encore at Wynn Las Vegas resumed full operations.
(3) Encore Boston Harbor closed on March 15, 2020 and reopened on July 10, 2020. In addition, on November 6, 2020, Encore Boston Harbor temporarily suspended hotel operations and overnight casino operations pursuant to a state directive limiting the operating hours of certain businesses, including restaurants and casinos. On January 25, 2021, the limitations on operating hours were lifted, and Encore Boston Harbor restored 24-hour casino operations and reopened its hotel tower on a Thursday through Sunday weekly schedule. The property reopened its hotel tower to seven days per week as of September 1, 2021.
Non-casino revenues
The table below sets forth our room revenues and associated key operating measures:
(1) Wynn Las Vegas closed on March 17, 2020 and reopened on June 4, 2020.
(2) Encore Boston Harbor closed on March 15, 2020 and reopened on July 10, 2020.
(3) Encore Boston Harbor room statistics have been computed based on 250 days and 141 days of operation in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing the number of nights hotel rooms were offered for sale to the public. The property reopened its hotel tower to seven days per week as of September 1, 2021.
Room revenues increased $284.6 million, primarily due to higher occupancy at each of our properties and higher ADR at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor, and the closures of our Las Vegas Operations from March 17, 2020 until June 4, 2020 and Encore Boston Harbor from March 15, 2020 until July 10, 2020, resulting from the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Food and beverage revenues increased $304.3 million, primarily due to increased covers at our restaurants and an increase in nightlife offerings at our Las Vegas Operations as a result of ongoing recovery from the effects of COVID-19.
Entertainment, retail and other revenues increased $182.7 million, primarily due to an increase in visitation to our Macau Operations, our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor as a result of ongoing recovery from the effects of COVID-19.
Operating expenses
The table below presents operating expenses (in thousands):
Total operating expenses increased $830.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased casino, room, food and beverage, entertainment, retail and other, and general and administrative expenses, partially offset by decreased provision for credit losses, depreciation and amortization, and property charges and other expenses.
Casino expenses increased $142.9 million, $59.1 million, $42.8 million, and $84.3 million at Wynn Palace, Wynn Macau, our Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively. These increases were primarily due to increased gaming tax expense driven by the increase in casino revenues at each property.
Room expenses increased $23.7 million at our Las Vegas Operations. The increase was primarily a result of higher operating costs related to the increase in occupancy.
Food and beverage expenses increased $121.0 million at our Las Vegas Operations. The increase was primarily a result of higher operating costs related to the increase in food and beverage revenues as well as higher nightlife entertainment costs.
Entertainment, retail and other expenses increased primarily due to marketing expenses incurred by Wynn Interactive in connection with the launch of its operations in various states.
General and administrative expenses increased primarily due to an increase in corporate and other general and administrative expenses of $54.8 million, primarily due to a credit of $30.2 million for the net proceeds of a derivative action settlement recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, general and administrative expenses increased $11.7 million at Encore Boston Harbor primarily due to the closure of our operations from March 15, 2020 until July 10, 2020.
The provision for credit losses decreased $24.1 million, $8.5 million, and $3.9 million at our Las Vegas Operations, Wynn Palace, and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively. The decreases were primarily due to the impact of historical collection patterns and expectations of current and future collection trends, as well as the specific review of customer accounts, on our estimated credit loss for the respective periods.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, pre-opening expenses totaled $6.8 million and $6.5 million, which primarily related to restaurant remodels at our Las Vegas Operations.
Our property charges and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of advocacy-related expenses of $12.5 million and impairment of goodwill of $10.3 million at Wynn Interactive, asset abandonments of $9.7 million, $4.2 million, $2.3 million, and $1.8 million at our Las Vegas Operations, Wynn Palace, Encore Boston Harbor, and Wynn Macau, respectively, and other contingency expenses of $8.7 million at Wynn Macau. Our property charges and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of asset disposals and abandonments of $24.4 million, $12.8 million, and $21.5 million at Wynn Palace, Encore Boston Harbor and Corporate and other, respectively.
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest
The following table summarizes information related to interest expense (dollars in thousands):
Interest costs increased primarily due to an increase in the weighted average debt balance and the weighted average interest rate. Capitalized interest decreased due to the completion of the meeting and convention expansion in February 2020.
Other non-operating income and expenses
We incurred a foreign currency remeasurement loss of $23.9 million and a gain of $12.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The impact of the exchange rate fluctuation of the Macau pataca, in relation to the U.S. dollar, on the remeasurements of U.S. dollar denominated debt and other obligations from our Macau-related entities drove the variability between periods.
We recorded a gain of $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to reflect the fair value of our cost method investment at the date we acquired a controlling interest in BetBull Limited.
We recorded a gain of $11.4 million and a loss of $13.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, from changes in the fair value of an interest rate collar.
We recorded a $2.1 million loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to full prepayments of the Wynn Macau Credit Facilities. We recorded a $4.6 million loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to the partial prepayment of the Wynn Macau Term Loan.
Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded an income tax expense of $0.5 million and $564.7 million, respectively. The 2021 income tax expense primarily relates to the Macau dividend tax agreement that provides for an annual payment of MOP 12.8 million (approximately $1.6 million) as complementary tax otherwise due by stockholders of Wynn Macau SA partially offset by a decrease in foreign deferred tax liabilities related to intangibles. The 2020 income tax expense primarily related to the increase in the valuation allowances for U.S foreign tax credits.
In March 2021, the Company received an extension of its Macau dividend tax agreement, providing for a payment of MOP 12.8 million (approximately $1.6 million) for 2021 and MOP 6.3 million (approximately $0.8 million) for the period ending June 26, 2022, the expiration date of the gaming concession agreement.
In April 2020, Wynn Macau SA received an extension of the exemption from Macau's 12% Complementary Tax on casino gaming profits earned from January 1, 2021 to June 26, 2022, the expiration date of the gaming concession agreement. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any casino gaming profits exempt from the Macau Complementary Tax. Our non-gaming profits remain subject to the Macau Complementary Tax and casino winnings remain subject to the Macau special gaming tax and other levies together totaling 39% in accordance with our concession agreement.
In March 2021, the Financial Services Bureau concluded its review of the 2017 and 2018 Macau income tax returns of Palo with no changes.
In January 2022, the Financial Services Bureau issued final tax assessments for the Company’s Macau income tax returns of Wynn Macau SA for the years 2017 and 2018, while no additional tax was due, adjustments were made to the Company’s tax loss carryforwards.
We have participated in the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") Compliance Assurance Program ("CAP") for the 2012 through 2021 tax years and will continue to participate in the IRS CAP for the 2022 tax year.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was $256.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss of $259.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These amounts are primarily related to the noncontrolling interests' share of net loss from WML.
Adjusted Property EBITDA
We use Adjusted Property EBITDA to manage the operating results of our segments. Adjusted Property EBITDA is net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, pre-opening expenses, property charges and other, management and license fees, corporate expenses and other (including intercompany golf course, meeting and convention, and water rights leases), stock-based compensation, change in derivatives fair value, loss on extinguishment of debt, and other non-operating income and expenses. Adjusted Property EBITDA is presented exclusively as a supplemental disclosure because management believes that it is widely used to measure the performance, and as a basis for valuation, of gaming companies. Management uses Adjusted Property EBITDA as a measure of the operating performance of its segments and to compare the operating performance of its properties with those of its competitors, as well as a basis for determining certain incentive compensation. We also present Adjusted Property EBITDA because it is used by some investors to measure a company's ability to incur and service debt, make capital expenditures and meet working capital requirements. Gaming companies have historically reported EBITDA as a supplement to GAAP. In order to view the operations of their casinos on a more stand-alone basis, gaming companies, including us, have historically excluded from their EBITDA calculations preopening expenses, property charges, corporate expenses and stock-based compensation, that do not relate to the management of specific casino properties. However, Adjusted Property EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to operating income as an indicator of our performance, as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity, or as an alternative to any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. Unlike net income (loss), Adjusted Property EBITDA does not include depreciation or interest expense and therefore does not reflect current or future capital expenditures or the cost of capital. We have significant uses of cash flows, including capital expenditures, interest payments, debt principal repayments, income taxes and other non-recurring charges, which are not reflected in Adjusted Property EBITDA. Also, our calculation of Adjusted Property EBITDA may be different from the calculation methods used by other companies and, therefore, comparability may be limited.
The following table summarizes Adjusted Property EBITDA (in thousands) for Wynn Palace, Wynn Macau, Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor as reviewed by management and summarized in Item 8 - "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," Note 20, "Segment Information." That footnote also presents a reconciliation of Adjusted Property EBITDA to net income (loss) attributable to Wynn Resorts, Limited.
Adjusted Property EBITDA at Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau increased $241.3 million and $91.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, respectively, primarily due to an increase in operating revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Our casino operations at both Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau were closed for a 15-day period in February 2020.
Adjusted Property EBITDA at our Las Vegas Operations increased $587.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in operating revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Our Las Vegas Operations closed to the public on March 17, 2020, and reopened on June 4, 2020 on a reduced basis.
Adjusted Property EBITDA at Encore Boston Harbor increased $233.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in operating revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Encore Boston Harbor closed to the public on March 15, 2020 and reopened on July 10, 2020 on a reduced basis.
Adjusted Property EBITDA at Wynn Interactive was $(267.4) million and $(7.4) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to increased marketing and promotional expenses incurred in connection with the launch of its operations in various states.
Refer to the discussions above regarding the specific details of our results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Our operating cash flows primarily consist of operating income (excluding depreciation and amortization and other non-cash charges), interest paid and earned, and changes in working capital accounts such as receivables, inventories, prepaid expenses, and payables. Our table games play is a mix of cash play and credit play, while our slot machine play is conducted
primarily on a cash basis. A significant portion of our table games revenue is attributable to the play of a limited number of premium international customers who gamble on credit. The ability to collect these gaming receivables may impact our operating cash flow for the period. Our rooms, food and beverage, and entertainment, retail and other revenue is conducted on a cash and credit basis. Accordingly, operating cash flows will be impacted by changes in operating income and accounts receivable, net.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to increased operating revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses and changes in working capital accounts, including a decrease in customer deposits primarily due to withdrawals by gaming promoters. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any agreements in place with gaming promoters.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in net cash provided by operations was primarily due to the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the results of our operations.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities primarily consist of project capital expenditures and maintenance capital expenditures associated with maintaining and continually refining our world-class integrated resort properties.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred capital expenditures of $168.8 million at our Las Vegas Operations primarily related to the Wynn Las Vegas room remodel, and $38.7 million at Encore Boston Harbor, $37.2 million at Wynn Palace, and $25.2 million at Wynn Macau primarily related to maintenance capital expenditures.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred capital expenditures of $61.3 million at Encore Boston Harbor primarily for the payment of construction retention and other payables related to its construction, $85.9 million at our Las Vegas Operations for restaurant remodels and maintenance capital expenditures, $45.3 million for the construction of the additional meeting and convention space at Wynn Las Vegas, and $46.7 million and $49.8 million at Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau, respectively, primarily related to maintenance capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received proceeds of $841.9 million from our February 2021 equity offering and used $716.0 million of the proceeds from the equity offering to repay the outstanding borrowings under the WRF Revolver. We also paid $464.7 million of outstanding principal owed under the Wynn Macau Term Loan and prepaid the outstanding $1.26 billion of borrowings under the Wynn Macau Credit Facilities along with related financing costs, using proceeds from the borrowing of $1.09 billion under the WM Cayman II Revolver along with $200.0 million of cash. In addition, we borrowed $200.4 million under the WM Cayman II Revolver, and made quarterly amortization payments under the WRF Term Loan totaling $50.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of WML 5 1/2% Senior Notes due 2026, issued $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of WML 5 5/8% Senior Notes due 2028, issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of WRF 7 3/4% Senior Notes due 2025, borrowed $56.5 million, net of amounts repaid, under the Wynn Macau Revolver, borrowed $716.0 million, net of amounts repaid, under the WRF Revolver, paid $1.04 billion of outstanding principal owed under the Wynn Macau Term Loan, and made quarterly amortization payments under the WRF Term Loan totaling $50.0 million.
Capital Resources
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and is likely to continue to impact, materially, our business, financial condition and results of operations. While we believe our strong liquidity position will enable us to fund our current obligations for the foreseeable future, COVID-19 has resulted in significant disruption, which has had and will likely continue to have a negative impact on our operating income and could have a negative impact on our ability to access capital in the future. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities.
The following table summarizes our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and available revolver borrowing capacity. Refer to Item 8 - "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," Note 7, "Long-Term Debt" in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information regarding each of the Company's debt agreements. The following table is presented by significant financing entity as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Excluding Wynn Macau, Limited and subsidiaries.
Wynn Macau, Limited and subsidiaries. Wynn Macau, Limited generates cash from our Macau Operations and may utilize proceeds from the WM Cayman II Revolver (discussed further below) to fund short term working capital requirements as needed. We expect to use this cash to fund working capital and capital expenditure requirements at WML and our Macau Operations, and to service our existing WML Senior Notes. WML paid no dividends during 2021 or 2020.
On September 16, 2021, WM Cayman Holdings Limited II ("WM Cayman II"), an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of WML, entered into an unsecured revolving credit facility agreement (the "Facility Agreement") in an aggregate principal amount of $1.50 billion consisting of one tranche in an amount of $312.5 million and one tranche in an amount of HK$9.26 billion (approximately $1.19 billion). WM Cayman II has the ability to upsize the total revolving credit facility by an additional $1.00 billion equivalent under the Facility Agreement and related agreements upon the satisfaction of various conditions.
In January 2021, Wynn Macau SA prepaid approximately $412.5 million of the term loan outstanding under the Wynn Macau Credit Facilities using proceeds from WML senior notes issuances.
In September 2021, borrowings of $1.09 billion under the WM Cayman II Revolver, along with $200.0 million of cash, were used to facilitate the prepayment of the outstanding $1.26 billion of borrowings under the Wynn Macau Credit Facilities and to pay related fees and expenses.
The borrowings under the WM Cayman II Revolver bear interest at LIBOR or HIBOR plus a margin of 1.875% to 2.875% per annum based on WM Cayman II’s leverage ratio on a consolidated basis. The final maturity of all outstanding loans under the Revolving Facility is September 16, 2025.
If our portion of our cash and cash equivalents were repatriated to the U.S. on December 31, 2021, it would be subject to minimal U.S. taxes in the year of repatriation.
Wynn Resorts Finance, LLC and subsidiaries. Wynn Resorts Finance, LLC ("WRF" or "Wynn Resorts Finance") generates cash from distributions from its subsidiaries, which include our Macau Operations, Wynn Las Vegas, and Encore Boston Harbor, and contributions from Wynn Resorts, as required. In addition, WRF may utilize its available revolving borrowing capacity as needed. We expect to use this cash to service our WRF Credit Facilities, 2025 WRF Notes, 2029 WRF Notes, and WLV Notes, and to fund working capital and capital expenditure requirements as needed.
WRF is a holding company and, as a result, its ability to pay dividends to Wynn Resorts is dependent on WRF receiving distributions from its subsidiaries, which include WML, Wynn Las Vegas, LLC, and Wynn MA, LLC (the owner and operator of Encore Boston Harbor). The WRF Credit Agreement contains customary negative and financial covenants, including, but not limited to, covenants that restrict WRF's ability to pay dividends or distributions and incur additional indebtedness.
Wynn Las Vegas is currently undergoing its planned room remodel, which we temporarily postponed during 2020. We expect to incur between $90 million and $100 million of remaining project costs related to this remodel, which we expect to complete during the second quarter of 2022.
We are currently reconfiguring the former Le Reve theater space at Wynn Las Vegas. The specially redesigned theater will host an all-new, exclusive theatrical production. We expect to incur between $70 million and $80 million of remaining
project costs related to the reconfigured theater and theatrical production, which we anticipate will open during the third quarter of 2022.
We repaid $716.0 million of the outstanding borrowings under the WRF Revolver in February 2021, using proceeds from the February 2021 equity offering described below.
On February 15, 2022, we announced our entry into a sale-leaseback arrangement with respect to certain real estate assets related to Encore Boston Harbor. Upon closing of the related transactions, currently expected to take place in the fourth quarter of 2022 subject to regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions, we expect to receive cash consideration of approximately $1.7 billion in exchange for the sale of such real estate assets to an unrelated third party, and to concurrently enter into a lease agreement whereby the Company will lease such real estate assets for the purpose of continuing to operate the Encore Boston Harbor property. The lease agreement provides for an initial annual minimum rent of $100.0 million for an initial term of 30 years, subject to certain annual rent escalations and renewal provisions. We expect to use the cash proceeds from the sale of the real estate assets for general corporate purposes, which may include the repayment of certain debt obligations.
Wynn Resorts, Limited and other subsidiaries. Wynn Resorts, Limited is a holding company and, as a result, our ability to pay dividends is dependent on our ability to obtain funds and our subsidiaries' ability to provide funds to us. Wynn Resorts, Limited and other primarily generates cash from royalty and management agreements with our resorts, dividends and distributions from our subsidiaries, and the operations of the Retail Joint Venture of which we own 50.1%. We expect to use this cash to service our Retail Term Loan, to fund working capital needs of Wynn Interactive, and for general corporate purposes.
On February 11, 2021, the Company completed a registered public offering of 7,475,000 newly issued shares of its common stock, par value $0.01 per share, at a price of $115.00 per share for proceeds of $841.9 million, net of $17.7 million in underwriting discounts, commissions and other expenses. The Company used $716.0 million of the net proceeds from this equity offering to repay the outstanding borrowings under the WRF revolver in February 2021, and used the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Other Factors Affecting Liquidity
We may refinance all or a portion of our indebtedness on or before maturity. We cannot assure you that we will be able to refinance any of the indebtedness on acceptable terms or at all.
Legal proceedings in which we are involved also may impact our liquidity. No assurance can be provided as to the outcome of such proceedings. In addition, litigation inherently involves significant costs. For information regarding legal proceedings, see Item 8 - "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," Note 17, "Commitments and Contingencies."
Our Board of Directors has authorized an equity repurchase program of up to $1.0 billion. Under the equity repurchase program, we may repurchase the Company's outstanding shares from time to time through open market purchases, in privately negotiated transactions, and under plans complying with Rules 10b5-1 and 10b-18 under the Exchange Act. As of December 31, 2021, we had $800.1 million in repurchase authority remaining under the program.
We have in the past repurchased, and in the future, we may periodically consider repurchasing our outstanding notes for cash. The amount of any notes to be repurchased, as well as the timing of any repurchases, will be based on business, market and other conditions and factors, including price, contractual requirements or consents, and capital availability.
New business developments or other unforeseen events, including related to COVID-19, may occur, resulting in the need to raise additional funds. We continue to explore opportunities to develop additional gaming or related businesses in domestic and international markets. There can be no assurances regarding the business prospects with respect to any other opportunity. Any new development may require us to obtain additional financing. We may decide to conduct any such development through Wynn Resorts, Limited or through subsidiaries separate from the Las Vegas, Boston or Macau-related entities.
Contractual Commitments
The following table summarizes our scheduled contractual commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Amounts for all periods represent our estimated future interest payments on our debt facilities based upon amounts outstanding and LIBOR or HIBOR rates as of December 31, 2021. Actual rates will vary.
(2) Represents payments to executive officers, other members of management and certain key employees. Employment agreements generally have three to five year terms and typically indicate a base salary and often contain provisions for discretionary bonuses. Certain of the executives are also entitled to a separation payment if terminated without "cause" or upon voluntary termination of employment for "good reason" following a "change of control" (as these terms are defined in the employment contracts).
(3) Represents payments to certain communities surrounding Encore Boston Harbor, required as a condition of the gaming license awarded to Wynn MA, LLC.
(4) Other includes open purchase orders, future charitable contributions, fixed gaming tax payments in Macau, performance contracts and other contracts. As further discussed in Item 8 - "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," Note 13, "Income Taxes," we had $141.5 million of unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021. Due to the inherent uncertainty of the underlying tax positions, it is not practicable to assign this liability to any particular year and therefore it is not included in the table above as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP involves the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. Certain of our accounting policies require management to apply significant judgment in defining the appropriate assumptions integral to financial estimates and on an ongoing basis, management evaluates those estimates. Judgments are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, industry trends and information available from outside sources, as appropriate. However, by their nature, judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty, and therefore actual results could differ from our estimates.
Allowance for Credit Losses
A substantial portion of our outstanding receivables relates to casino credit play. Credit play, through the issuance of markers, represents a significant portion of the table games volume. Our goal is to maintain strict controls over the issuance of credit and aggressively pursue collection from those customers who fail to pay their balances in a timely fashion. These collection efforts may include the mailing of statements and delinquency notices, personal contacts, the use of outside collection agencies, and litigation. Markers issued at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor are generally legally enforceable instruments in the United States, and United States assets of foreign customers may be used to satisfy judgments entered in the United States.
The enforceability of markers and other forms of credit related to gaming debt outside of the United States varies from country to country. Some foreign countries do not recognize the enforceability of gaming related debt, or make enforcement burdensome. We closely consider the likelihood and difficulty of enforceability, among other factors, when issuing credit to customers who are not residents of the United States. In addition to our internal credit and collection departments, we have a network of legal, accounting and collection professionals to assist us in our determinations regarding enforceability and our overall collection efforts.
We regularly evaluate our reserve for credit losses based on a specific review of customer accounts and outstanding gaming promoter accounts, taking into consideration the amount owed, the age of the account, the customer's financial condition, management's experience with historical and current collection trends, current economic and business conditions, and management's expectations of future economic and business conditions and forecasts. Accounts are written off when management deems them to be uncollectible. Recoveries of accounts previously written off are recorded when received.
The following table presents key statistics related to our casino accounts receivable (dollars in thousands):
The increase in allowance for casino credit losses as shown in the table above is primarily due to the impact of historical collection patterns and expectations of current and future collection trends in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the specific review of customer accounts. Although the Company believes that its allowance is adequate, it is possible the estimated amounts of cash collections with respect to receivables could change. Our allowance for credit losses is based on our estimates of amounts collectible and depends on the risk assessments and judgments by management regarding realizability, the current and expected future state of the economy and our credit policy. Our reserve methodology is applied similarly to credit extended at each of our resorts. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 42.9% and 50.0%, respectively, of our outstanding casino accounts receivable balance originated at our Macau Operations, which include advances to gaming promoters.
As of December 31, 2021, a 100 basis point change in the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of casino accounts receivable would change the provision for credit losses by approximately $2.0 million.
As our customer payment experience evolves, we will continue to refine our estimated allowance for credit losses. Accordingly, the associated provision for credit losses may fluctuate. Because individual customer account balances can be significant, the reserve and the provision can change significantly between periods as we become aware of additional information about a customer or changes occur in a region's economy or legal system.
Development, Construction and Property, and Equipment Estimates
During the construction and development of a resort or other projects, pre-opening or start-up costs are expensed when incurred. In connection with the construction and development of our resorts, significant start-up costs are incurred and charged to pre-opening costs through their respective openings. Once our resorts open, expenses associated with the opening of the resorts are no longer charged as pre-opening costs.
During the construction and development stage, direct costs such as those incurred for the design and construction of our resorts, including applicable portions of interest, are capitalized. Accordingly, the recorded amounts of property and equipment increase significantly during construction periods. Depreciation is provided over the estimated useful lives of the assets using the straight-line method. We determine the estimated useful lives based on our experience with similar assets, estimates of the usage of the asset and other factors specific to the asset. Depreciation expense related to capitalized construction costs and fixed assets commences when the related assets are placed in service. The remaining estimated useful lives of assets are periodically reviewed and adjusted as necessary.
Costs of repairs and maintenance are charged to expense when incurred. The cost and accumulated depreciation of property and equipment retired or otherwise disposed of are eliminated from the respective accounts and any resulting gain or loss is included in property charges and other.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets, Intangible assets, and Goodwill
We evaluate our property and equipment and other long-lived assets for impairment in accordance with applicable accounting standards. For assets to be disposed of we recognize the asset at the lower of carrying value or fair market value less costs of disposal, as estimated based on comparable asset sales, solicited offers, or a discounted cash flow model. For assets to be held and used, we review for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. In reviewing for impairment, we compare the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to the carrying value of the asset. If the undiscounted
cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, an impairment is recorded based on the fair value of the asset, typically measured using a discounted cash flow model. If an asset is still under development, future cash flows include remaining construction costs. All recognized impairment losses, whether for assets to be disposed of or assets to be held and used, are recorded as operating expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau continued to experience disruptions to their respective businesses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as noted in Note 1, "Organization and Business." As a result, we concluded that a triggering event occurred at each of these asset groups. We tested our asset groups for recoverability as of December 31, 2021, and concluded no impairment existed at that date as the estimated undiscounted future cash flows exceeded the net carrying amount for each of the asset groups. The tests for recoverability include estimates of future cash flows and the useful lives of our primary assets. These estimates are subjective and may change should the COVID-19 pandemic, including travel restrictions and operating capacity limitations, persist longer than expected. Unfavorable changes in the Company's estimates could require an impairment charge in the future.
The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that this asset may be impaired. The Company’s test of goodwill impairment starts with a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If qualitative factors indicate that the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed. For the quantitative analysis, the Company compares the fair value of its reporting unit to its carrying value. If the estimated fair value exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired and no additional steps are necessary. However, if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, goodwill impairment is recorded equal to the difference between the carrying amount of the reporting unit and its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. Most of the Company’s goodwill recorded as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was the result of an acquisition during the fourth quarter of 2020.
On November 12, 2021, Wynn Resorts announced the termination of a previously announced agreement and plan of merger which contemplated the combination of Wynn Interactive and a special purpose acquisition company. The Company concluded that the termination of the agreement constituted a potential indicator of impairment, and as a result of revisiting its estimated fair value of the reporting units comprising Wynn Interactive based on a combination of the income and market approaches, recognized impairment of $10.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Litigation and Contingency Estimates
We are subject to various claims, legal actions and other contingencies, and we accrue for these matters when they are both probable and estimable. For matters that arose on or prior to the balance sheet date, we estimate any accruals based on the relevant facts and circumstances available through the date of issuance of the financial statements. We include the accruals associated with any contingent matters in other accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions where we operate. Accounting standards require the recognition of deferred tax assets, net of applicable reserves, and liabilities for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on the income tax provision and deferred tax assets and liabilities generally is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. Accounting standards require recognition of a future tax benefit to the extent that realization of such benefit is more likely than not. Otherwise, a valuation allowance is applied.
As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred tax assets of $2.5 billion including a foreign tax credit ("FTC") carryforward of $2.0 billion and a deferred tax asset related to interest expense carryforwards of $154.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we have recorded a valuation allowance of $2.5 billion against the FTC carryforward, disallowed interest expense carryforward and the other deferred tax assets based on our estimate of future realization. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, the Company considers whether it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. In this assessment, appropriate consideration was given to all positive and negative evidence including recent operating profitability, forecasts of future earnings, ability to carryback, the reversal of net taxable temporary differences, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, and tax planning strategies. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company no longer relies on forecast of future
taxable income due to tax legislation that reduces future sources of taxable income as well as the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and relies solely on the reversal of net taxable temporary differences.
Our income tax returns are subject to examination by the IRS and other tax authorities in the locations where we operate. We assess potentially unfavorable outcomes of such examinations based on accounting standards for uncertain income taxes. The accounting standards prescribe a minimum recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements.
Uncertain tax position accounting standards apply to all tax positions related to income taxes. These accounting standards utilize a two-step approach for evaluating tax positions. The tax benefit is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement.
As applicable, we recognize accrued penalties and interest related to unrecognized tax benefits in the provision for income taxes.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards and Accounting Standards Issued But Not Yet Adopted
See Item 8 - "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," Note 2, "Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies."