ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Form 10-K, including “Risk Factors,” and the Financial Statements and notes thereto. The various sections of this discussion contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary.” Our actual results may differ materially.
Organizational Overview
We were incorporated on May 30, 1997 under the laws of the state of Delaware. We are a leading provider of Trusted Mobility Management (TMaaS) that consists of federally certified communications management, identity management, and interactive bill presentment and analytics solutions. We help our clients achieve their organizational missions for mobility management and security objectives in this challenging and complex business environment.
We offer our TMaaS solutions through a flexible managed services model which includes both a scalable and comprehensive set of functional capabilities that can be used by any customer to meet the most common functional, technical and security requirements for mobility management. Our TMaaS solutions were designed and implemented with flexibility in mind such that it can accommodate a large variety of customer requirements through simple configuration settings rather than through costly software development. The flexibility of our TMaaS solutions enables our customers to be able to quickly expand or contract their mobility management requirements. Our TMaaS solutions are hosted and accessible on-demand through a secure federal government certified proprietary portal that provides our customers with the ability to manage, analyze and protect their valuable communications assets, and deploy identity management solutions that provide secured virtual and physical access to restricted environments.
We executed on our key initiative for 2021 by obtaining FedRAMP Ready status for ITMS™ and completing an acquisition of substantially all of the assets of IT Authorities, Inc. (ITA), a Provider of Comprehensive IT as a Service (ITaaS). In addition, we focused on increasing our customer base and our sales pipeline and leveraging our strategic relationships with key system integrators and strategic partners to capture additional market share. In fiscal 2022, we will continue to focus on the following key goals:
·
selling high margin managed services,
·
integration of ITA business into the Company,
·
executing cross-sell opportunities identified from ITA acquisition, including Identity Management (IdM), Telecommunications Lifecycle Management (TLM) and Digital Billing & Analytics (DB&A) solutions,
·
growing our sales pipeline by continue to invest in our business development and sales team assets,
·
pursuing additional opportunities with our key systems integrator and strategic partners, and
·
expanding our solution offerings into the commercial space.
Our longer-term strategic goals are driven by our need to expand our critical mass so that we have more flexibility to fund investments in technology solutions and introduce new sales and marketing initiatives to expand our marketplace share and increase the breadth of our offerings in order to improve company sustainability and growth. Our next steps towards achieving our longer-term goals include:
·
pursuing accretive and strategic acquisitions to expand our solutions and our customer base,
·
delivering new incremental offerings to add to our existing TMaaS offering,
·
developing and testing innovative new offerings that enhance our TMaaS offering, and
·
transitioning our data center and support infrastructure into a more cost-effective and federally approved cloud environment to comply with perceived future contract requirements.
We believe these actions could drive a strategic repositioning our TMaaS offering and may include the sale of non-aligned offerings coupled with acquisitions of complementary and supplementary offerings that could result in a more focused core set of TMaaS offerings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies referenced, as applicable, to other notes. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. Our senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with its Audit Committee. See Note 2 to consolidated financial statements, which contain additional information regarding accounting policies and other disclosures required by U.S. GAAP. The following section below provides information about certain critical accounting policies that are important to the consolidated financial statements and that require significant management assumptions and judgments.
Segments
Segments are defined by authoritative guidance as components of a company in which separate financial information is available and is evaluated by the chief operating decision maker (CODM), or a decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. Our CODM is our chief executive officer.
We operate in one segment based on the consolidated information used by our CODM in evaluating the financial performance of our business and allocation resources. This single segment represents our Company’s business, which is providing managed services for government and commercial clients that include Identity Management (IdM), secure Mobility Managed Services (MMS), Telecom Lifecycle Management, Digital Billing & Analytics and IT as a service (ITaaS).
We present a single segment for purposes of financial reporting and prepared consolidated financial statements upon that basis.
Revenue Recognition
Our managed services solutions may require a combination of labor, third party products and services. Our managed services are generally not interdependent and our contract performance obligations are delivered consistently on a monthly basis. We do not typically have undelivered performance obligations in these arrangements that would require us to spread our revenue over a longer period of time. In the event there are undelivered performance obligations our practice is to recognize the revenue when the performance obligation has been satisfied.
.
A substantial portion of our revenues are derived from firm fixed price contracts with the U.S. federal government that are fixed fee arrangements tied to the number of devices managed. Our actual reported revenue may fluctuate month to month depending on the hours worked, number of users, number of devices managed, actual or prospective proven expense savings, actual technology spend, or any other metrics as contractually agreed to with our customers.
Our revenue recognition policies for our managed services is summarized and shown below:
·
Managed services are delivered on a monthly basis based on a standard fixed pricing scale and sensitive to significant changes in per user or device counts which form the basis for monthly charges. Revenue is recognized upon the completion of the delivery of monthly managed services based on user or device counts or other metrics. Managed services are not interdependent and there are no undelivered elements in these arrangements.
·
Identity services are delivered as an on-demand managed service through the cloud to an individual or organization or sold in bulk to an organization capable of self-issuing credentials. There are two aspects to issuing an identity credential to an individual that consists of identity proofing which is a significant part of the service and monthly credential validation services which enable the credential holder to access third party systems. Identity proofing services are not bundled and do not generally include other performance obligations to deliver. Revenue is recognized from the sales of identity credentials to an individual or organization upon issuance less a portion deferred for monthly credential validation support services. In the case of bulk sales or credential management system revenue is recognized upon issue or availability to the customer for issuance. There is generally no significant performance obligation to provide post contract services in relation to identity consoles delivered. Identity certificates issued have a fixed life and cannot be modified once issued.
·
Proprietary software revenue for software sold as a term license is recognized ratably over the license term from the date the software is accepted by the customer. Maintenance services, if contracted, are recognized ratably over the term of the maintenance agreement, generally twelve months. Revenue for fixed price software licenses that are sold as a perpetual license with no significant customization are recognized when the software is delivered. Implementation fees are recognized when the work is completed. Revenue from this service does not require significant accounting estimates.
Our revenue recognition policies for our labor services is summarized and shown below:
·
Billable services are professional services provided on a project basis determined by our customers’ specific requirements. These technical professional services are billed based on time incurred and actual costs. We recognize revenues for professional services performed based on actual hours worked and actual costs incurred.
Our revenue recognition policies for our reselling services is summarized and shown below:
·
Reselling services require the Company to acquire third party products and services to satisfy customer contractual obligations. We recognize revenues and related costs on a gross basis for such arrangements whenever we control the products and services before they are transferred to the customer. We are the principal in these transactions as we are seen as the primary creditor, we carry inventory risk for undelivered products and services, we directly issue purchase orders third party suppliers, and we have discretion in sourcing among many different suppliers. For those transactions in which we procure and deliver products and services for our customers’ on their own account we do not recognize revenues and related costs on a gross basis for these arrangements. We only recognize revenues earned for arranging the transaction and any related costs.
Our revenue recognition policies for our billable carrier services is summarized and shown below:
·
Carrier services are delivered on a monthly basis and consist of phone, data and satellite and related mobile services for a connected device or end point. These services require us to procure, process and pay communications carrier invoices. We recognize revenues and related costs on a gross basis for such arrangements whenever we control the services before they are transferred to the customer. We are the principal in these transactions when we are seen as the primary creditor, we directly issue purchase orders directly to communications carriers for wireline and wireless services, and/or we have discretion in choosing optimal providers and rate plans. For arrangements in which we do not have such control we recognize revenues and related costs on a net basis.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost of an acquired company over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In accordance with GAAP, goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually at December 31 and between annual tests if events or circumstances arise, such as adverse changes in the business climate, that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying value.
A reporting unit is defined as either an operating segment or a business one level below an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available that management regularly reviews. The Company has a single reporting unit for the purpose of impairment testing.
Goodwill impairment testing involves management judgment, requiring an assessment of whether the carrying value of the reporting unit can be supported by its fair value. As of December 31, 2021, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test with support from an external consultant and estimated the fair value of our single reporting unit based on a combination of the income (estimates of future discounted cash flows) and the market approach (market multiples for similar companies). The income approach uses a discounted cash flow (DCF) method that utilizes the present value of cash flows to estimate fair value of our reporting unit. The future cash flows for the reporting unit were projected based upon our estimates of future revenue, operating income and other factors such as working capital and capital expenditures. As part of our DCF analysis, we projected revenue and operating profits, and assumed a long-term revenue growth rates in the terminal year. The market approach utilizes multiples of revenues and earnings before interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) to estimate the fair value of our reporting unit. The market multiples used for our single reporting unit were based on a group of comparable companies’ market multiples applied to the Company’s revenue and EBITDA. The carrying value of the reporting unit as of December 31, 2021 was $41.7 million.
Finally, we compared our estimates of fair value to the Company’s December 31, 2021, total public market capitalization, and assessed implied control premiums. Based on the results of this analysis, we concluded that the estimated fair value determined under our approach for the annual goodwill impairment test for our single reporting unit was reasonable.
We had approximately $22.1 million of goodwill as of December 31, 2021. Based on the results of the market and income approach, we have concluded that goodwill is not impaired as of December 31, 2021. However, the Company’s evaluations are based on estimates and judgments based on current available information, any of which could become inaccurate as a result of subsequent events. The Company could be exposed to increased risk of goodwill impairment if future operating results or macroeconomic conditions differ significantly from our current assumptions.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is established when management determines that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the benefit of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Since deferred taxes measure the future tax effects of items recognized in the financial statements, certain estimates and assumptions are required to determine whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the benefit of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In making this assessment, management analyzes and estimates the impact of future taxable income, reversing temporary differences and available tax planning strategies. These assessments are performed quarterly, taking into account any new information.
The Company’s significant deferred tax assets consist of net operating loss carryforwards, share-based compensation and intangible asset amortization related to prior business acquisitions. Should a change in facts or circumstances lead to a change in judgment about the ultimate ability to realize a deferred tax asset (including our utilization of historical net operating losses and share-based compensation expense), the Company records or adjusts the related valuation allowance in the period that the change in facts or circumstances occurs, along with a corresponding increase or decrease to the income tax provision.
Business Combinations
The application of the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires the use of significant estimates, assumptions and judgments in the determination of the estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in order to properly allocate the purchase price at the acquisition date. For the ITA acquisition, the Company used valuation methods including the “monte carlo simulation” method to estimate the fair value of the contingent consideration, the “multi-period excess earnings method” to estimate the fair value of customer relationships and the “relief from royalty” method to estimate the fair value of the acquired tradename. Although we believe the estimates, assumptions and judgments we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience, industry data, information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and assistance from independent third-party appraisal firms and are inherently uncertain.
Contingent Consideration
To value both the cash and warrant portions of the contingent consideration, we used a Monte Carlo Simulation Model, which incorporates significant inputs that are not observable in the market. Fluctuations in the fair value of contingent obligations are impacted by several unobservable inputs that are estimated by management, including forecasted revenue growth rates, forecasted costs and expenses, volatility, and discount rates. Significant changes in any of those inputs in isolation may result in a significantly higher or lower fair value measurement. The unobservable inputs utilized for measuring the fair value of the contingent consideration reflect management’s own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the contingent consideration.
2021 Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $87.3 million, a decrease of approximately $93.0 million (or 52%), as compared to approximately $180.3 million in 2020. Our mix of revenues for the periods presented is set forth below:
·
Our carrier services revenues declined primarily as a result of the completion of the U.S. Department of Commerce contract supporting the 2020 Census.
·
Our managed service fees declined primarily due to reduced accessory sales to federal government customers and to lesser extent, customer attrition due to contract expiration, partially offset by additional revenue as a result of the ITA acquisition during the fourth quarter of 2021.
·
Billable service fees decreased due to the completion of professional services supporting the 2020 Census project, partially offset by increased onsite support services to other existing and new federal government customers.
·
Reselling and other services increased due to large product resales to existing government customers. Reselling and other services are transactional in nature and as a result the amount and timing of revenue will vary significantly from quarter to quarter.
Revenues by customer type for the periods presented is set forth below:
·
Our sales to federal government customers decreased as a result of the completion of the activities of the U.S. Department of Commerce contract supporting the 2020 Census, partially offset by increased professional onsite support to other federal government customers, as well as product resales to federal government customers.
·
Our sales to state and local government customers increased primarily due to a new managed services provided to the Virginia state agency.
·
Our sales to foreign government customers decreased as compared to last year due to reduction in managed services.
·
Our sales to commercial enterprise customers decreased due to reduction in product resale compared to last year, partially offset by ITaaS provided by ITA.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $70.9 million (or 81% of revenues) as compared to approximately $159.8 million (or 89% of revenues) in 2020. The dollar decrease was driven by lower carrier services and accessory sales, partially offset by higher cost related to product resales and higher labor costs to support professional services. Our cost of revenues may fluctuate due to our revenue mix.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended was approximately $16.4 million (or 19% of revenues), as compared to approximately $20.5 million (or 11% of revenues) in 2020. The dollar decrease in gross profit reflects lower managed services revenue as compared to last year.
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $2.0 million (or 2% of revenues), as compared to approximately $1.9 million (or 1% of revenues) in 2020. The dollar increase reflects investment in business development and sales resources.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $12.7 million (or 15% of revenues), as compared to approximately $14.3 million (or 8% of revenues) in 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expense is primarily due to recognition of a one-time qualified payroll tax credit of $1.3 million as part of “CARES ACT” and to a lesser extent lower payroll costs, partially offset by increased data center costs and acquisition related costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $1,026,800, as compared to approximately $1,091,000 in 2020. The decrease in depreciation and amortization expense reflects the decrease in our depreciable asset base.
Other (Expense) Income
Net other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $374,000 as compared to net expense of approximately $299,000 in 2020. The income in 2021 i is primarily driven by the fair value adjustments of contingent consideration.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Income tax provision (benefit) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $640,000, as compared to approximately $(7.4) million in 2020. The current income tax provision included true up of deferred tax assets. Prior year tax benefit included a reversal of valuation allowance of $8.2 million.
Net Income
As a result of the factors above, net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $341,100 as compared to a net income of approximately $10.3 million in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital
Net Working Capital
Our immediate sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, unbilled receivables and access to a working capital credit facility with Atlantic Union Bank for up to $5.0 million. In addition, we maintain an at-the-market (ATM) equity sales program (described below) that permits us to sell, from time to time, up to $24.0 million of our common stock through the sales agents under the program. There is no assurance that, if needed, we will be able to raise capital on favorable terms or at all.
At December 31, 2021, our net working capital was approximately $7.1 million as compared to $13.0 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in net working capital was primarily driven by decreases in revenue, cash used in our acquisition of ITA, and temporary receivable/payable timing differences. We did not utilize our credit facility during 2021. We may need to raise additional capital to fund major growth initiatives and/or acquisitions and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
ATM Sales Program
On August 18, 2020, we entered into an At-The-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc., The Benchmark Company, LLC and Spartan Capital Securities, LLC which establishes an ATM equity program pursuant to which we may offer and sell up to $24.0 million of shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, from time to time as set forth in the Sales Agreement. We have no obligation to sell any of the Shares, and, at any time, we may suspend offers under the Sales Agreement or terminate the Sales Agreement. We sold approximately 100,000 shares during the year ended December 31, 2021 under the ATM program and had remaining capacity of approximately $18.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
We sold 399,000 shares during the fiscal year ended December 30, 2020 under the ATM program and had remaining capacity of $20.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities provides an indication of our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from our recurring business activities. Our single largest cash operating expense is labor and company sponsored benefits. Our second largest cash operating expense is our facility costs and related technology communication costs to support delivery of our services to our customers. We lease our facilities under non-cancellable long-term contracts. Any changes to our fixed labor and/or infrastructure costs may require a significant amount of time to take effect depending on the nature of the change made and cash payments to terminate any agreements that have not yet expired. We experience temporary collection timing differences from time to time due to customer invoice processing delays that are often beyond our control, including intermittent U.S. federal government shutdowns related to budgetary funding issues.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used by operations was approximately $1.2 million driven by decreased accounts receivable and temporary payable timing differences.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operations was approximately $6.4 million driven by increased accounts receivable and temporary payable timing differences.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities provides an indication of our long-term infrastructure investments. We maintain our own technology infrastructure and may need to make additional purchases of computer hardware, software and other fixed infrastructure assets to ensure our environment is properly maintained and can support our customer obligations. We typically fund purchases of long-term infrastructure assets with available cash or capital lease financing agreements.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was approximately $7.4 million and consisted of $4.7 million related to acquisition of assets of ITA, and $2.8 million of computer hardware and software purchases and capitalized internally developed software costs of computer hardware and software purchases and capitalized internally developed software costs, primarily associated with upgrading our ITMS™ and Soft-ex platform, secure identity management technology and network operations center.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was approximately $1.2 million and consisted of computer hardware and software purchases and capitalized internally developed software costs, primarily associated with upgrading our ITMS™ platform, secure identity management technology and network operations center.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities provides an indication of our debt financing and proceeds from capital raise transactions and stock option exercises.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities was approximately $.7 million and consisted of finance lease principal repayments of approximately $572,000, proceeds from issuance of common stock through the ATM sales program of $1.1 million, net of issuance costs, and repurchases of our common stock of $1.2 million. The Company did not use its line of credit during the year.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities was approximately $3.7 million and consisted of finance lease principal repayments of approximately $608,000, proceeds from issuance of common stock through the ATM sales program of $4.3 million, net of issuance costs, and repurchases of our common stock of $10,100. The Company was advanced and repaid approximately $1.9 million in cumulative line of credit advances during the year.
Net Effect of Exchange Rate on Cash and Equivalents
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the depreciation of the Euro relative to the US dollar decreased the translated value of our foreign cash balances by approximately $145,000 as compared to last year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the gradual appreciation of the Euro relative to the US dollar increased the translated value of our foreign cash balances by approximately $155,000.
Credit Facilities and Other Commitments
At December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings against the Company’s $5.0 million working capital credit facility with Atlantic Union Bank. At December 31, 2021, there were no material commitments for additional capital expenditures, but that could change with the addition of material contract awards or task orders awarded in the future The available amount under the working capital credit facility is subject to a borrowing base, which is equal to the lesser of (i) $5.0 million or (ii) 50% of the net unpaid balance of our eligible accounts receivable. The facility is secured by a first lien security interest on all of our personal property, including its accounts receivable, general intangibles, inventory and equipment. The maturity date of the credit facility is June 15, 2022 and the facility has a variable interest rate equal to the Wall Street Journal prime rate plus 0.25%.
The credit facility requires that the Company meet the following financial covenants on a quarterly basis: (i) maintain a minimum adjusted tangible net worth of at least $2.0 million, (ii) maintain minimum consolidated adjusted EBITDA of at least two times interest expense and (iii) maintain a current ratio of 1.1 to 1.0 (excluding finance lease liabilities reported under recently adopted lease accounting standards). We were in compliance with the financial covenants as of December 31, 2021.
We believe our working capital credit facility, provided it is renewed or replaced upon its expiration on June 15, 2022, along with cash on hand and proceeds from sales under our ATM sales program, should be sufficient to meet our minimum requirements for our current business operations or potential acquisitions. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms, or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no existing off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC regulations.