Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. Please refer to Item 7 of our 2020 Form 10-K for further discussion and analysis of our 2019 financial condition and results of operations.
Overview
Following a challenging 2020 where our business was significantly, adversely impacted by pandemic-related customer slowdown, in 2021, we rebounded sharply, and adeptly responded to significantly increased demand from customers, resuming and accelerating production. Steel prices rose significantly for much of 2021 and demand remained high. Increased earnings in 2021 allowed us to repay a meaningful amount of debt, and strengthen the balance sheet to enable strategic capital investment in furtherance of our Best for AllSM strategy.
U. S. Steel's results in 2021 benefited from significantly improved business conditions compared to the previous year's COVID-19 pandemic induced market challenges in each of the Company's four reportable segments:
•North American Flat-Rolled (Flat-Rolled): Flat-Rolled results improved due to higher steel demand across most industries as consumer demand recovered during the first full year of COVID-19 recovery, pushing both spot and contract prices higher throughout much of the year.
•Mini Mill: Mini Mill results were added in the first quarter of 2021 with the acquisition of Big River Steel on January 15, 2021.
•U. S. Steel Europe (USSE): USSE results improved due to stronger performance of the manufacturing and construction sectors and higher selling prices though continued high levels of imports persist.
•Tubular Products (Tubular): Tubular results improved from the realized benefits of rounds being in-sourced from our electric arc furnace and the steady increase of drilling activity even though continued high levels of tubular imports persist.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of U. S. Steel’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon U. S. Steel’s financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting standards generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at year-end and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the year. Management regularly evaluates these estimates, including those related to employee benefits liabilities and assets held in trust relating to such liabilities; the carrying value of property, plant and equipment; intangible assets; valuation allowances for receivables, inventories and deferred income tax assets; liabilities for deferred income taxes; potential tax deficiencies; environmental obligations; potential litigation claims and settlements and put and call option assets and liabilities. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience, current business and market conditions, and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from current expectations under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes that the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Goodwill and intangible assets - Goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of acquired identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities assumed from businesses acquired. Goodwill and intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives are not amortized, but are subject to impairment testing annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the asset might be impaired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually in the fourth quarter.
The goodwill impairment test compares carrying values of the reporting units to their estimated fair values. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value then the carrying value is reduced to fair value. In developing our estimates for the fair value of our reporting units and unamortized intangible assets, significant judgment is required in the determination of the appropriateness of
using a qualitative assessment or quantitative assessment. For the quantitative assessments that are performed, fair value is primarily based on the income approach using a discounted cash flow method, which have significant assumptions including sales growth rates, projected earnings, terminal growth rates and discount rates. Such assumptions are subject to variability from year to year and are directly impacted by, among other things, global market conditions.
Our mini mill reporting unit holds the goodwill recognized as a result of the Company's acquisition of Big River Steel, and is our only reporting unit that has a significant amount of goodwill. This goodwill is primarily attributable to Big River Steel's operational abilities, workforce and the anticipated benefits from their recent expansion. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives and are tested for impairment when events occur that indicate that the net book value will not be recovered over future cash flows.
The evaluation of impairment involves using either a qualitative or quantitative approach as outlined in Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. U. S. Steel completed its annual goodwill impairment evaluation using a qualitative analysis during the fourth quarter of 2021 and determined there was no indication of impairment.
If business conditions deteriorate or other factors have an adverse effect on our qualitative and quantitative estimates, inclusive of discounted future cash flows or assumed growth rates, or if we experience a sustained decline in our market capitalization, future assessments of goodwill for impairment may result in impairment charges.
Intangible assets with indefinite lives are also subject to at least annual impairment testing, which compares the fair value of the intangible assets with their carrying amounts. U. S. Steel has determined that certain of its acquired intangible assets have indefinite useful lives. These assets are also reviewed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. U. S. Steel completed its evaluation of its indefinite lived water rights and other indefinite lived intangible assets during 2021 and determined there was no indication of impairment.
Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives and are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. During the fourth quarter of 2021, U. S. Steel completed a review of its identifiable intangible assets with finite lives and determined that the assets were not impaired.
Business combinations - We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, which requires an allocation of the consideration we paid to the identifiable assets, intangible assets and liabilities based on the estimated fair values as of the closing date of the acquisition. The excess of the fair value of the purchase price over the fair values of these identifiable assets, intangible assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
Purchased intangibles are initially recognized at fair value and amortized over their useful lives unless those lives are determined to be indefinite. The valuation of acquired assets will impact future operating results. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is determined using an income approach on an individual asset basis. Specifically, we use the multi-period excess earnings method to estimate the fair value of the customer relationships intangible asset. Determining the fair value of the customer relationships intangible asset involves significant judgements and assumptions, including expected realized price, base year metallic costs, contributory asset charges, and customer attrition rate.
Inventories - Inventories are carried at the lower of cost or market for last-in, first-out (LIFO), moving average and first-in, first-out (FIFO) method inventories. The predominant method of inventory costing for Flat-Rolled and Tubular is LIFO. The Mini Mill segment uses a moving average costing method to account for semi-finished and finished products and FIFO for raw materials. FIFO is the predominant inventory costing method used by the USSE segment. The LIFO method of inventory costing was used on 46 percent and 59 percent of consolidated inventories at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Since the LIFO inventory valuation methodology is an annual calculation, interim estimates of the annual LIFO valuation are required. We recognize the effects of the LIFO inventory valuation method on an interim basis by estimating the year-end inventory amounts. The projections of annual LIFO inventory amounts are updated quarterly. Changes in U.S. GAAP rules or tax law, such as the elimination of the LIFO method of accounting for inventories, could negatively affect our profitability and cash flow.
Pensions and Other Benefits - The recording of net periodic benefit costs for defined benefit pensions and Other Benefits is based on, among other things, assumptions of the expected annual return on plan assets, discount rate, mortality, escalation or other changes in retiree health care costs and plan participation levels. Changes in the assumptions or differences between actual and expected changes in the present value of liabilities or assets of U. S. Steel’s plans could cause net periodic benefit costs to increase or decrease materially from year to year as discussed below.
U. S. Steel’s investment strategy for its U.S. pension and Other Benefits plan assets provides for a diversified mix of high quality bonds, public equities and selected smaller investments in private equities, private credit, timber and mineral interests. For its U.S. pension, U. S. Steel has a target allocation for plan assets of 50 percent in corporate bonds, government bonds and mortgage, private credit, and asset-backed securities. The balance is invested in equity securities, timber, private equity and real estate partnerships. U. S. Steel believes that returns on equities over the long term will be higher than returns from fixed-income securities as actual historical returns from U. S. Steel’s trusts have shown. Returns on bonds tend to offset some of the short-term volatility of stocks. Both equity and fixed-income investments are made across a broad range of industries and companies
(both domestic and foreign) to provide protection against the impact of volatility in any single industry as well as company specific developments. U. S. Steel will use a 6.90 percent assumed rate of return on assets for the development of net periodic cost for the main defined benefit pension plan in 2022. Actual returns since the inception of the plan have exceeded this 6.90 percent rate and while recent annual returns have been volatile, it is U. S. Steel’s expectation that rates will achieve this level in future periods.
On November 8, 2021, U. S. Steel entered into a commitment agreement with Banner Life Insurance Company and William Penn Life Insurance Company of New York (the “Insurers”) and State Street Global Advisors Trust Company, as independent fiduciary to the United States Steel Corporation Plan for Employee Pension Benefits (Revision of 2003), where U. S. Steel will purchase group annuity contracts that will transfer approximately $284 million of its pension plan obligations to the Insurers. The purchase of the group annuity contracts will be funded directly by the assets of the pension plan. The purchase results in the transfer of administrative and benefit-paying responsibilities for approximately 17,800 U.S. retirees and beneficiaries to the Insurers. The Insurers will begin paying benefits for certain retirees and beneficiaries in the Plan on January 1, 2022. There will be no change to the pension benefits for any retirees and beneficiaries as a result of the transaction. As a result of the transaction, the Corporation recognized a non-cash pension settlement charge of approximately $93 million.
For its Other Benefits plan, U. S. Steel is employing a liability driven investment strategy. The plan assets are allocated to match the plan cash flows with maturing investments. To achieve this strategy, U. S. Steel has a target allocation for plan assets of 72 percent in fixed income and private credit. The balance is primarily invested in equity securities, timber, private equity and real estate partnerships. U. S. Steel will use a 4.50 percent assumed rate of return on assets for the development of net periodic cost for its Other Benefit plans for 2022. The 2022 assumed rate of return was updated after a review of capital market forecasted returns based on target allocations. As a result, the expected asset return for 2022 was increased to 4.50 percent from the rate of return used for 2021 domestic net periodic benefit cost of 4.25 percent.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is applied to the market value of assets as of the beginning of the period less expected benefit payments and considering any planned contributions.
To determine the discount rate used to measure our pension and Other Benefit obligations for U.S. plans we utilize a bond matching approach to select specific bonds that would satisfy our projected benefit payments. At December 31, 2021, the weighted average discount rate used for our pension and Other Benefit obligations was determined to be 3.01 percent and 3.11 percent, respectively, compared to the weighted average discount rate used of 2.72 percent and 2.80 percent, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The discount rate reflects the current rate at which we estimate the pension and Other Benefits liabilities could be effectively settled at the measurement date.
U. S. Steel reviews its actual historical rate experience and expectations of future health care cost trends to determine the escalation of per capita health care costs under U. S. Steel’s benefit plans. Approximately three quarters of our costs for the domestic United Steelworkers (USW) participants’ retiree health benefits in the Company’s main domestic benefit plan are limited to a per capita dollar maximum calculation based on 2006 base year actual costs incurred under the main U. S. Steel benefit plan for USW participants (cost cap). The full effect of the cost cap is expected to be realized around 2028. After 2028, the Company’s costs for a majority of USW retirees and their dependents are expected to remain fixed and as a result, the cost impact of health care escalation for the Company is projected to be limited for this group (See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). For measurement of its domestic retiree medical plans where health care cost escalation is applicable, U. S. Steel has assumed an initial escalation rate of 5.75 percent for 2022. This rate is assumed to decrease gradually to an ultimate rate of 4.50 percent in 2029 and remain at that level thereafter.
Net periodic pension benefit cost (credit), including multiemployer plans, is expected to total approximately $(7) million in 2022 compared to $199 million in 2021. Excluding settlement and special termination losses totaling $135 million in 2021, the decrease in net periodic pension benefit cost to credit in 2022 is primarily due to 2021 decreases in amortized losses and service costs. Net periodic other benefit (credit) in 2022 is expected to be approximately $(114) million, compared to $(53) million in 2021. The expected improvement in the 2022 net periodic other benefit (credit) is primarily due to increases in amortized gains and expected return on assets.
The table below projects the incremental effect of a hypothetical one percentage point change in significant assumptions used in determining the funded status and net periodic benefit cost for pension and other benefits:
Changes in the assumptions for expected annual return on plan assets and the discount rate used for accounting purposes do not impact the funding calculations used to derive minimum funding requirements for the pension plan. However, the discount rate required for minimum funding purposes is also based on corporate bond related indices and as such, the same general sensitivity concepts as above can be applied to increases or decreases to the funding obligations of the plans assuming the same hypothetical rate changes. (See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion regarding legislation enacted in March of 2021 that impacts the discount rate used for funding purposes.) For further cash flow discussion see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Long-lived assets - U. S. Steel evaluates long-lived assets, primarily property, plant and equipment for impairment whenever changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of those productive assets exceed their recoverable amount as determined by the asset group's projected undiscounted cash flows. We evaluate the impairment of long-lived assets at the asset group level. Our primary asset groups are Flat-Rolled, Mini Mill, U. S. Steel Europe (USSE), welded tubular, and seamless tubular.
In December of 2021, U. S. Steel decided to permanently idle the steelmaking assets at Great Lakes Works, which had been indefinitely idled since 2020, resulting in an impairment of $128 million for property, plant and equipment. The ironmaking process and the related assets at Great Lakes Works remain indefinitely idled.
For the period ended March 31, 2020, the steep decline in oil prices that resulted from market oversupply and declining demand was considered a triggering event for the welded tubular and seamless tubular asset groups. A quantitative analysis was completed for both asset groups and a $263 million impairment, consisting of an impairment of $196 million for property, plant and equipment and $67 million for intangible assets was recorded for the welded tubular asset group while no impairment was indicated for the seamless tubular asset group. There were no other triggering events that required an impairment evaluation of our long-lived asset groups during the year-ended December 31, 2020.
Taxes - U. S. Steel records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. A valuation allowance is recorded if, based on the weight of all available positive and negative evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Each quarter U. S. Steel analyzes the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized.
At June 30, 2021, U. S. Steel determined, based upon weighing all positive and negative evidence, that a full valuation allowance for the domestic deferred tax assets was no longer required. Accordingly, we reversed all of the domestic valuation allowance except for a portion of the domestic valuation allowance related to certain state net operating losses and state tax credits. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we realized a non-cash net benefit of $715 million related to the valuation allowance release, which was partially offset by the addition of a valuation allowance of $82 million, the majority of which relates to an unused capital loss generated in the fourth quarter of 2021. In the future, if we determine that it is more likely than not that we will be able to realize all or a portion of our deferred tax assets, the valuation allowance will be reduced, and we will record a non-cash net benefit to earnings.
At December 31, 2020, after weighing all the positive and negative evidence available to the Company, U. S. Steel determined that it was still more likely than not that the net domestic deferred tax asset (excluding a portion of a deferred tax liability with an indefinite life) may not be realized. As a result, U. S. Steel recorded a $229 million non-cash charge to tax expense.
At the end of both 2021 and 2020, U. S. Steel did not have any undistributed foreign earnings and profits for which U.S. deferred taxes have not been provided.
For further information on income taxes see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental remediation - U. S. Steel has been identified as a potentially responsible party (PRP) at four sites under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) as of December 31, 2021. Of these, there are three sites where information requests have been received or there are other indications that U. S. Steel may
be a PRP under CERCLA, but where sufficient information is not presently available to confirm the existence of liability or to make a reasonable estimate with respect to any potential liabilities. There are also nine additional sites where U. S. Steel may be liable for remediation costs in excess of $1 million under other environmental statutes, both federal and state, or where private parties are seeking to impose liability on U. S. Steel for remediation costs through discussions or litigation. At many of these sites, U. S. Steel is one of a number of parties involved and the total cost of remediation, as well as U. S. Steel’s share, is frequently dependent upon the outcome of ongoing investigations and remedial studies. U. S. Steel accrues for environmental remediation activities when the responsibility to remediate is probable and the amount of associated costs is reasonably determinable. As environmental remediation matters proceed toward ultimate resolution or as remediation obligations arise, charges in excess of those previously accrued may be required.
U. S. Steel's accrual for environmental liabilities for U.S. and international facilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $158 million and $146 million, respectively. These amounts exclude liabilities related to asset retirement obligations, disclosed in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
U. S. Steel is the subject of, or a party to, a number of pending or threatened legal actions, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters, including laws and regulations relating to the environment. The ultimate resolution of these contingencies could, individually or in the aggregate, be material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For discussion of relevant environmental items, see “Part I. Item 3. Legal Proceedings-Environmental Proceedings.”
Segments
U. S. Steel has four reportable segments: North American Flat-Rolled (Flat-Rolled), Mini Mill, U. S. Steel Europe (USSE) and Tubular Products (Tubular). For further description of segment operations and information see Item 1 Segments and Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, respectively.
Net Sales
Net Sales by Segment
Net sales by segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are set forth in the following table:
Management’s analysis of the percentage change in net sales for U. S. Steel’s reportable business segments is set forth in the following table:
Net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 were $20,275 million and $9,741 million, respectively.
•For the Flat-Rolled segment the increase in sales primarily resulted from higher average realized prices ($454 per ton) across all products and increased shipments (307 thousand tons) primarily for cold-rolled products.
•For the USSE segment the increase in sales primarily resulted from higher average realized prices ($340 per net ton) and increased shipments (1,261 thousand tons) across most products.
•For the Tubular segment the increase in sales primarily resulted from higher average realized prices ($425 per net ton) for seamless products.
Operating Expenses
Union profit-sharing costs
Profit-based amounts are calculated and paid on a quarterly basis as a percentage of consolidated earnings (loss) before interest and income taxes based on 7.5 percent of profit between $10 and $50 per ton and 15 percent of profit above $50 per ton.
The amounts above represent profit-sharing amounts paid to active USW-represented employees and are included in cost of sales on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Net periodic pension and other benefits costs
Pension and other benefit costs (other than service cost) are reflected within net interest and other financial costs and the service cost component is reflected within cost of sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Defined benefit and multiemployer pension plan costs included in cost of sales totaled $128 million in 2021 and $127 million in 2020.
Other benefit service cost included in cost of sales totaled $11 million in 2021 and $12 million in 2020.
Costs related to defined contribution plans totaled $45 million in 2021 and $22 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 from the prior year primarily resulted from the suspension of the Company's contributions for salaried defined contribution plans for a portion of 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $426 million in 2021 and $277 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 from the prior year primarily resulted from the addition of Big River Steel with the purchase of its remaining equity interest and increased profit based payments.
Operating configuration adjustments
The Company also adjusted its operating configuration in response to global overcapacity, unfair trade practices and increases in domestic demand as a result of tariffs on imports by indefinitely and temporarily idling and then re-starting production at certain
of its facilities. U. S. Steel will continue to adjust its operating configuration in order to maximize its strategy of providing Best for All profitable steel solutions for all stakeholders.
Idled Operations
In December 2019, U. S. Steel announced that it would indefinitely idle a significant portion of Great Lakes Works due to market conditions including continued high levels of imports. The Company began idling the iron and steelmaking facilities in March 2020 and the hot strip mill rolling facility in June 2020. In December 2021, the Company permanently idled the steelmaking operations at Great Lakes Works, resulting in a non-cash impairment of $128 million. The carrying value of the remaining Great Lakes Works indefinitely idled facilities was approximately $160 million as of December 31, 2021.
In 2020, we took actions to adjust our footprint by idling certain operations to better align production with customer demand and respond to the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. The operations that were initially idled in 2020 and remained idle as of December 31, 2021 included:
•Blast Furnace A at Granite City Works
•Lone Star Tubular Operations
•Lorain Tubular Operations
•Wheeling Machine Products coupling production facility at Hughes Springs, Texas
As of December 31, 2021 the carrying value of the idled fixed assets for facilities noted above was: Granite City Works Blast Furnace A, $60 million; Lone Star Tubular Operations, $5 million; Lorain Tubular Operations, $70 million and Wheeling Machine Product's production facility, immaterial.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization expenses were $791 million in 2021 and $643 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 from the prior year is primarily due to the acquisition of Big River Steel.
Earnings from investees
Earnings from investees was $170 million in 2021 versus loss from investees of $117 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 from the prior year is primarily due to current year earnings from our PRO-TEC joint venture and prior year losses from our investment in Big River Steel.
Restructuring and Other Charges
During 2021, the Company recorded restructuring and other charges of $128 million, which consists of charges of $29 million for Great Lakes Works, charges of approximately $89 million related to the planned sale of a component within the Flat-Rolled segment and $10 million for environmental related charges at other facilities.
Charges for restructuring and ongoing cost reduction initiatives are recorded in the period U. S. Steel commits to a restructuring or cost reduction plan, or executes specific actions contemplated by the plan and all criteria for liability recognition have been met. Charges related to restructuring and cost reductions are reported in restructuring and other charges in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Segment results for Flat-Rolled
The Flat-Rolled segment had earnings of $2,630 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a loss of $596 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Despite low priced imports Flat-Rolled results for 2021 compared to 2020 increased primarily due to:
•increased average realized prices (approximately $4,025 million)
•increased shipments (approximately $20 million)
•increased mining sales (approximately $265 million)
•increased coke sales (approximately $75 million),
this change was partially offset by:
•higher raw material costs (approximately $240 million)
•increased operating costs (approximately $55 million)
•higher energy costs (approximately $85 million)
•increased substrate purchases (approximately $80 million)
•higher other costs, primarily variable compensation (approximately $700 million).
Gross margin for 2021 as compared to 2020 increased primarily as a result of higher average realized prices.
Segment results for Mini Mill (a)(a) Mini Mill segment added after January 15, 2021 with the purchase of the remaining equity interest in Big River Steel.
Segment results for USSE
The USSE segment had earnings of $975 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to earnings of $9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in USSE results in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to:
•increased average realized prices (approximately $1,440 million)
•increased shipments, including volume efficiencies (approximately $160 million)
•strengthening of the Euro versus the U.S. dollar (approximately $50 million),
these changes were partially offset by:
•higher raw material costs (approximately $575 million)
•increased operating costs (approximately $40 million)
•higher energy costs (approximately $45 million)
•higher other costs, primarily variable compensation accruals (approximately $25 million).
Gross margin for 2021 as compared to 2020 increased primarily as a result of higher average realized prices and sales volume.
Segment results for Tubular
The Tubular segment had earnings of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a loss of $179 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Despite low price imports Tubular results in 2021 as compared to 2020 increased primarily due to:
•increased average realized prices (approximately $180 million)
•lower operating costs, including operating efficiencies (approximately $35 million)
•lower other costs, primarily idled plant carrying costs, (approximately $30 million),
these changes were partially offset by:
•higher raw material costs (approximately $30 million)
•higher energy costs (approximately $25 million)
•increased operating costs (approximately $10 million)
Gross margin for 2021 as compared to 2020 increased primarily as a result of significantly higher average realized prices and positive cost improvements from the new EAF and plant idlings.
Results for Other
The Other category had a loss of $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to loss of $39 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest and Other Financial Costs
Net interest and other financial costs increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily from the loss on debt extinguishment from our significant reduction of debt and from the increase in other financial costs as a result of the elimination in the current year of the favorable impacts from Big River Steel (BRS) put and call option mark-to-market impacts that appeared in the prior year. The exercise of the U. S. Steel Call Option on December 8, 2020 legally extinguished the Big River Steel put and call options. For additional information on U. S. Steel indebtedness see Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For additional information on U. S. Steel’s foreign currency exchange activity see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and