ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following discussion includes financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP, as well as certain non-GAAP financial measures such as ongoing ROE, ongoing earnings and ongoing diluted EPS. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are adjusted from measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Xcel Energy’s management uses non-GAAP measures for financial planning and analysis, for reporting of results to the Board of Directors, in determining performance-based compensation and communicating its earnings outlook to analysts and investors. Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to supplement investors’ understanding of our performance and should not be considered alternatives for financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP. These measures are discussed in more detail below and may not be comparable to other companies’ similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures.
Ongoing ROE
Ongoing ROE is calculated by dividing the net income or loss of Xcel Energy or each subsidiary, adjusted for certain nonrecurring items, by each entity’s average stockholder’s equity. We use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate and provide details of earnings results.
Earnings Adjusted for Certain Items (Ongoing Earnings and Ongoing Diluted EPS)
GAAP diluted EPS reflects the potential dilution that could occur if securities or other agreements to issue common stock (i.e., common stock equivalents) were settled. The weighted average number of potentially dilutive shares outstanding used to calculate Xcel Energy Inc.’s diluted EPS is calculated using the treasury stock method. Ongoing earnings reflect adjustments to GAAP earnings (net income) for certain items. Ongoing diluted EPS is calculated by dividing the net income or loss of each subsidiary, adjusted for certain items, by the weighted average fully diluted Xcel Energy Inc. common shares outstanding for the period. Ongoing diluted EPS for each subsidiary is calculated by dividing the net income or loss of such subsidiary, adjusted for certain items, by the weighted average fully diluted Xcel Energy Inc. common shares outstanding for the period.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate and provide details of Xcel Energy’s core earnings and underlying performance. We believe these measurements are useful to investors to evaluate the actual and projected financial performance and contribution of our subsidiaries. For the years ended Dec. 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no such adjustments to GAAP earnings and therefore GAAP earnings equal ongoing earnings.
Results of Operations
Diluted EPS for Xcel Energy at Dec. 31:
(a) Amounts may not add due to rounding.
Xcel Energy’s management believes that ongoing earnings reflects management’s performance in operating Xcel Energy and provides a meaningful representation of the performance of Xcel Energy’s core business. In addition, Xcel Energy’s management uses ongoing earnings internally for financial planning and analysis, reporting results to the Board of Directors and when communicating its earnings outlook to analysts and investors.
2021 Comparison with 2020
Xcel Energy - GAAP and ongoing earnings increased $0.17 per share for 2021. The increase was driven by capital investment recovery and other regulatory outcomes, partially offset by increases in depreciation and lower AFUDC. Fluctuations in electric and natural gas revenues associated with changes in fuel and purchased power and/or natural gas sold and transported generally do not significantly impact earnings (changes in revenues are offset by the related variation in costs).
PSCo - Earnings increased $0.11 per share for 2021, driven by capital investment recovery and other regulatory outcomes. Higher revenues were partially offset by increased depreciation, O&M expenses and other taxes (other than income taxes).
NSP-Minnesota - Earnings were flat for 2021 compared to 2020, reflecting capital investment recovery offset by additional depreciation and interest charges.
SPS - Earnings increased $0.03 per share for 2021, largely related to capital investment recovery, other regulatory outcomes and higher sales and demand, partially offset by decreased AFUDC.
NSP-Wisconsin - Earnings were flat for 2021 compared to 2020.
Xcel Energy Inc. and Other - Primarily includes financing costs at the holding company, offset by earnings from EIP investments.
Changes in Diluted EPS
Components significantly contributing to changes in EPS:
(a) Includes PTCs and plant regulatory amounts, which are primarily offset as a reduction to electric revenues.
ROE for Xcel Energy and its utility subsidiaries:
Statement of Income Analysis
The following summarizes the items that affected the individual revenue and expense items reported in the consolidated statements of income.
Estimated Impact of Temperature Changes on Regulated Earnings - Unusually hot summers or cold winters increase electric and natural gas sales, while mild weather reduces electric and natural gas sales. The estimated impact of weather on earnings is based on the number of customers, temperature variances, the amount of natural gas or electricity historically used per degree of temperature and excludes any incremental related operating expenses that could result due to storm activity or vegetation management requirements. As a result, weather deviations from normal levels can affect Xcel Energy’s financial performance. However, sales true-up and decoupling mechanisms in Minnesota and Colorado predominately mitigate the positive and adverse impacts of weather.
Degree-day or THI data is used to estimate amounts of energy required to maintain comfortable indoor temperature levels based on each day’s average temperature and humidity. HDD is the measure of the variation in the weather based on the extent to which the average daily temperature falls below 65° Fahrenheit. CDD is the measure of the variation in the weather based on the extent to which the average daily temperature rises above 65° Fahrenheit. Each degree of temperature above 65° Fahrenheit is counted as one CDD, and each degree of temperature below 65° Fahrenheit is counted as one HDD. In Xcel Energy’s more humid service territories, a THI is used in place of CDD, which adds a humidity factor to CDD. HDD, CDD and THI are most likely to impact the usage of Xcel Energy’s residential and commercial customers. Industrial customers are less sensitive to weather.
Normal weather conditions are defined as either the 10, 20 or 30-year average of actual historical weather conditions. The historical period of time used in the calculation of normal weather differs by jurisdiction, based on regulatory practice. To calculate the impact of weather on demand, a demand factor is applied to the weather impact on sales. Extreme weather variations, windchill and cloud cover may not be reflected in weather-normalized estimates.
Percentage (decrease) increase in normal and actual HDD, CDD and THI:
Weather - Estimated impact of temperature variations on EPS compared with normal weather conditions:
Sales - Sales growth (decline) for actual and weather-normalized sales:
Weather-normalized and leap-year adjusted electric sales growth (decline) - year-to-date
Weather-adjusted sales results for each of our utility subsidiaries in 2021 reflect improving economies as the adverse effects of COVID-19 lessen. The recovery reflects increased sales in the C&I sector as businesses return to a more normal level. Residential sales remain elevated from pre-pandemic levels due to continuance of individuals working from home.
•PSCo - Residential sales rose based on a 1.2% increase in customers, combined with higher use per customer. The growth in C&I sales was due to a 1.2% increase in customers, partially offset by slightly lower use per customer, primarily in the services sector.
•NSP-Minnesota - Residential sales growth reflects a 1.2% increase in customers, partially offset by a lower use per customer. The growth in C&I sales was due to a 0.9% increase in customers and higher use per customer, primarily in the manufacturing, retail and services sectors.
•SPS - Residential sales declined as lower use per customer offset a 0.9% increase in customers. C&I sales increased due to a 0.5% increase in customers and higher use per customer, primarily driven by the oil and gas and professional services sectors.
•NSP-Wisconsin - Residential sales growth was attributable to a 0.8% increase in customer additions, partially offset by slightly lower use per customer. The growth in C&I sales was due to a 1.1% increase in customers, primarily led by increases in the manufacturing, health care and retail trade sectors.
Weather-normalized and leap-year adjusted natural gas sales growth (decline) - year-to-date
•Natural gas sales primarily reflect a 1.2% increase in residential customers and a 0.5% increase in C&I customers, partially offset by a decrease in use per customer.
Electric Margin
Electric margin is presented as electric revenues less electric fuel and purchased power expenses. Expenses incurred for electric fuel and purchased power are generally recovered through various regulatory recovery mechanisms. As a result, changes in these expenses are generally offset in operating revenues.
Electric revenues and fuel and purchased power expenses are impacted by fluctuations in the price of natural gas, coal and uranium. However, these price fluctuations generally have minimal impact on earnings impact due to fuel recovery mechanisms. In addition, electric customers receive a credit for PTCs generated, which reduce electric revenue and income taxes.
Electric Revenues, Fuel and Purchased Power and Electric Margin
Changes in Electric Margin
(a)Includes $27 million of net gains recognized in the first quarter of 2021, driven by market changes associated with Winter Storm Uri. Additional amounts are primarily related to long-term physical generation contracts, which have increased in value as a result of higher energy prices.
(b)Sales excludes weather impact, net of decoupling/sales true-up, and demand is net of sales true-up.
(c)Impact is due to the Texas rate case outcome, which resulted in a revenue increase that was recognized in the third quarter of 2020 (largely offset by recognition of previously deferred costs).
Natural Gas Margin
Natural gas margin is presented as natural gas revenues less the cost of natural gas sold and transported. Expenses incurred for the cost of natural gas sold are generally recovered through various regulatory recovery mechanisms. As a result, changes in these expenses are generally offset in operating revenues.
Natural gas expense varies with changing sales and the cost of natural gas. However, fluctuations in the cost of natural gas generally have minimal earnings impact due to cost recovery mechanisms.
Natural Gas Revenues, Cost of Natural Gas Sold and Transported and Natural Gas Margin
Changes in Natural Gas Margin
Non-Fuel Operating Expenses and Other Items
O&M Expenses - O&M expenses decreased $3 million year-to-date. Increases for distribution, wind farm maintenance and technology costs were offset by a decrease in employee benefits expense (e.g., long term incentives), additional Texas 2021 rate case deferrals and the year-over-year impact of amounts associated with the Texas 2019 rate case surcharge.
Depreciation and Amortization - Depreciation and amortization increased $173 million year-to-date. The increase was primarily driven by several wind farms going into service, normal system expansion and the implementation of new depreciation rates in various states.
Other Income (Expense) - Other income (expense) increased $11 million year-to-date. The change was largely related to gains associated with rabbi trust performance (offset in O&M expenses).
AFUDC, Equity and Debt - AFUDC decreased $58 million year-to-date. The decrease was driven by completion of various wind projects throughout 2020 and 2021.
Interest Charges - Interest charges increased $2 million year-to-date. The increase was largely due to higher debt levels to fund capital investments, partially offset by lower long-term and short-term interest rates.
Earnings from Equity Method Investments - Earnings from equity method investments increased $22 million year-to-date. The year-to-date change was largely attributable to the performance of the EIP funds, which invest in energy technology companies.
Income Taxes - Income tax benefit increased $64 million year-to-date. The change was driven by an increase in wind PTCs due to additional wind facilities going into service. Impact of PTCs was partially offset by an increase in pretax earnings, lower plant regulatory differences and lower non-plant accumulated deferred income tax amortization.
Xcel Energy Inc. and Other Results
Net income and diluted EPS contributions of Xcel Energy Inc. and its nonregulated businesses:
(a)MEC was sold in the third quarter of 2020.
(b)Amounts include gains or losses associated with EIP investments.
Xcel Energy Inc.’s results include interest charges, which are incurred at Xcel Energy Inc. and are not directly assigned to individual subsidiaries.
2020 Comparison with 2019
A discussion of changes in Xcel Energy’s results of operations, cash flows and liquidity and capital resources from the year ended Dec. 31, 2019 to Dec. 31, 2020 can be found in Part II, “Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year 2020, which was filed with the SEC on Feb. 17, 2021. However, such discussion is not incorporated by reference into, and does not constitute a part of, this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Public Utility Regulation
The FERC and various state and local regulatory commissions regulate Xcel Energy Inc.’s utility subsidiaries and West Gas Interstate. Xcel Energy is subject to rate regulation by state utility regulatory agencies, which have jurisdiction with respect to the rates of electric and natural gas distribution companies in Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, Michigan, Colorado, New Mexico and Texas.
Rates are designed to recover plant investment, operating costs and an allowed return on investment. Our utility subsidiaries request changes in utility rates through commission filings. Changes in operating costs can affect Xcel Energy’s financial results, depending on the timing of rate cases and implementation of final rates. Other factors affecting rate filings are new investments, sales, conservation and DSM efforts, and the cost of capital.
In addition, the regulatory commissions authorize the ROE, capital structure and depreciation rates in rate proceedings. Decisions by these regulators can significantly impact Xcel Energy’s results of operations.
See Rate Matters within Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
NSP-Minnesota
Summary of Regulatory Agencies / RTO and Areas of Jurisdiction
Recovery Mechanisms
(a)Minnesota state law requires NSP-Minnesota to spend 2% of its state electric revenues and 0.5% of its state natural gas revenues on CIP. These costs are recovered through an annual cost-recovery mechanism.
(b)The MPUC changed the FCA process in Minnesota (effective in 2020). Each month, utilities collect amounts equal to baseline cost of energy set at the start of the plan year (base would be reset annually). Monthly variations to baseline costs are tracked and netted over a 12-month period. Utilities issue refunds above the baseline costs and can seek recovery of any overage.
Pending and Recently Concluded Regulatory Proceedings
2022 Minnesota Natural Gas Rate Case - In November 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed a request with the MPUC for an annual natural gas rate increase of $36 million, or 6.6%. The filing is based on a 2022 forecast test year and includes a requested ROE of 10.5%, rate base of $934 million and an equity ratio of 52.50%.
In December 2021, the MPUC approved the requested interim rates of $25 million, subject to refund, beginning on Jan. 1, 2022.
The next steps in the procedural schedule are expected to be as follows:
•Intervenor testimony: Aug. 30, 2022.
•Rebuttal testimony: Oct. 4, 2022.
•Public hearing: Nov. 1-4, 2022.
•ALJ Report: Feb. 6, 2023.
•MPUC Order: April 26, 2023.
2022 Minnesota Electric Rate Case - In October 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed a three-year electric rate case with the MPUC. The rate case is based on a requested ROE of 10.2%, a 52.50% equity ratio and forward test years.
The request is detailed as follows:
In addition, NSP-Minnesota requested interim rates, subject to refund, of $288 million to be implemented in January 2022 and an incremental $135 million to be implemented in January 2023. In December 2021, the MPUC approved rates of $247 million to begin on Jan. 1, 2022. The adjusted level reflects exigent circumstances from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The next steps in the procedural schedule are expected to be as follows:
•Intervenor testimony: Oct. 3, 2022.
•Rebuttal testimony: Nov. 8, 2022.
•Public hearing: Dec. 13-16, 2022.
•ALJ Report: March 31, 2023.
•MPUC Order: June 30, 2023.
2021 North Dakota Natural Gas Rate Case - In September 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed a request with the NDPSC for a natural gas rate increase of $7 million, or 10.49%. The filing is based on a requested ROE of 10.5%, an equity ratio of 52.54%, a 2022 forecast test year and a rate base of approximately $140 million. Interim rates of $7 million, subject to refund, were implemented on Nov. 1, 2021. An NDPSC decision is expected in early fall 2022.
The next steps in the procedural schedule are expected to be as follows:
•Intervenor testimony: March 1, 2022
•Rebuttal testimony: April 1, 2022
•Hearings: June 1-3, 2022
2020 North Dakota Electric Rate Case - In November 2020, NSP-Minnesota filed a rate case with the NDPSC seeking a rate increase of $19 million based on a ROE of 10.2%, an equity ratio of 52.5% and rate base of $677 million.
In August 2021, the NDPSC approved a settlement between NSP-Minnesota and various parties, which includes the following, effective Jan. 1, 2021:
•Base revenue increase of $7 million.
•ROE of 9.5%.
•Equity ratio of 52.5%.
•Deferral of advanced grid intelligence and security initiative capital and O&M expenses.
•An earnings cap mechanism, which would return to customers 100% of earnings equal to or in excess of 9.75% ROE, effective until the next rate case.
Minnesota Relief and Recovery - In 2020, the MPUC opened a docket and invited utilities in the state to submit potential projects that would create jobs and help jump start the economy to offset the impacts of COVID-19.
The status of the various proposals is listed below:
•In January 2021, the MPUC approved NSP-Minnesota’s request for the repowering of 651 MW of owned wind projects and 20 MW of wind projects under PPAs. These projects are estimated to save customers approximately $160 million over the next 25 years.
•In April 2021, NSP-Minnesota proposed to add 460 MW of solar facilities at the Sherco site with an incremental investment of approximately $575 million. An MPUC decision is expected by the third quarter of 2022.
•In June 2021, the MPUC approved NSP-Minnesota’s proposal to acquire a repowered wind farm from ALLETE, Inc.
•The MPUC is also considering NSP-Minnesota’s revised proposal to provide $40 million of incremental electric vehicle rebates.
Minnesota Resource Plan - In July 2019, NSP-Minnesota filed its Minnesota resource plan, which runs through 2034.
On Feb. 8, 2022, the MPUC approved the following:
•10-year extension for the Monticello nuclear facility.
•Retirement of the A.S. King plant in 2028 and Sherco 3 in 2030.
•NSP-Minnesota ownership of Sherco and A.S. King gen-tie lines plus additional renewable resources on the lines up to its current interconnection rights (2,000 MW for Sherco and 600 MW for A.S. King).
•The need for 2,150 MW of new wind and 2,500 MW of new solar by 2032, as well as additional renewable generation of 1,100 MW beyond 2032.
•Recognition of the need for 800 MW of additional firm dispatchable resources between 2027 and 2029. The dispatchable generation will need to be approved through a CON process.
The next Minnesota resource plan is due on Feb. 1, 2024.
2022 RES Electric Rider - In November 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed the RES Rider. The requested amount of $264 million includes a true-up (2020 and 2021 riders) of $154 million and the 2022 requested amount of $110 million. The filing included a ROE of 9.06%. An MPUC decision is pending.
2021 RES Electric Rider - In November 2020, NSP-Minnesota filed the RES Rider. The requested amount of $189 million includes a true-up (2019 and 2020 riders) of $96 million and the 2021 requested amount of $93 million. The filing included a ROE of 9.06%. An MPUC decision is pending.
2022 GUIC Natural Gas Rider - In October 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed the GUIC Rider for an amount of $27 million based on a ROE of 9.04%. An MPUC decision is pending.
2021 GUIC Natural Gas Rider - In October 2020, NSP-Minnesota filed the GUIC Rider for an amount of $27 million based on a ROE of 9.04%. An MPUC decision is pending.
2022 TCR Electric Rider - In November 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed the TCR Rider for an amount of $105 million based on a ROE of 9.06%. An MPUC decision is pending.
2020 TCR Electric Rider - In November 2019, NSP-Minnesota filed the TCR Rider for an amount of $82 million based on a ROE of 9.06%, which was approved by the MPUC in December 2021.
FERC NOPR on ROE Incentive Adders - In April 2021, the FERC issued a NOPR proposing to limit collection of ROE incentive adders for RTO membership to the first three years after an entity begins participation in an RTO. If adopted as a final rule, NSP-Minnesota (as well as NSP-Wisconsin and SPS) would prospectively discontinue charging their current 50 basis point ROE incentive adders. Amounts related to a discontinuance of the adder would ultimately be offset by an increase in retail rates, subject to future rate cases.
Purchased Power Arrangements and Transmission Service Provider
NSP-Minnesota expects to use power plants, power purchases, CIP/DSM options, new generation facilities and expansion of power plants to meet its system capacity requirements.
Purchased Power - NSP-Minnesota has contracts to purchase power from other utilities and IPPs. Long-term purchased power contracts for dispatchable resources typically require a capacity and an energy charge.
NSP-Minnesota makes short-term purchases to meet system requirements, replace company owned generation, meet operating reserve obligations or obtain energy at a lower cost.
Purchased Transmission Services - NSP-Minnesota and NSP-Wisconsin have contracts with MISO and other regional transmission service providers to deliver power and energy to their customers.
Nuclear Power Operations
Nuclear power plant operations produce gaseous, liquid and solid radioactive wastes, which are covered by federal regulation. High-level radioactive wastes primarily include used nuclear fuel. Low-level waste consists primarily of demineralizer resins, paper, protective clothing, rags, tools and equipment contaminated through use.
NRC Regulation - The NRC regulates nuclear operations. Costs of complying with NRC requirements can affect both operating expenses and capital investments of the plants. NSP-Minnesota has obtained recovery of these compliance costs and expects to recover future compliance costs.
Low-Level Waste Disposal - Low level waste disposal from Monticello and PI is disposed at the Clive facility located in Utah and the Waste Control Specialists facility in Texas. NSP-Minnesota has storage capacity available on-site at PI and Monticello which would allow both plants to continue to operate until the end of their current licensed lives if off-site low-level waste disposal facilities become unavailable.
High-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal - The federal government has responsibility to permanently dispose domestic spent nuclear fuel and other high-level radioactive wastes. The Nuclear Waste Policy Act requires the DOE to implement a program for nuclear high-level waste management. This includes the siting, licensing, construction and operation of a repository for spent nuclear fuel from civilian nuclear power reactors and other high-level radioactive wastes at a permanent federal storage or disposal facility. Currently, there are no definitive plans for a permanent federal storage facility site.
Nuclear Spent Fuel Storage - NSP-Minnesota has interim on-site storage for spent nuclear fuel at its Monticello and PI nuclear generating plants. Authorized storage capacity is sufficient to allow NSP-Minnesota to operate until the end of the operating licenses in 2030 for Monticello, 2033 for PI Unit 1, and 2034 for PI Unit 2. Authorizations for additional spent fuel storage capacity may be required at each site to support either continued operation or decommissioning if the federal government does not commence storage operations.
Monticello CON - In September 2021, NSP-Minnesota filed an application for a CON for additional spent fuel storage (existing independent spent fuel storage installation) at the Monticello Nuclear Power Generating Plant. The CON requests sufficient additional spent fuel storage at the existing independent spent fuel storage installation to allow continued operation of the Monticello Plant until 2040. The filing passed completeness review and has been referred to an ALJ. A decision is expected in late 2023.
Wholesale and Commodity Marketing Operations
NSP-Minnesota conducts wholesale marketing operations, including the purchase and sale of electric capacity, energy, ancillary services and energy-related products. NSP-Minnesota uses physical and financial instruments to minimize commodity price and credit risk and to hedge sales and purchases.
NSP-Minnesota also engages in trading activity unrelated to hedging. Sharing of any margins is determined through state regulatory proceedings as well as the operation of the FERC approved joint operating agreement. NSP-Minnesota does not serve any wholesale requirements customers at cost-based regulated rates.
NSP-Wisconsin
Summary of Regulatory Agencies / RTO and Areas of Jurisdiction
Recovery Mechanisms
Pending and Recently Concluded Regulatory Proceedings
Wisconsin Electric and Natural Gas Settlement - In December 2021, the PSCW approved a rate case settlement agreement and 2022 fuel cost plan without modification. New rates and tariffs were effective Jan. 1, 2022. Key elements of the settlement:
•An increase in electric rates of $35 million (4.9%) for 2022 and an incremental $18 million increase (2.5%) for 2023.
•An increase in natural gas rates of $10 million (8.4%) for 2022 and an incremental $3 million (2.3%) for 2023.
•ROE of 9.80% for 2022 and 10.00% for 2023.
•Equity ratio of 52.5% for both 2022 and 2023.
•Returning $9 million in various net regulatory liabilities to offset customer impacts in 2023.
•Deferring certain pension and other post-employment benefit expense in 2021 through 2023.
•Incorporating an earnings sharing mechanism for 2022 and 2023.
Michigan Electric Rate Case - In January 2022, NSP-Wisconsin reached an electric rate case settlement in principle with the MPSC staff and others. The settlement grants NSP-Wisconsin an electric revenue increase of $1.6 million in 2022, based on a ROE of 9.7% and an equity ratio of 52.5%. The MPSC is expected to rule on the settlement in the first quarter of 2022.
Purchased Power and Transmission Services
The NSP System expects to use power plants, power purchases, conservation and DSM options, new generation facilities and expansion of power plants to meet its system capacity requirements.
Purchased Power - Through the Interchange Agreement, NSP-Wisconsin receives power purchased by NSP-Minnesota from other utilities and independent power producers. Long-term purchased power contracts for dispatchable resources typically require a capacity charge and an energy charge. NSP-Minnesota makes short-term purchases to meet system requirements, replace company owned generation, meet operating reserve obligations or obtain energy at a lower cost.
Purchased Transmission Services - NSP-Minnesota and NSP-Wisconsin have contracts with MISO and other regional transmission service providers to deliver power and energy to their customers.
Wholesale and Commodity Marketing Operations
NSP-Wisconsin does not serve any wholesale requirements customers at cost-based regulated rates.
PSCo
Summary of Regulatory Agencies / RTO and Areas of Jurisdiction
Recovery Mechanisms
Pending and Recently Concluded Regulatory Proceedings
Colorado Natural Gas Rate Case - In January 2022, PSCo filed a request with the CPUC seeking a net increase to retail natural gas rates of $107 million. The total change to base rates is $215 million, reflecting the transfer of $108 million previously recovered from customers through the PSIA rider, which was closed to new investments at the end of 2021. The request is based on a 10.25% ROE, an equity ratio of 55.66% and a 2022 current test year. PSCo has requested a proposed effective date of Nov. 1, 2022.
Additionally, PSCo’s request includes step revenue increases of $40 million in 2023 (effective Nov. 1, 2023) and $41 million in 2024 (effective Nov. 1, 2024) related to continued capital investment. Under this proposal, PSCo would not request another base rate change prior to Nov. 1, 2025. An informational historical test year, including a 10.75% ROE, was also filed as required by the CPUC.
(a) Includes approximately $28 million as a result of the increase in ROE from 9.2% to 10.25%.
Colorado Electric Rate Request - In July 2021, PSCo filed a request with the CPUC seeking a net electric rate increase of $343 million (or 12.4%). The total request reflects a $470 million increase, which includes $127 million of previously authorized costs currently recovered through various rider mechanisms. The request is based on a 10.0% ROE, an equity ratio of 55.64%, a 2022 forecast test year, a rate base of $10.3 billion and impacts of a new depreciation study.
In January 2022, PSCo reached an unopposed comprehensive settlement. The CPUC is expected to rule on the settlement in March 2022 with final rates expected to be effective in April 2022. Key settlement terms include:
•A net electric rate increase of $177 million. The total change in base rates is $299 million, which includes $122 million of revenue previously collected through various rider mechanisms.
•A ROE of 9.3% and an equity ratio of 55.69%.
•A current 2021 test year (average rate base) with the transfer of Cheyenne Ridge, Wildfire Mitigation Plan and Advanced Grid Intelligence and Security investments at year-end rate base.
•Approval of all of PSCo’s proposed depreciation adjustments.
•Continuation of the property tax, qualified pension, and non-qualified pension trackers.
•Continuation of Advanced Grid Intelligence and Security deferral including interest equivalent to PSCo's weighted average cost of capital once the balance exceeds $50 million.
•Continuation of the Wildfire Mitigation Plan deferral, with a debt return.
PSIA Rider Extension - In October 2021, the CPUC approved a settlement agreement to allow the rider to end on Dec. 31, 2021, transfer the investments recovered under the rider to base rates Jan. 1, 2022, and defer $9 million of depreciation expense and return on $143 million in project costs in 2022.
Pathway Transmission Expansion Settlement - In November 2021, PSCo filed a non-unanimous settlement agreement with Staff and several other parties regarding its CPCN request for the Pathway Transmission project.
Key settlement terms include:
•The parties agreed that PSCo met the burden of proof demonstrating that the project was needed to facilitate the renewables in the Integrated Resource Plan and is in the public interest.
•Agreed to a cost estimate of $1.7 billion and recovery through the transmission rider.
•The Pathway project will also include a Performance Incentive Mechanism such that applicable costs in a given year above or below a 5% dead band would allow for a ROE penalty or adder.
•Parties agreed to conditional CPCN approval for 345 kV extension project subject to the project being included in the final approved Integrated Resource Plan with a cost estimate of $247 million.
The settlement agreement is currently being deliberated by the CPUC.
Resource Plan Settlement - In November 2021, PSCo and intervenors filed a partial settlement of the resource plan, which will result in an expected 87% carbon reduction and an 80% renewable mix by 2030. A CPUC decision is expected in the first quarter of 2022. Key settlement terms include:
•Early retirement of Hayden: Unit 2 in 2027 (was 2036); and Unit 1 in 2028 (was 2030).
•Conversion of Pawnee to burn natural gas by 2026.
•Early retirement of Comanche 3 in 2034 with reduced operations beginning in 2025.
•Addition of ~2,300 MW of wind.
•Addition of ~1,600 MW of utility-scale solar.
•Addition of 400 MW of storage.
•Addition of 1,300 MW of flexible, dispatchable generation.
•Addition of ~1,200 MW of distributed solar resources through our renewable energy programs.
Partial Settlement - In October 2021, PSCo filed a comprehensive settlement with the CPUC Staff and the COEO, which proposed to address four outstanding regulatory items, including recovery of fuel costs related to Winter Storm Uri, disputed revenue associated with the 2020 electric decoupling pilot program year, replacement power costs associated with an extended outage at Comanche Unit 3 during 2020 and deferred customer bad debt balances associated with COVID-19. The Utility Consumer Advocate has not signed the settlement. A hearing and a CPUC decision on the settlement is expected in the first quarter of 2022.
Key terms of the proposed settlement:
•PSCo would fully recover Winter Storm Uri deferred net natural gas, fuel and purchased energy costs of $263 million (electric utility) and $287 million (natural gas utility) over a 24-month and 30-month period, respectively, with no carrying charges through a rider mechanism. Recovery would commence Jan. 1, 2022 for electric costs and April 1, 2022 for natural gas costs.
•PSCo will refund electric customers $41 million (previously deferred) related to the 2020 electric decoupling pilot program.
•PSCo agreed to forego recovery of $14 million for replacement power costs due to an extended outage at Comanche Unit 3 during 2020 (approved by the CPUC in February 2022 as part of the 2020 ECA settlement agreement).
•PSCo also agreed to not seek recovery of COVID-19 related bad debt expense, previously deferred as a regulatory asset, and recorded an additional $11 million of incremental bad debt expense for the period ended Dec. 31, 2021.
Decoupling Filing - PSCo's 2019 Electric Rate Case included a decoupling program, effective April 1, 2020 through Dec. 31, 2023. The program applies to Residential and metered small C&I customers who do not pay a demand charge. The program includes a refund and surcharge cap not to exceed 3% of forecasted base rate revenue for a specified period.
In April 2021, PSCo made its annual filing for 2020, and the revised tariff went into effect by operation of law on June 1, 2021. In the annual filing review, the CPUC indicated they may pursue reopening the case in order to revisit the cap. As of Dec. 31, 2021, PSCo has recognized a refund for Residential customers and a surcharge for C&I customers based on 2020 and 2021 results.
In October 2021, a settlement was reached on Winter Storm Uri costs and also addressed certain components of decoupling. See Partial Settlement disclosure above for further discussion.
Comanche Unit 3 - PSCo is part owner and operator of Comanche Unit 3, a 750 MW, coal-fueled electric generating unit. In January 2020, the unit experienced a turbine failure causing the unit to be taken offline for repairs, which were completed in June 2020. During start-up, the unit experienced a loss of turbine oil, which damaged the unit. Comanche Unit 3 recommenced operations in January 2021. Replacement and repair of damaged systems in excess of a $2 million deductible are expected to be recovered through insurance policies. PSCo incurred replacement power costs of approximately $16 million during the outage.
In October 2020, the CPUC initiated a review of Comanche Unit 3’s performance. In March 2021, the CPUC Staff issued a report, which noted higher-than average outages and included criticisms of PSCo’s operations of Comanche Unit 3 over the last ten years. The report recommended thorough explanation of the future of Comanche Unit 3 operations in the next resource plan, performance standards for all company-owned generation and a review of outage and repair costs in upcoming ECA proceedings.
In October 2021, a comprehensive settlement was reached, which addressed treatment of 2020 Comanche Unit 3 replacement power costs. See Partial Settlement disclosure above for further discussion.
2019 Electric Rate Case Appeal - In August 2020, PSCo filed an appeal with the Denver District Court seeking a review of CPUC decisions on gains and losses on sales of assets, oil and gas royalty revenues, Board of Directors equity compensation and a true-up surcharge to collect the difference between rates from February through August 2020 based on the CPUC’s decision on the Company’s Application for Reconsideration, Rehearing or Reargument and rates that were actually in place. In January 2022, the Denver District Court issued its decision that the CPUC’s approach to gains and losses on certain sales of assets was legally erroneous and confiscatory to PSCo and set aside and remanded the issue for further consideration. The District Court affirmed the CPUC with respect to the remaining decisions.
GCA NOPR - In June 2021, the CPUC issued a NOPR addressing the recovery of costs through the GCA. The proposed rule would establish an annual forecast of GCA costs for each utility and allow each utility to recover only 90%-95% of any costs in excess of the forecasted amount. The proposed rule would allow utilities to earn an incentive equal to an undefined portion of any savings relative to forecasted costs. Comments were filed and requested that the CPUC delay the rule making process until after the 2021 - 2022 heating season; in part because utilities have already proceeded with purchasing gas for the upcoming heating season in accordance with prior CPUC decisions. The CPUC has reopened the GCA NOPR matter and the parties will submit follow-up comments during the first quarter of 2022.
Purchased Power and Transmission Service Providers
PSCo expects to meet its system capacity requirements through electric generating stations, power purchases, new generation facilities, DSM options and expansion of generation plants.
Purchased Power - PSCo purchases power from other utilities and IPPs. Long-term purchased power contracts for dispatchable resources typically require capacity and energy charges. It also contracts to purchase power for both wind and solar resources. PSCo makes short-term purchases to meet system load and energy requirements, replace owned generation, meet operating reserve obligations, or obtain energy at a lower cost.
Energy Markets - PSCo plans to join the SPP Western Energy Imbalance Service Market in April 2023. This market is an incremental step in the participation in the organized wholesale market. Energy imbalance markets allow participants to buy and sell power close to the time electricity is consumed and gives system operators real-time visibility across neighboring grids. The result improves balancing supply and demand at a lower cost.
Purchased Transmission Services - In addition to using its own transmission system, PSCo has contracts with regional transmission service providers to deliver energy to its customers.
Wholesale and Commodity Marketing Operations
PSCo conducts various wholesale marketing operations, including the purchase and sale of electric capacity, energy, ancillary services and energy related products. PSCo uses physical and financial instruments to minimize commodity price and credit risk and hedge sales and purchases. PSCo also engages in trading activity unrelated to hedging. Sharing of any margin is determined through state regulatory proceedings as well as the operation of the FERC approved joint operating agreement.
SPS
Summary of Regulatory Agencies / RTO and Areas of Jurisdiction
Recovery Mechanisms
Pending and Recently Concluded Regulatory Proceedings
2021 New Mexico Electric Rate Case - In January 2021, SPS filed an electric rate case with the NMPRC with a current requested base rate increase of approximately $84 million.
In June 2021, SPS and various parties filed an uncontested stipulation with the NMPRC, which reflected a $62 million rate increase, a change in the depreciation life of the Tolk coal plant to 2032, an equity ratio of 54.72% and ROE of 9.35% for reconciliation statements and determining the revenue requirements for the Sagamore and Hale wind projects. In December 2021, the Hearing Examiner issued a recommendation that the NMPRC approve the rate case settlement agreement without modification.
On Feb. 2, 2022, the NMPRC voted 3-2 to reject the uncontested stipulation as filed. The NMPRC then approved a modified settlement, which would maintain the proposed revenue requirement increase of $62 million, but would adjust the class cost allocation such that all rate classes would have a uniform increase of 4.89%. The NMPRC required the parties to either file their acceptance or opposition to the modified settlement.
On Feb. 9, 2022, the signatories informed the NMPRC they did not unanimously support the modifications. Accordingly, the Hearing Examiner will issue a procedural order for further proceedings on SPS’ originally filed application.
On Feb. 10, 2022, SPS filed a motion requesting the NMPRC either approve the original settlement or approve the modified settlement.
On Feb. 16, 2022, the NMPRC voted to reconsider its order and voted 3-2 to approve the stipulation without modification. New rates will go into effect on Feb. 26, 2022.
2021 Texas Rate Case - In February 2021, SPS filed an electric rate case with the PUCT and its municipalities, seeking an increase in base rates of approximately $140 million. SPS’ proposed net rate increase to Texas customers was approximately $71 million, or 9.2%, as a result of the offsetting $69 million in fuel cost reductions and PTCs from the Sagamore wind project.
The request was based on a ROE of 10.35%, an equity ratio of 54.60%, a rate base of approximately $3.3 billion and a historic test year based on the 12-month period ended Dec. 31, 2020. The request included the effect of losing approximately 400 MW from a wholesale transmission customer and changes to depreciation lives of SPS’ Tolk power plant (from 2037 to 2032) and coal handling assets at the Harrington facility (to 2024).
In January 2022, SPS and intervenors filed a blackbox settlement. Key terms include:
•A base rate increase of approximately $89 million effective back to March 15, 2021.
•A 9.35% ROE and 7.01% weighted average cost of capital for AFUDC purposes only.
•The depreciation lives for Tolk moved up to 2034 and Harrington coal assets moved up to 2024.
In February 2022, the ALJ issued an order approving interim rates to be effective on March 1, 2022. A PUCT decision is expected in the first quarter of 2022.
Purchased Power Arrangements and Transmission Service Providers
SPS expects to use electric generating stations, power purchases, DSM and new generation options to meet its system capacity requirements.
Purchased Power - SPS purchases power from other utilities and IPPs. Long-term purchased power contracts typically require periodic capacity and energy charges. SPS also makes short-term purchases to meet system load and energy requirements to replace owned generation, meet operating reserve obligations or obtain energy at a lower cost.
Purchased Transmission Services - SPS has contractual arrangements with SPP and regional transmission service providers to deliver power and energy to its native load customers.
Natural Gas
SPS does not provide retail natural gas service, but purchases and transports natural gas for its generation facilities and operates limited natural gas pipeline facilities connecting the generation facilities to interstate natural gas pipelines. SPS is subject to the jurisdiction of the FERC with respect to natural gas transactions in interstate commerce and the PHMSA and PUCT for pipeline safety compliance.
Wholesale and Commodity Marketing Operations
SPS conducts various wholesale marketing operations, including the purchase and sale of electric capacity, energy, ancillary services and energy related products. SPS uses physical and financial instruments to minimize commodity price and credit risk and to hedge sales and purchases.
Other Public Utility Matters
Comanche Unit 3 Outage
In January 2022, PSCo experienced an incident at the Comanche Unit 3 plant (750 MW, coal-fueled electric generating unit) resulting in damage and an outage that is expected to last approximately two months. PSCo has notified the CPUC and informed them that it will not seek recovery of any replacement power costs above the expected costs if Comanche 3 had been in service. The estimated incremental replacement power costs could be approximately $10 million, assuming a two month outage, normal weather and current market pricing.
Marshall Wildfire
In December 2021, a wildfire ignited in Boulder County, Colorado (the “Marshall Fire”), which burned over 6,000 acres and destroyed or damaged over 1,000 structures. While there were no downed power lines in the ignition area, the determination of the cause of the Marshall Fire is pending.
In Colorado, the standard of review governing liability differs from the “inverse condemnation” or strict liability standard utilized in California. In Colorado, courts look to whether electric power companies have operated their system with a heightened duty of care consistent with the practical conduct of its business, and liability does not extend to occurrences that cannot be reasonably anticipated. In addition, PSCo has been operating under a commission approved wildfire mitigation plan and carries wildfire liability insurance.
However, in the unlikely event we were found liable, the damages awarded could exceed our coverage and negatively impact our results of operations, financial conditions or cash flows.
Winter Storm Uri
In February 2021, the United States experienced Winter Storm Uri. Extreme cold temperatures impacted certain operational assets as well as the availability of renewable generation. The cold weather also affected the country’s supply and demand for natural gas. These factors contributed to extremely high market prices for natural gas and electricity. As a result of the extremely high market prices, Xcel Energy incurred net natural gas, fuel and purchased energy costs of approximately $1 billion (largely deferred as regulatory assets).
Regulatory Overview - Xcel Energy has natural gas, fuel and purchased energy mechanisms in each jurisdiction for recovering incurred costs. However, the utility subsidiaries have deferred February 2021 cost increases for future recovery and sought recovery of the cost increases over a period of up to 63 months to mitigate the impact to customer bills. Additionally, we did not request recovery of financing costs in order to further limit the impact to our customers.
Proceedings initiated:
Potential Tax Reform
The U.S. Congress is currently discussing potential proposals that may impact federal tax law. At this time, it is unknown what, if any, changes may ultimately occur. Based on provisions passed by the U.S. House of Representatives in November 2021, known as the Build Back Better Act, if any of such provisions were to be enacted into law, we would not expect the impact of such changes to have a material impact on our earnings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires the application of accounting rules and guidance, as well as the use of estimates. Application of these policies involves judgments regarding future events, including the likelihood of success of particular projects, legal and regulatory challenges and anticipated recovery of costs. These judgments could materially impact the consolidated financial statements, based on varying assumptions. In addition, the financial and operating environment also may have a significant effect on the operation of the business and results reported.
Accounting policies and estimates that are most significant to Xcel Energy’s results of operations, financial condition or cash flows, and require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments are outlined below. Each of these has a higher likelihood of resulting in materially different reported amounts under different conditions or using different assumptions. Each critical accounting policy has been reviewed and discussed with the Audit Committee of Xcel Energy Inc.’s Board of Directors on a quarterly basis.
Regulatory Accounting
Xcel Energy is subject to the accounting for Regulated Operations, which provides that rate-regulated entities report assets and liabilities consistent with the recovery of those incurred costs in rates, if it is probable that such rates will be charged and collected. Our rates are derived through the ratemaking process, which results in the recording of regulatory assets and liabilities based on the probability of future cash flows.
Regulatory assets generally represent incurred or accrued costs that have been deferred because future recovery from customers is probable. Regulatory liabilities generally represent amounts that are expected to be refunded to customers in future rates or amounts collected in current rates for future costs. In other businesses or industries, regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities would generally be charged to net income or other comprehensive income.
Each reporting period we assess the probability of future recoveries and obligations associated with regulatory assets and liabilities. Factors such as the current regulatory environment, recently issued rate orders and historical precedents are considered. Decisions made by regulatory agencies can directly impact the amount and timing of cost recovery as well as the rate of return on invested capital, and may materially impact our results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
As of Dec. 31, 2021 and 2020, Xcel Energy had regulatory assets of $3.8 billion and $3.4 billion, respectively and regulatory liabilities of $5.7 billion and $5.6 billion, respectively. Each subsidiary is subject to regulation that varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. If future recovery of costs in any such jurisdiction is no longer probable, Xcel Energy would be required to charge these assets to current net income or other comprehensive income.
At Dec. 31, 2021, in assessing the probability of recovery of recognized regulatory assets, unless otherwise disclosed, Xcel Energy noted no current or anticipated proposals or changes in the regulatory environment that it expects will materially impact the recovery of the assets.
See Notes 4 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Income Tax Accruals
Judgment, uncertainty and estimates are a significant aspect of the income tax accrual process that accounts for the effects of current and deferred income taxes. Uncertainty associated with the application of tax statutes and regulations and outcomes of tax audits and appeals require that judgment and estimates be made in the accrual process and in the calculation of the ETR.
Changes in tax laws and rates may affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities and our future ETR. ETR calculations are revised every quarter based on best available year-end tax assumptions, adjusted in the following year after returns are filed. Tax accrual estimates are trued-up to the actual amounts claimed on the tax returns and further adjusted after examinations by taxing authorities, as needed.
In accordance with the interim period reporting guidance, income tax expense for the first three quarters in a year is based on the forecasted annual ETR. The forecasted ETR reflects a number of estimates, including forecasted annual income, permanent tax adjustments and tax credits.
Valuation allowances are applied to deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that at least a portion may not be realized based on an evaluation of expected future taxable income. Accounting for income taxes also requires that only tax benefits that meet the more likely than not recognition threshold can be recognized or continue to be recognized. We may adjust our unrecognized tax benefits and interest accruals as disputes with the IRS and state tax authorities are resolved, and as new developments occur. These adjustments may increase or decrease earnings.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Employee Benefits
We sponsor several noncontributory, defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans that cover almost all employees and certain retirees. Projected benefit costs are based on historical information and actuarial calculations that include key assumptions (annual return level on pension and postretirement health care investment assets, discount rates, mortality rates and health care cost trend rates, etc.). In addition, the pension cost calculation uses a methodology to reduce the volatility of investment performance over time. Pension assumptions are continually reviewed.
At Dec. 31, 2021, Xcel Energy set the rate of return on assets used to measure pension costs at 6.49%, which is consistent with the rate set in 2020. The rate of return used to measure postretirement health care costs is 4.10% at Dec. 31, 2021, which is consistent with the rate set in 2020.
Xcel Energy’s pension investment strategy is based on plan-specific investments that seek to minimize investment and interest rate risk as a plan’s funded status increases over time. This strategy results in a greater percentage of interest rate sensitive securities being allocated to plans with higher funded status ratios and a greater percentage of growth assets being allocated to plans having lower funded status ratios.
Xcel Energy set the discount rates used to value the pension obligations at 3.08% and postretirement health care obligations at 3.09% at Dec. 31, 2021. This represents a 37 basis point and 44 basis point decrease, respectively, from 2020. Xcel Energy uses a bond matching study as its primary basis for determining the discount rate used to value pension and postretirement health care obligations. The bond matching study utilizes a portfolio of high grade (Aa or higher) bonds that matches the expected cash flows of Xcel Energy’s benefit plans in amount and duration.
The effective yield on this cash flow matched bond portfolio determines the discount rate for the individual plans. The bond matching study is validated for reasonableness against the Merrill Lynch Corporate 15+ Bond Index. In addition, Xcel Energy reviews general actuarial survey data to assess the reasonableness of the discount rate selected.
If Xcel Energy were to use alternative assumptions, a 1% change would result in the following impact on 2021 pension costs:
(a)These costs include the effects of regulation.
Mortality rates are developed from actual and projected plan experience for pension plan and postretirement benefits. Xcel Energy’s actuary conducts an experience study periodically to determine an estimate of mortality. Xcel Energy considers standard mortality tables, improvement factors and the plans actual experience when selecting a best estimate.
As of Dec. 31, 2021, the initial medical trend cost claim assumptions for Pre-65 was 5.3% and Post-65 was 4.9%. The ultimate trend assumption remained at 4.5% for both Pre-65 and Post-65 claims costs. Xcel Energy bases its medical trend assumption on the long-term cost inflation expected in the health care market, considering the levels projected and recommended by industry experts, as well as recent actual medical cost experienced by Xcel Energy’s retiree medical plan.
Funding contributions in 2021 were $131 million and are expected to decline in the following years. Investment returns exceeded assumed levels in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
The pension cost calculation uses a market-related valuation of pension assets. Xcel Energy uses a calculated value method to determine the market-related value of the plan assets. The market-related value is determined by adjusting the fair market value of assets at the beginning of the year to reflect the investment gains and losses (the difference between the actual investment return and the expected investment return on the market-related value) during each of the previous five years at the rate of 20% per year. As differences between actual and expected investment returns are incorporated into the market-related value, amounts are recognized in pension cost over the expected average remaining years of service for active employees (approximately 13 years in 2021).
Xcel Energy currently projects the pension costs recognized for financial reporting purposes will be $77 million in 2022 and $60 million in 2023, while the actual pension costs were $121 million in 2021 and $117 million in 2020. The expected decrease in 2022 and future year costs is primarily due to the reductions in loss amortizations.
Pension funding contributions across all four of Xcel Energy’s pension plans, both voluntary and required, for 2019 - 2022:
•$50 million in January 2022.
•$131 million in 2021.
•$150 million in 2020.
•$154 million in 2019.
Future amounts may change based on actual market performance, changes in interest rates and any changes in governmental regulations. Therefore, additional contributions could be required in the future.
Xcel Energy contributed $15 million, $11 million and $15 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, to the postretirement health care plans. Xcel Energy expects to contribute approximately $9 million during 2022. Xcel Energy recovers employee benefits costs in its utility operations consistent with accounting guidance with the exception of the areas noted below.
•NSP-Minnesota recognizes pension expense in all regulatory jurisdictions using the aggregate normal cost actuarial method. Differences between aggregate normal cost and expense as calculated by pension accounting standards are deferred as a regulatory liability.
•In 2021, the PSCW approved NSP-Wisconsin’s request for deferred accounting treatment of the 2021 pension settlement accounting expense. In addition, the Commission order approved escrow accounting treatment for pension and other post-employment benefit expenses.
•Regulatory Commissions in Colorado, Texas, New Mexico and FERC jurisdictions allow the recovery of other postretirement benefit costs only to the extent that recognized expense is matched by cash contributions to an irrevocable trust. Xcel Energy has consistently funded at a level to allow full recovery of costs in these jurisdictions.
•PSCo and SPS recognize pension expense in all regulatory jurisdictions based on GAAP. The Texas and Colorado electric retail jurisdictions and the Colorado gas retail jurisdiction, each record the difference between annual recognized pension expense and the annual amount of pension expense approved in their last respective general rate case as a deferral to a regulatory asset.
•In 2018, PSCo was required to create a regulatory liability to adjust postretirement health care costs to zero in order to match the amounts collected in rates in the Colorado Gas retail jurisdiction. In 2020, this requirement was extended to the Colorado Electric retail jurisdiction.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Nuclear Decommissioning
Xcel Energy recognizes liabilities for the expected cost of retiring tangible long-lived assets for which a legal obligation exists. These AROs are recognized at fair value as incurred and are capitalized as part of the cost of the related long-lived assets. In the absence of quoted market prices, Xcel Energy estimates the fair value of its AROs using present value techniques, in which it makes assumptions including estimates of the amounts and timing of future cash flows associated with retirement activities, credit-adjusted risk free rates and cost escalation rates. When Xcel Energy revises any assumptions, it adjusts the carrying amount of both the ARO liability and related long-lived asset. ARO liabilities are accreted to reflect the passage of time using the interest method.
A significant portion of Xcel Energy’s AROs relates to the future decommissioning of NSP-Minnesota’s nuclear facilities. The nuclear decommissioning obligation is funded by the external decommissioning trust fund. Difference between regulatory funding (including depreciation expense less returns from the external trust fund) and expense recognized is deferred as a regulatory asset. The amounts recorded for AROs related to future nuclear decommissioning were $2.1 billion in 2021 and $2.0 billion in 2020.
NSP-Minnesota obtains periodic independent cost studies in order to estimate the cost and timing of planned nuclear decommissioning activities. Estimates of future cash flows are highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. NSP-Minnesota is required to file a nuclear decommissioning filing every three years. The filing covers all expenses for the decommissioning of the nuclear plants, including decontamination and removal of radioactive material.
The currently approved triennial filing was ordered by the MPUC in January 2019. This approval did not result in a change to the ARO liability. In December 2020, the MPUC ordered Xcel Energy to maintain the current accrual through 2021 to align with the approved one year stay out of the previously filed multi-year electric rate case. Also, in December 2020, Xcel Energy filed an accrual proposal with the MPUC to be effective in 2022 based on an updated independent cost study. In December 2021, Xcel Energy submitted its petition for approval of the 2022-2024 NSP-Minnesota’s Nuclear Decommission Study and Assumptions. Xcel Energy anticipates the MPUC to deliberate on this filing in February 2022.
The following assumptions have a significant effect on the estimated nuclear obligation:
Timing - Decommissioning cost estimates are impacted by each facility’s retirement date and timing of the actual decommissioning activities. Estimated retirement dates coincide with the expiration of each unit’s operating license with the NRC (i.e., 2030 for Monticello and 2033 and 2034 for PI’s Unit 1 and 2, respectively). The estimated timing of the decommissioning activities is based upon the DECON method (required by the MPUC), which assumes prompt removal and dismantlement. Decommissioning activities are expected to begin at the end of the license date and be completed for both facilities by 2091.
Technology and Regulation - There is limited experience with actual decommissioning of large nuclear facilities. Changes in technology, experience and regulations could cause cost estimates to change significantly.
Escalation Rates - Escalation rates represent projected cost increases due to general inflation and increases in the cost of decommissioning activities. NSP-Minnesota used an escalation rate of 3.2% in calculating the ARO for nuclear decommissioning of its nuclear facilities, based on weighted averages of labor and non-labor escalation factors calculated by Goldman Sachs Asset Management.
Discount Rates - Changes in timing or estimated cash flows that result in upward revisions to the ARO are calculated using the then-current credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. The credit-adjusted risk-free rate in effect when the change occurs is used to discount the revised estimate of the incremental expected cash flows of the retirement activity.
If the change in timing or estimated expected cash flows results in a downward revision of the ARO, the undiscounted revised estimate of expected cash flows is discounted using the credit-adjusted risk-free rate in effect at the date of initial measurement and recognition of the original ARO. Discount rates ranging from approximately 3% to 7% have been used to calculate the net present value of the expected future cash flows over time.
Significant uncertainties exist in estimating future costs including the method to be utilized, ultimate costs to decommission and planned method of disposing spent fuel. If different cost estimates, life assumptions or cost escalation rates were utilized, the AROs could change materially.
However, changes in estimates have minimal impact on results of operations as NSP-Minnesota expects to continue to recover all costs in future rates.
Xcel Energy continually makes judgments and estimates related to these critical accounting policy areas, based on an evaluation of the assumptions and uncertainties for each area. The information and assumptions of these judgments and estimates will be affected by events beyond the control of Xcel Energy, or otherwise change over time. This may require adjustments to recorded results to better reflect updated information that becomes available. The accompanying financial statements reflect management’s best estimates and judgments of the impact of these factors as of Dec. 31, 2021.
See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Derivatives, Risk Management and Market Risk
We are exposed to a variety of market risks in the normal course of business. Market risk is the potential loss that may occur as a result of adverse changes in the market or fair value of a particular instrument or commodity. All financial and commodity-related instruments, including derivatives, are subject to market risk.
Xcel Energy is exposed to the impact of adverse changes in price for energy and energy-related products, which is partially mitigated by the use of commodity derivatives. In addition to ongoing monitoring and maintaining credit policies intended to minimize overall credit risk, management takes steps to mitigate changes in credit and concentration risks associated with its derivatives and other contracts, including parental guarantees and requests of collateral. While we expect that the counterparties will perform under the contracts underlying its derivatives, the contracts expose us to some credit and non-performance risk.
Distress in the financial markets may impact counterparty risk, the fair value of the securities in the nuclear decommissioning fund and pension fund and Xcel Energy’s ability to earn a return on short-term investments.
Commodity Price Risk - We are exposed to commodity price risk in our electric and natural gas operations. Commodity price risk is managed by entering into long- and short-term physical purchase and sales contracts for electric capacity, energy and energy-related products and fuels used in generation and distribution activities. Commodity price risk is also managed through the use of financial derivative instruments. Our risk management policy allows us to manage commodity price risk within each rate-regulated operation per commission approved hedge plans.
Wholesale and Commodity Trading Risk - Xcel Energy conducts various wholesale and commodity trading activities, including the purchase and sale of electric capacity, energy, energy-related instruments and natural gas-related instruments, including derivatives. Our risk management policy allows management to conduct these activities within guidelines and limitations as approved by our risk management committee.
Fair value of net commodity trading contracts as of Dec. 31, 2021:
(a)Prices actively quoted or based on actively quoted prices.
(b)Prices based on models and other valuation methods.
Changes in the fair value of commodity trading contracts before the impacts of margin-sharing for the years ended Dec. 31:
At Dec. 31, 2021, a 10% increase in market prices for commodity trading contracts through the forward curve would increase pretax income from continuing operations by approximately $13 million, whereas a 10% decrease would decrease pretax income from continuing operations by approximately $13 million. At Dec. 31, 2020, a 10% increase in market prices for commodity trading contracts would increase pretax income from continuing operations by approximately $13 million, whereas a 10% decrease would decrease pretax income from continuing operations by approximately $13 million. Market price movements can exceed 10% under abnormal circumstances.
The utility subsidiaries’ commodity trading operations measure the outstanding risk exposure to price changes on contracts and obligations that have been entered into, but not closed, using an industry standard methodology known as VaR. VaR expresses the potential change in fair value on the outstanding contracts and obligations over a particular period of time under normal market conditions.
The VaRs for the NSP-Minnesota and PSCo commodity trading operations, excluding both non-derivative transactions and derivative transactions designated as normal purchase and normal sales, calculated on a consolidated basis using a Monte Carlo simulation with a 95% confidence level and a one-day holding period, were as follows:
A short-term increase in VaR occurred during the week of Feb. 12, 2021 through Feb. 18, 2021. On Feb. 17, 2021, the portfolio VaR reached a high of $52 million. This increase in VaR was driven by the unprecedented market conditions during Winter Storm Uri. Prior to this widespread weather event, VaR was $1 million and returned to $1 million by Feb. 19, 2021.
Nuclear Fuel Supply - NSP-Minnesota has contracted for approximately 78% of its 2022 enriched nuclear material requirements from sources that could be impacted by sanctions against entities doing business with Iran. Those sanctions may impact the supply of enriched nuclear material supplied from Russia. Long-term, through 2030, NSP-Minnesota is scheduled to take delivery of approximately 30% of its average enriched nuclear material requirements from these sources. NSP-Minnesota is able to manage nuclear fuel supply with alternate potential sources. NSP-Minnesota periodically assesses if further actions are required to assure a secure supply of enriched nuclear material.
Interest Rate Risk - Xcel Energy is subject to interest rate risk. Our risk management policy allows interest rate risk to be managed through the use of fixed rate debt, floating rate debt and interest rate derivatives such as swaps, caps, collars and put or call options.
A 100 basis point change in the benchmark rate on Xcel Energy’s variable rate debt would impact pretax interest expense annually by approximately $11 million and $6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
NSP-Minnesota maintains a nuclear decommissioning fund, as required by the NRC. The nuclear decommissioning fund is subject to interest rate risk and equity price risk. The fund is invested in a diversified portfolio of cash equivalents, debt securities, equity securities and other investments. These investments may be used only for the purpose of decommissioning NSP-Minnesota’s nuclear generating plants.
Realized and unrealized gains on the decommissioning fund investments are deferred as an offset of NSP-Minnesota’s regulatory asset for nuclear decommissioning costs. Fluctuations in equity prices or interest rates affecting the nuclear decommissioning fund do not have a direct impact on earnings due to the application of regulatory accounting.
Changes in discount rates and expected return on plan assets impact the value of pension and postretirement plan assets and/or benefit costs.
Credit Risk - Xcel Energy is also exposed to credit risk. Credit risk relates to the risk of loss resulting from counterparties’ nonperformance on their contractual obligations. Xcel Energy maintains credit policies intended to minimize overall credit risk and actively monitors these policies to reflect changes and scope of operations.
At Dec. 31, 2021, a 10% increase in commodity prices would have resulted in an increase in credit exposure of $36 million, while a decrease in prices of 10% would have resulted in a decrease in credit exposure of $26 million. At Dec. 31, 2020, a 10% increase in commodity prices would have resulted in an increase in credit exposure of $11 million, while a decrease in prices of 10% would have resulted in an immaterial increase in credit exposure.
Xcel Energy conducts credit reviews for all counterparties and employs credit risk controls, such as letters of credit, parental guarantees, master netting agreements and termination provisions. Credit exposure is monitored, and when necessary, the activity with a specific counterparty is limited until credit enhancement is provided. Distress in the financial markets could increase our credit risk.
Fair Value Measurements
Xcel Energy uses derivative contracts such as futures, forwards, interest rate swaps, options and FTRs to manage commodity price and interest rate risk. Derivative contracts, with the exception of those designated as normal purchase and normal sale contracts, are reported at fair value.
Xcel Energy’s investments held in the nuclear decommissioning fund, rabbi trusts, pension and other postretirement funds are also subject to fair value accounting.
Commodity Derivatives - Xcel Energy monitors the creditworthiness of the counterparties to its commodity derivative contracts and assesses each counterparty’s ability to perform on the transactions. The impact of discounting commodity derivative assets for counterparty credit risk was not material to the fair value of commodity derivative assets at Dec. 31, 2021.
Adjustments to fair value for credit risk of commodity trading instruments are recorded in electric revenues. Credit risk adjustments for other commodity derivative instruments are recorded as other comprehensive income or deferred as regulatory assets and liabilities. Classification as a regulatory asset or liability is based on commission approved regulatory recovery mechanisms. The impact of discounting commodity derivative liabilities for credit risk was immaterial at Dec. 31, 2021.
See Notes 10 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
Operating Cash Flows
(a) Non-cash transactions applicable to net income (e.g., depreciation, nuclear fuel amortization, changes in deferred income taxes, allowance for equity funds used during construction, etc.).
(b) Working capital includes accounts receivable, accrued unbilled revenues, inventories, accounts payable, other current assets and other current liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $659 million for 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the deferral of net natural gas, fuel and purchased energy costs related to Winter Storm Uri in the first quarter.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $453 million for 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease in capital expenditures was largely due to the purchase of MEC in January 2020, which was subsequently sold in July 2020, as well as the completion of various wind projects.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $362 million for 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the amount/timing of debt issuances and repayments, changes in capital investment and incremental financing due to the lag in recovery costs associated with Winter Storm Uri.
See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Capital Requirements
Xcel Energy has contractual obligations and other commitments that will need to be funded in the future. The Company expects to have adequate amounts of cash from operating and/or financing activities to meet both its short-term and long-term cash requirements. Xcel Energy’s financing requirements are dependent on both existing contractual obligations and other commitments, as well as projected capital forecasts. Xcel Energy expects to meet future financing requirements by periodically issuing short-term debt, long-term debt, common stock, hybrid and other securities to maintain desired capitalization ratios. Projected future financing requirements can be impacted by various factors including constraints to supply chain and labor, as well as inflation.
Recovery of the effects of inflation through higher customer rates is dependent upon receiving adequate and timely rate increases. Rate increases may not be retroactive and often lag increases in costs caused by inflation. On occasion, the Company may enter into rate settlement agreements, which require us to wait for a period of time to file the next base rate increase request. These agreements may result in regulatory lag whereby the impact of inflation may not yet be reflected in rates, or a delay may occur between capital project completion and the start of rate recovery. Xcel Energy attempts to mitigate the potential impact of inflation through the use of fuel, energy and other cost adjustment clauses and bill riders, by employing prudent risk management and hedging strategies and by considering, among other areas, its impact on purchases of energy, operating expenses, materials and equipment costs, contract negotiations, future capital spending programs and long-term debt issuances.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
(a)Included in operating lease obligations are $229 million, $430 million, $335 million and $416 million, for the less than 1 year, 1 - 3 years, 3 - 5 years and after 5 years categories, respectively, pertaining to PPAs that were accounted for as operating leases.
(b)Xcel Energy Inc. and its subsidiaries have contracts providing for the purchase and delivery of a significant portion of its fuel (nuclear, natural gas and coal) requirements. Additionally, the utility subsidiaries of Xcel Energy Inc. have entered into non-lease purchase power agreements. Certain contractual purchase obligations are adjusted on indices. Effects of price changes are mitigated through cost of energy adjustment mechanisms.
(c)Primarily consists of contracts for information technology services.
Capital Expenditures - Base capital expenditures and incremental capital forecasts:
(a) Other category includes intercompany transfers for safe harbor wind turbines.
The five-year capital forecast includes the proposed Colorado Pathway transmission expansion (approximately $1.7 billion) and the proposed 460 MW Sherco solar facility (approximately $600 million).
Additional capital investment in renewable generation and transmission may be needed in the five-year forecast pending approval of regulatory filings in Minnesota and Colorado. The approval of the proposed resource plans could result in up to 2,000 MW of renewable generation being needed between 2024 - 2026, resulting in potential capital expenditures estimated between $1.0 to $1.5 billion (assuming Xcel Energy were to own ~50% of the renewables). Additionally, the associated $0.5 billion to $1.0 billion of network upgrades, voltage support and interconnection work related to the Colorado Power Pathway could also be needed during this five-year forecast depending on resource mix, location and timing. Any additional capital investment would likely be funded with approximately 50% equity and 50% debt.
Xcel Energy’s capital expenditure forecast is subject to continuing review and modification. Actual capital expenditures may vary from estimates due to changes in electric and natural gas projected load growth, safety and reliability needs, regulatory decisions, legislative initiatives (e.g., federal clean energy and tax policy), reserve requirements, availability of purchased power, alternative plans for meeting long-term energy needs, environmental initiatives and regulation, and merger, acquisition and divestiture opportunities.
Financing for Capital Expenditures through 2026 - Xcel Energy issues debt and equity securities to refinance retiring maturities, reduce short-term debt, fund capital programs, infuse equity in subsidiaries, fund asset acquisitions and for other general corporate purposes.
Current estimated financing plans of Xcel Energy for 2022 through 2026:
(a) Net of dividends and pension funding.
(b) Reflects a combination of short and long-term debt; net of refinancing.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Xcel Energy does not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements, other than those currently disclosed, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Common Stock Dividends - Future dividend levels will be dependent on Xcel Energy’s results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, reinvestment opportunities and other factors, and will be evaluated by the Xcel Energy Inc. Board of Directors. In February 2022, Xcel Energy announced an increase in the annual dividend of 12 cents per share, which represents an increase of 6.6%.
Xcel Energy’s dividend policy balances the following:
•Projected cash generation.
•Projected capital investment.
•A reasonable rate of return on shareholder investment.
•The impact on Xcel Energy’s capital structure and credit ratings.
In addition, there are certain statutory limitations that could affect dividend levels. Federal law places limits on the ability of public utilities within a holding company to declare dividends. Under the Federal Power Act, a public utility may not pay dividends from any funds properly included in a capital account. The utility subsidiaries’ dividends may be limited directly or indirectly by state regulatory commissions or bond indenture covenants.
See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Pension Fund - Xcel Energy’s pension assets are invested in a diversified portfolio of domestic and international equity securities, short-term to long-duration fixed income securities and alternative investments, including private equity, real estate and hedge funds.
Funded status and pension assumptions:
(a)Excludes non-qualified plan of $43 million and $43 million at Dec. 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Capital Sources
Short-Term Funding Sources - Xcel Energy generally funds short-term needs, through operating cash flows, notes payable, commercial paper and bank lines of credit. The amount and timing of short-term funding needs depend on construction expenditures, working capital and dividend payments.
Short-Term Investments - Xcel Energy Inc., NSP-Minnesota, NSP-Wisconsin, PSCo and SPS maintain cash and short-term investment accounts.
Short-Term Debt - Xcel Energy Inc., NSP-Minnesota, NSP-Wisconsin, PSCo and SPS each have individual commercial paper programs. Authorized levels for these commercial paper programs are:
•$1.25 billion for Xcel Energy Inc.
•$700 million for PSCo.
•$500 million for NSP-Minnesota.
•$500 million for SPS.
•$150 million for NSP-Wisconsin.
Xcel Energy Inc. repaid its $1.2 billion 364-Day Term Loan Agreement in the fourth quarter.
Xcel Energy’s outstanding short-term debt:
Credit Facility Agreements - Xcel Energy Inc., NSP-Minnesota, PSCo and SPS each have the right to request an extension of the revolving credit facility for two additional one-year periods beyond the June 2024 termination date. NSP-Wisconsin has the right to request an extension of the revolving credit facility for an additional year. All extension requests are subject to majority bank group approval.
As of Feb. 18, 2022, Xcel Energy Inc. and its utility subsidiaries had the following committed credit facilities available to meet liquidity needs:
(a)Credit facilities expire in June 2024.
(b)Includes outstanding commercial paper and letters of credit.
Registration Statements - Xcel Energy Inc.’s Articles of Incorporation authorize the issuance of one billion shares of $2.50 par value common stock. As of Dec. 31, 2021 and 2020, Xcel Energy had approximately 544 million shares and 537 million shares of common stock outstanding, respectively.
Xcel Energy Inc. and its utility subsidiaries have registration statements on file with the SEC pursuant to which they may sell securities from time to time. These registration statements, which are uncapped, permit Xcel Energy Inc. and its utility subsidiaries to issue debt and other securities in the future at amounts, prices and with terms to be determined at the time of future offerings, and in the case of our utility subsidiaries, subject to commission approval.
Planned Financing Activity - Xcel Energy’s 2022 financing plans reflect the following:
•Xcel Energy Inc. - approximately $600 million in unsecured bonds during Q2.
•PSCo - approximately $650 million of first mortgage bonds during Q2.
•SPS - approximately $150 million of first mortgage bonds during Q2.
•NSP-Minnesota - approximately $500 million of first mortgage bonds during Q2.
•NSP-Wisconsin - approximately $100 million of first mortgage bonds during Q3.
Equity through DRIP and Benefits Program - Xcel Energy also plans to issue approximately $90 million of equity annually through the DRIP and benefit programs during the five-year forecast time period.
ATM Equity Offering - In November 2021, Xcel Energy Inc. filed a prospectus supplement under which it may sell up to $800 million of its common stock through an ATM program. As of Dec. 31, 2021, Xcel Energy Inc. issued 5.33 million shares of common stock with net proceeds of $347 million through the ATM program.
Long-Term Borrowings and Other Financing Instruments - See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Earnings Guidance and Long-Term EPS and Dividend Growth Rate Objectives
Xcel Energy 2022 Earnings Guidance - Xcel Energy’s 2022 GAAP and ongoing earnings guidance is a range of $3.10 to $3.20 per share.(a)
Key assumptions as compared with 2021 levels unless noted:
•Constructive outcomes in all rate case and regulatory proceedings.
•Normal weather patterns for the year.
•Weather-normalized retail electric sales are projected to increase ~1%.
•Weather-normalized retail firm natural gas sales are projected to be 0% to 1%.
•Capital rider revenue is projected to increase $35 million to $45 million (net of PTCs). PTCs are credited to customers, through capital riders and reductions to other regulatory mechanisms.
•O&M expenses are projected to increase approximately 1% to 2%.
•Depreciation expense is projected to increase approximately $255 million to $265 million.
•Property taxes are projected to increase approximately $40 million to $50 million.
•Interest expense (net of AFUDC - debt) is projected to increase $55 million to $65 million.
•AFUDC - equity is projected to be relatively flat.
•ETR is projected to be ~(3%) to (5%). The ETR reflects benefits of PTCs which are credited to customers through electric margin and will not have a material impact on net income.
(a) Ongoing earnings is calculated using net income and adjusting for certain nonrecurring or infrequent items that are, in management’s view, not reflective of ongoing operations. Ongoing earnings could differ from those prepared in accordance with GAAP for unplanned and/or unknown adjustments. Xcel Energy is unable to forecast if any of these items will occur or provide a quantitative reconciliation of the guidance for ongoing EPS to corresponding GAAP EPS.
Long-Term EPS and Dividend Growth Rate Objectives - Xcel Energy expects to deliver an attractive total return to our shareholders through a combination of earnings growth and dividend yield, based on the following long-term objectives:
• Deliver long-term annual EPS growth of 5% to 7% based off of a 2021 base of $2.96 per share, which represents the mid-point of the revised 2021 guidance range of $2.94 to $2.98 per share.
• Deliver annual dividend increases of 5% to 7%.
• Target a dividend payout ratio of 60% to 70%.
• Maintain senior secured debt credit ratings in the A range.