Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited and unaudited financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should specifically consider the various risk factors identified in this Report that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Financial Results
The following discussion of the results of operations constitutes management's review of the factors that affected the financial and operating performance for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. The Company has a June 30 fiscal year end.
Executive Summary
Xeriant, Inc. is dedicated to the acquisition, development and commercialization of transformative aerospace technologies, including eco-friendly specialty materials which can be successfully deployed and integrated across multiple industry sectors, and disruptive innovations related to the emerging aviation market called Advanced Air Mobility, which include next-generation aircraft. We seek to partner with and acquire strategic interests in visionary companies that accelerate this mission. The Company is located at the Research Park at Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton, Florida.
JV with XTI Aircraft
On May 31, 2021, the Company entered into a Joint Venture Agreement (the “Agreement”) with XTI Aircraft Company (“XTI”), a Delaware corporation, to form a new company, called Eco-Aero, LLC (the “JV”), a Delaware limited liability company, with the purpose of completing the preliminary design of XTI’s TriFan 600, a 5-passenger plus pilot, hybrid electric, vertical takeoff, and landing (eVTOL) fixed wing aircraft. Under the Agreement, Xeriant is contributing capital, technology, and strategic business relationships, and XTI is contributing intellectual property licensing rights and know-how. XTI and the Company each own 50 percent of the JV. The JV is managed by a management committee consisting of five members, three appointed by the Company and two by XTI. The Agreement was effective on June 4, 2021, with an initial deposit of $1 million into the JV. Xeriant’s financial commitment is up to $10 million, contributed as needed based on the aircraft development timeline and budget.
The Company analyzed the transaction under ASC 810 Consolidation, to determine if the joint venture classifies as a Variable Interest Entity (“VIE”). The Joint Venture qualifies as a VIE based on the fact the JV does not have sufficient equity to operate without financial support from Xeriant. According to ASC 810-25-38, a reporting entity shall consolidate a VIE when that reporting entity has a variable interest (or combination of variable interests) that provides the reporting entity with a controlling financial interest on the basis of the provisions in paragraphs 810-10-25-38A through 25-38J. The reporting entity that consolidates a VIE is called the primary beneficiary of that VIE. According to the JV operating agreement, the ownership interests are 50/50. However, the agreement provides for a Management Committee of five members. Three of the five members are from Xeriant. Additionally, Xeriant has the right to invest up to $10,000,000 into the JV. As such, Xeriant has substantial capital at risk. Based on these two factors, the conclusion is that Xeriant is the primary beneficiary of the VIE. Accordingly, Xeriant has consolidated the VIE.
Recent Developments
JV with Movychem
On April 2, 2022 the Company entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with Movychem s.r.o., a Slovakian limited liability company setting forth the terms for the establishment of a joint venture (the “Joint Venture”) to develop applications and commercialize a series of flame-retardant products in the form of polymer gels, powders, liquids and pellets derived from technology developed by Movychem under the name Retacell™. The Joint Venture is organized as a Florida limited liability company under the name Ebenberg, LLC and is owned 50% by each of the Company and Movychem.
For its capital contribution to the Joint Venture, pursuant to a Patent and Exclusive License and Assignment Agreement (the “Patent Agreement”), Movychem is transferring to the Joint Venture all of its interest to the know-how and intellectual property relating to Retacell exclusive of all patents, and the Company is contributing the amount of $2,600,000 payable (a) $600,000 at the rate of $25,000 per month over a 24 month period and (b) $2,000,000 within five business days of a closing of a financing in which the Company receives net proceeds of at least $3,000,000 but in no event later than six months from the Effective Date. At such time as the Company makes its $2,000,000 payment (and assuming the Company is current with its then monthly capital contributions), pursuant to the Patent Agreement, Movychem will transfer all of its rights, title and interest to all of the patents related to Retacell for an amount equal to aggregate cash contributions of the Company to the Joint Venture plus 40% of all royalty payments received by the Joint Venture for the licensing of Retacell products. Pending assignment of the patents to the Joint Venture, pursuant to the Patent Agreement, Movychem has granted to the Joint Venture an exclusive worldwide license under the patents.
Concurrently with the execution of the Joint Venture Agreement, the Joint Venture has entered into a Services Agreement (the “Services Agreement”) with the Company pursuant to which the Company will provide to the Joint Venture technical services related to the exploitation of the Retacell intellectual property and corporate, marketing. business development, communications and administrative services as requested by the Joint Venture in exchange for 40% of all royalty payments received by the Joint Venture for the licensing of Retacell products.
Under the Joint Venture Agreement, the Company has agreed to grant to certain individuals affiliated with Movychem five-year warrants (the “Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 170,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share with vesting depending on the satisfaction of various milestones as described therein.
The Joint Venture Agreement grants to Movychem the right to dissolve the Joint Venture in the event that the Company fails to make any of its capital contributions in which case the Joint Venture will be required to grant back to Movychem all joint venture intellectual property and the assignment to Movychem of any outstanding licenses. Additionally, the Services Agreement will be amended to provide that the 40% of royalties to be paid by to the Company will be limited to licensees who were first introduced to the Joint Venture or Movychem, as the case may be.
The Company analyzed the transaction under ASC 810 Consolidation, to determine if the joint venture classifies as a Variable Interest Entity (“VIE”). The Joint Venture qualifies as a VIE based on the fact the JV does not have sufficient equity to operate without financial support from both parties. According to ASC 810-25-38, a reporting entity shall consolidate a VIE when that reporting entity has a variable interest (or combination of variable interests) that provides the reporting entity with a controlling financial interest on the basis of the provisions in paragraphs 810-10-25-38A through 25-38J. The reporting entity that consolidates a VIE is called the primary beneficiary of that VIE. According to the JV operating agreement, the ownership interests are 50/50 and the agreement provides for a Management Committee of five members. Two of the five members are from Xeriant and Movychem, respectively and one is appointed by mutual agreement of the parties. Movychem is transferring to the Joint Venture all of its interest to the know-how and intellectual property relating to Retacell exclusive of all patents, and the Company is contributing cash. As such, both parties do not have substantial capital at risk. Based on these two factors, the conclusion is that no one is the primary beneficiary of the VIE. Accordingly, Xeriant has not consolidated the VIE.
As of June 30, 2022, the Company paid $115,357 to the joint venture.
Stock Sales
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company received $2,207,050 by selling 43,675,266 shares common stock, which includes 4,308,600 shares issued based on the exercise of warrants.
Convertible Notes Issued
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company received $4,958,950 from issuance of convertible debt.
Litigation
On September 1, 2021, Xeriant Inc. brought a cause of action in the Southern District of Florida against a former shareholder for claims, including but not limited to, breach of contract, misrepresentation, and asserting claims to recoup monetary and in-kind distributions made to the shareholder by the Company. The defendant submitted an affirmative defense and counterclaim on October 29, 2021.
Fiscal Year 2022 Results of Operations Compared with Fiscal Year 2021
Sales and marketing expenses
Total sales and marketing expenses were $651,567 and $1,047,120 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 the Company’s sales and marketing expenses were associated with social media marketing campaigns, events and press releases.
General and administrative expenses
Total general and administrative expenses were $4,216,613 and $368,296 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The change was primarily due to an increase in stock issuances related to consulting fees and advisory board fees, advisory board fees paid in cash, and an increase in travel, meetings, and conferences.
Professional Fees
Total professional fees were $444,012 and $190,693 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase was primarily due to legal fees.
Related Party Consulting Fees
Total related party consulting fees were $432,425 and $220,000 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The related party consulting fees for fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 consisted of (i) $184,000 to Ancient Investments, LLC, a company owned by Keith Duffy, CEO and Scott Duffy, Executive Director of Operations, (ii) $86,000 for AMP Web Services, LLC, a company owned by Pablo Lavigna, CIO, $122,000 to Edward DeFeudis, Director, and (iii) $40,425 for Keystone Business Development Partners, LLC, a company owned by Brian Carey, CFO. The consulting fees for June 30, 2021 consisted of i) $98,000 to Ancient Investments, LLC, a company owned by Keith Duffy, CEO and Scott Duffy, Executive Director of Operations, (ii) $49,500 for AMP Web Services, LLC, a company owned by Pablo Lavigna, CIO, $40,000 to Edward DeFeudis, Director, and (iii) $20,000 for Keystone Business Development Partners, LLC, a company owned by Brian Carey, CFO.
Research and Development Expenses
Total research and development expenses were $5,267,581 and $373,112 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. These research and development expenses were in connection with our Eco-Aero, LLC joint venture with XTI Aircraft Company for funding the preliminary design phase in the development of an aircraft, called the TriFan 600.
Other Income (Expenses)
Total other expenses consist of amortization of debt discount related to convertible notes, interest expense related to convertible notes, and a loss on settlement of debt. Total other expenses were $4,869,997 for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $503,381 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily due to recording the amortization of debt discount from the convertible note signed for the year ended June 30, 2022 in the amount of $4,629,089.
Net loss
Total net loss was $15,882,195 for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $2,702,602 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily due to research and development expense and the cost of financings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2022, we had a cash balance of $1,065,945 and a working deficit of $3,002,259. Our net loss of $15,882,195 in the year ended June 30, 2022 was mostly funded by proceeds raised from financings. We will need to raise working capital (or refinance existing short-term debt to long-term debt) to fund operations. Future equity financings may be dilutive to our stockholders. Alternative forms of future financings may include preferences or rights superior to our common stock. Debt financings may involve a pledge of assets and will rank senior to our common stock. We have historically financed our operations through best- efforts private equity and debt financings. We do not have any credit or equity facilities available with financial institutions, stockholders or third-party investors, and will continue to rely on best efforts financings. The failure to raise sufficient capital will likely cause us to cease operations.
During the fiscal year 2022, our operating activities used $6,927,249 of net cash compared to using $1,012,203 of net cash flow in our operating activities during fiscal year 2021. This difference primarily resulted from the increase of operations such as research and development expense of $5,267,581 and non-cash expense such as stock option expense of $3,248,181 and amortization of debt discount of $4,629,089.
Funding Strategy
To date, our operations have been funded primarily through private investors. Some of these investors have verbally committed additional funding for the Company, as needed. We have had a number of discussions with broker-dealers regarding the funding required to execute the Company’s business plan, which is to acquire and develop breakthrough technologies or business interests in those companies that have developed these technologies. We are in the process of issuing an offering document to obtain the funding for certain acquisitions that are in the discussion stages.
Off Balance Sheet Items
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “special purpose entities” (SPEs).
Critical Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements, which include the accounts of the Company and American Aviation Technologies, LLC, its subsidiary, and Eco-Aero, LLC, its joint venture, and are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP). All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated. The consolidated financial statements, which include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary, and related disclosures have been prepared pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). The Financial Statements have been prepared using the accrual basis of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and presented in US dollars. The fiscal year end is June 30.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Xeriant, Inc., and American Aviation Technologies, LLC, and Eco-Aero, LLC. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant assumptions and estimates relate to the valuation of beneficial conversion features and warrants associated with convertible debt. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company measures the cost of employee services received in exchange for equity incentive awards based on the grant date fair value of the award. The Company uses the Black-Scholes valuation model to calculate the fair value of stock options granted to employees or consultants. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the period during which the employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, which is usually the vesting period.
Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company adopted ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements. ASC Topic 820 clarifies the definition of fair value, prescribes methods for measuring fair value, and establishes a fair value hierarchy to classify the inputs used in measuring fair value as follows:
Level 1: Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities available at the measurement date.
Level 2: Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active, inputs other than quoted prices that are observable, and inputs derived from or corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3: Inputs are unobservable inputs which reflect the reporting entity's own assumptions on what assumptions the market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on the best available information.
The estimated fair value of certain financial instruments, including all current liabilities are carried at historical cost basis, which approximates their fair values because of the short-term nature of these instruments.
Deferred Taxes
The Company follows Accounting Standards Codification subtopic 740-10, Income Taxes ("ASC 740-10") for recording the provision for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are computed based upon the difference between the financial statement and income tax basis of assets and liabilities using the enacted marginal tax rate applicable when the related asset or liability is expected to be realized or settled. Deferred income tax expenses or benefits are based on the changes in the asset or liability during each period. If available evidence suggests that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is required to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Future changes in such valuation allowance are included in the provision for deferred income taxes in the period of change. Deferred income taxes may arise from temporary differences resulting from income and expense items reported for financial accounting and tax purposes in different periods.
Deferred taxes are classified as current or non-current, depending on the classification of assets and liabilities to which they relate. Deferred taxes arising from temporary differences that are not related to an asset or liability are classified as current or non-current depending on the periods in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse and are considered immaterial. As of June 30, 2022 there are no deferred tax assets.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the Statements of Cash Flows, the Company considers highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. The Company has no cash equivalents.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company monitors outstanding receivables based on factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers, historical trends, and other information. The allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated based on an assessment of the Company's ability to collect on customer accounts receivable. There is judgment involved with estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts and if the financial condition of the Company's customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make the required payments, the Company may be required to record additional allowances or charges against revenues. The Company writes off accounts receivable against the allowance when it determines a balance is uncollectible and no longer actively pursues its collection. The allowance for doubtful accounts is created by forming a credit balance which is deducted from the total receivables balance in the balance sheet. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021 there are no accounts receivable.
Convertible Debentures
If the conversion features of conventional convertible debt provide for a rate of conversion that is below market value at issuance, this feature is characterized as a beneficial conversion feature ("BCF"). A BCF is recorded by the Company as a debt discount pursuant to ASC Topic 470-20 "Debt with Conversion and Other Options." In those circumstances, the convertible debt is recorded net of the discount related to the BCF, and the Company amortizes the discount to interest expense, over the life of the debt. During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company recorded a BCF in the amount of $2,615,419.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Accounting Standards Codification subtopic 825-10, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825-10") requires disclosure of the fair value of certain financial instruments. The carrying value of cash, accounts payable and accrued liabilities as reflected in the balance sheets, approximate fair value because of the short-term maturity of these instruments. All other significant financial assets, financial liabilities and equity instruments of the Company are either recognized or disclosed in the financial statements together with other information relevant for making a reasonable assessment of future cash flows, interest rate risk and credit risk. Where practicable the fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities have been determined and disclosed; otherwise only available information pertinent to fair value has been disclosed.
The Company follows Accounting Standards Codification subtopic 820-10, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures ("ASC 820-10") and Accounting Standards Codification subtopic 825-10, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825-10"), which permits entities to choose to measure many financial instruments and certain other items at fair value.
Research and Development Expenses
Expenditures for research and development are expensed as incurred. The Company incurred research and development expenses of $5,267,581 and $373,112 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Advertising, Marketing and Public Relations
The Company expenses advertising and marketing costs as they are incurred. The Company recorded advertising expenses in the amount of $651,567 and $1,047,120 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Offering Costs
Costs incurred in connection with raising capital by the issuance of common stock are recorded as contra equity and deducted from the capital raised. There were no offering costs for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. The Company records interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of general and administrative expenses. Our consolidated federal tax return and any state tax returns are not currently under examination.
The Company has adopted FASB ASC 740-10, Accounting for Income Taxes, which requires an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed annually from differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect. These pronouncements did not have any material impact on the consolidated financial statements unless otherwise disclosed, and the Company does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.