ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Unless otherwise indicated, references to "Xeris," the "Company," "we," "our" and "us" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K refer to Xeris Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ("Xeris Pharma") when referring to periods prior to the acquisition of Strongbridge Biopharma plc, an Irish public limited company ("Strongbridge") (discussed below) on October 5, 2021 and to Xeris Biopharma Holdings, Inc. when referring to periods on or subsequent to October 5, 2021. Also, throughout this document, unless otherwise noted, references to Gvoke® include Gvoke PFS, Gvoke HypoPen® and Ogluo® (glucagon).
We are a biopharmaceutical company committed to developing and commercializing innovative solutions to enhance the lives of people with life-threatening diseases. Our primary focus is on therapies for patient populations in endocrinology, neurology, and gastroenterology. We currently have three commercially available products, Gvoke, a ready-to-use liquid glucagon for the treatment of severe hypoglycemia, Keveyis, the first and only U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approved therapy for primary periodic paralysis (“PPP”) and Recorlev, approved by the FDA in December 2021 for the treatment of endogenous hypercortisolemia in adult patients with Cushing’s Syndrome. We also have a pipeline of development programs to extend our current marketed products into new indications and uses or bring new products forward using our proprietary formulation technology platforms, XeriSolTM and XeriJectTM.
Acquisition of Strongbridge
On May 24, 2021, Xeris Pharma and Strongbridge entered into the Transaction Agreement together with Xeris Biopharma Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“the Company”), and Wells MergerSub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MergerSub”) (the “Transaction Agreement”) whereby we would acquire Strongbridge (the “Acquisition”) pursuant to a scheme of arrangement (the “Scheme”) under Irish law. Under the terms of the Transaction Agreement, (i) the Company acquired Strongbridge by means of the Acquisition pursuant to the Scheme and (ii) MergerSub merged with and into Xeris Pharma, with Xeris Pharma as the surviving corporation in the merger (the “Merger,” and the Merger together with the Acquisition, the “Transactions”). As a result of the Transactions, both Xeris Pharma and Strongbridge became wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company. the Company acquired all of the outstanding Strongbridge ordinary shares (“Strongbridge Shares”) in exchange for (i) 0.7840 of a share of the Company’s common stock (“Company Shares”) and cash in lieu of fractions of Company Shares due to a holder of Strongbridge Shares per Strongbridge Share and (ii) one (1) non-tradeable contingent value right, worth up to a maximum of $1.00 per Strongbridge Share settleable in cash, additional Company Shares, or a combination of cash and additional Company Shares, at the Company’s sole discretion. On October 5, 2021, pursuant to the Transaction Agreement, we completed the Transactions.
Through the Acquisition, we added Keveyis (dichlorphenamide) to our commercial product portfolio. Keveyis is the first and only treatment approved by FDA for hyperkalemic, hypokalemic, and related variants of primary periodic paralysis (“PPP”), a group of rare hereditary disorders that cause episodes of muscle weakness or paralysis. In addition, we added a clinical-stage product candidate for rare endocrine diseases, Recorlev. Recorlev (levoketoconazole), the pure 2S,4R enantiomer of the enantiomeric pair comprising ketoconazole, is a next-generation steroidogenesis inhibitor which serves as a chronic therapy for adults with endogenous Cushing’s syndrome. Levoketoconazole has received orphan designation from the FDA and the European Medicines Agency. Recorlev was acquired as an in-process research and development asset and subsequently approved by the FDA on December 30, 2021 for the treatment of endogenous hypercortisolemia in adult patients with Cushing’s syndrome for whom surgery is not an option or has not been curative. Recorlev was commercially launched in January 2022.
Patents
We currently own 141 patents issued globally, including a composition of matter patent covering our ready-to-use glucagon formulation that expires in 2036. Upon completion of the Transactions, Xeris Biopharma Holdings, Inc. controls the patents of Xeris Pharma and Strongbridge Dublin Limited, the latter of which has 53 granted patents globally related to proprietary formulations of levoketoconazole (the active pharmaceutical ingredient in Recorlev) and the uses of such formulations in treating certain endocrine-related diseases and syndromes. This includes US Patent No. 11,020,393, which was granted on June 1, 2021, and which provides patent protection through 2040 for the use of Recorlev in the treatment of certain patients with persistent or recurrent Cushing’s syndrome.
Financing
We have funded our operations to date primarily with proceeds from the sale of our preferred and common stock and debt financing. We have received gross proceeds of $253.0 million from public equity offerings of our common stock (including our June 2018 initial public offering ("IPO") and our February 2019, February 2020 and June 2020 offerings), $104.9 million from sales of our preferred
stock, $86.3 million from our June 2020 Convertible Notes offering and $63.5 million from the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (as amended, the "Amended Loan Agreement"), of which $20.0 million was repaid in June 2020.
In February 2020, we completed an equity offering and sold 10,299,769 shares of common stock, including 1,299,769 shares pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock. Net proceeds from the offering were $39.9 million. In June 2020, we completed a public notes offering and sold $86.3 million aggregate principal amount of 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes, including $11.3 million pursuant to the underwriters' option to purchase additional notes which was exercised in full in July 2020. Concurrent with the public notes offering, in June 2020 we completed an equity offering and sold 8,510,000 shares of common stock, including 1,110,000 shares pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock which also was exercised in full in July 2020. Gross proceeds from the equity offering were $23.1 million. Net proceeds from both June 2020 offerings were $102.8 million. During the second half of 2020, $39.1 million in principal amount of Convertible Notes were converted into 13,171,791 shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of Convertible Notes was $47.2 million. In October 2020, we entered into a fourth amendment to the Amended Loan Agreement, which provided for an additional $3.5 million term loan which was drawn in November 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance under the Amended Loan Agreement was $43.5 million. As part of the Acquisition, we acquired $38.5 million cash on October 5, 2021. On January 2, 2022, we entered into a securities purchase agreement in connection with a private placement (the “Private Placement”) with an affiliate of Armistice Capital, LLC (“Armistice”) for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $30.0 million. The transaction was completed on January 3, 2022.
In March 2022, Xeris Biopharma, Xeris Pharma and certain subsidiary guarantors of the Company entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty (the "Hayfin Loan Agreement") with the lenders from time to time parties thereto (the “New Lenders”) and Hayfin Services LLP, as administrative agent for the New Lenders, pursuant to which we and our subsidiaries party thereto granted a first priority security interest on substantially all of our assets, including intellectual property, subject to certain exceptions. The Hayfin Loan Agreement provided for the New Lenders to extend $100.0 million in term loans (the “Initial Loan”) to us on the closing date and up to an additional $50.0 million in delayed draw term loans during the one year period immediately following the closing date (the “Delayed Draw Term Loans” and, together with the Initial Loan, the "Loans") in no more than three drawings of no less than $10.0 million per drawing subject to us being in pro forma compliance with the financial covenants and other conditions set forth therein. In conjunction with the execution of the Hayfin Loan Agreement, the Amended Loan Agreement balance of $43.5 million was repaid in full and fees of $2.1 million in connection with the loan repayment were paid. In addition to utilizing the proceeds to repay the obligations under the Amended Loan Agreement in full, the proceeds will otherwise be used for general corporate purposes. After repayment, the Loans may not be re-borrowed.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported net losses of $122.7 million and $91.1 million, respectively. We have not been profitable since inception, and, as of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $460.1 million. In the near term, we expect to continue to incur significant expenses, operating losses and net losses as we:
< continue our marketing and selling efforts related to commercialization of Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev;
< continue our research and development efforts;
< seek regulatory approval for new product candidates and product enhancements; and
< continue to operate as a public company.
We may continue to seek public equity and debt financing to meet our capital requirements. There can be no assurance that such funding may be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all, or that we will be able to commercialize our product candidates, if approved. In addition, we may not be profitable even if we commercialize any of our product candidates.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and has impacted our business operations, employees, patients and communities as well as the global economy and financial markets. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and has led to the implementation of various responses, including government-imposed quarantines, stay-at-home orders, travel restrictions, mandated business closures and other public health safety measures.
To date, we and our suppliers and third-party manufacturing partners have been able to continue to supply our products and product candidates to our patients and clinical trials respectively, and currently do not anticipate any interruptions in supply. Our third-party contract manufacturing partners continue to operate at or near normal levels, with enhanced safety measures intended to prevent the spread of the virus. While we currently do not anticipate any interruptions in our manufacturing process, it is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic and response efforts may have an impact in the future on our third-party suppliers and contract manufacturing partners' ability to supply and/or manufacture our products and product candidates.
We believe that customer demand for our products has been adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic due to the disruption the pandemic has caused in patients' normal access to healthcare as well as our sales and marketing personnel's access to customers. Initially, we suspended in-person interactions by our sales and marketing personnel in healthcare settings. We were engaging with these customers remotely, via webinar programs and virtual meetings, as we sought to continue to support healthcare professionals and patient care. As parts of the country reopened, some of our sales and marketing personnel began to reengage with a limited number of
in-person interactions. However, with the emergence of variants, some areas have implemented or reintroduced restrictions and may again in the future, which may impact our sales and marketing personnel’s access to customers. Remote interactions generally are not as effective as in-person interactions. In addition, several conferences and other programs at which we intended to market our products have been postponed, canceled and/or transitioned to virtual meetings. We also have revised our Gvoke patient copay assistance program to offer a copay card with a buy-down to $0 for commercially eligible patients in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition to our sales and marketing personnel, we moved quickly to transition other employees to a remote work-from-home environment excluding essential services, such as personnel in our laboratory. We have since reopened our offices on a voluntary basis and have implemented safety measures designed to comply with applicable federal, state and local guidelines in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We may be required to take additional actions that may impact our operations as required by applicable laws or regulations or which we determine to be in the best interests of our employees.
We have incurred operating losses since inception, and we have an accumulated deficit of $460.1 million at December 31, 2021. Although we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, investments, and expected revenue from sales of Gvoke, Keveyis, and Recorlev will enable us to fund our operating and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months, we cannot predict the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future results of operations and financial condition due to a variety of factors, including the health of our employees, the ability of suppliers to continue to operate and deliver, the ability of Xeris and our customers to maintain operations, continued access to transportation resources, the changing needs and priorities of customers, any further government and/or public actions taken in response to the pandemic, the emergence of variants and acceptance of vaccines, and ultimately the length of the pandemic. As further detailed in "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below, we have relied on equity and debt financing for our funding to date and completed concurrent convertible debt and equity offerings in June/July 2020 under which we raised gross proceeds of $109.4 million and a registered direct offering in March 2021 under which we raised gross proceeds of $27.0 million. Given the impact of COVID-19 on the U.S. and global financial markets, we may be unable to access further equity or debt financing if and when needed.
We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including the impact on our operations and the operations of our customers, suppliers, vendors and business partners. We may take further precautionary and preemptive actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities. In addition, we have taken and continue to take steps to try and minimize the current environment’s impact on our business, including devising contingency plans and backup resources.
We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, our clinical trials, our research programs, healthcare systems or the global economy, and we cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including sales, expenses, reserves and allowances, manufacturing, clinical trials, research and development costs and employee-related costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat it, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. If we, or any of the third parties with whom we engage, were to experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially or negatively affected, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Components of our Results of Operations
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statement of operations of Xeris for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as well as factors that impact those items.
Product revenues, net
Product revenues, net, represent gross product sales less estimated allowances for patient copay assistance programs, prompt payment discounts, payor rebates, chargebacks, service fees, and product returns, all of which are recorded at the time of sale to the pharmaceutical wholesaler or other customer. We apply significant judgments and estimates in determining some of these allowances. If actual results differ from our estimates, we make adjustments to these allowances in the period in which the actual results or updates to estimates become known. See "Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates and Assumptions" for further information regarding the significant judgments and estimates involved in the determination of product revenues, net.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold includes primarily product costs, which include all costs directly related to the purchase of raw materials, charges from our contract manufacturing organizations, and manufacturing overhead costs, as well as shipping and distribution charges. Cost of goods sold also includes losses from excess, slow-moving or obsolete inventory and inventory purchase commitments, if any. Manufacturing costs for Gvoke and Recorlev incurred prior to approval and initial commercialization were expensed as research and development expenses.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as incurred. Research and development expenses that are paid in
advance of performance are capitalized until services are provided or goods are delivered. Research and development expenses include:
< the cost of acquiring and manufacturing preclinical and clinical trial materials and manufacturing costs related to commercial production and scale-up until a product is approved and initially available for commercial sale;
< expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations ("CROs") as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
< personnel-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
< laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities;
< outsourced product development services;
< expenses relating to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies; and
< allocated expenses for facility-related costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect to continue to incur significant research and development expenses as we advance our pipeline candidates and in particular plan and conduct clinical trials, prepare regulatory filings for our product candidates, and utilize internal resources to support these efforts. Our research and development costs have declined as compared to previous levels as a result of directing significant funding to our commercial activities, with the approval and launch of Gvoke and as we have concluded ongoing clinical programs and not yet initiated any new studies. Based on FDA interactions and expectations for a registrational program to support a mini-dose indication for Glucagon RTU in EIH, we submitted an IND in February 2022. We received FDA clearance in March 2022 and are actively planning to initiate a new phase 2 clinical program by the end of 2022 to further address the management of EIH in people with diabetes who use insulin.
Our research and development expenses may vary significantly over time due to uncertainties relating to the timing and results of our clinical trials, feedback received from interactions with the FDA and the timing of regulatory approvals.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of compensation and related personnel costs, marketing and selling expenses, professional fees and facility costs not otherwise included in cost of goods sold or research and development expenses. Our selling and marketing costs have increased significantly as we continue our marketing and selling efforts for Gvoke in the United States. We expect to continue to incur significant marketing and selling expenses in the near term related to the commercialization of Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev in the United States.
As a public reporting company, we have incurred greater expenses, including increased payroll, legal and compliance, accounting, insurance and investor relations costs. We expect some of these costs to continue to increase in conjunction with our anticipated growth and complexity as a public reporting company.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense related to our convertible debt and Amended Loan Agreement, interest income earned on deposits and investments, and the change in fair value of our warrants.
Income tax
We have incurred operating losses since inception and therefore do not have any taxable income. As of December 31, 2021, we had $475.7 million in federal net operating loss carryforwards, $309.7 million of various state net operating loss carryforwards, $5.4 million in federal research and orphan drug credits that begin to expire in 2025, and $2.5 million of state research and development credits that will begin to expire in 2022.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020 $ Change
Product revenues, net $ 49,280 $ 20,155 $ 29,125
Royalty, contract and other revenue 310 280 30
Total revenue 49,590 20,435 29,155
Cost and expenses:
Cost of goods sold, excluding amortization of intangible assets 13,318 9,328 3,990
Research and development 25,160 20,921 4,239
Selling, general and administrative 125,718 73,732 51,986
Amortization of intangible assets 550 - 550
Total cost and expenses 164,746 103,981 60,765
Loss from operations (115,156) (83,546) (31,610)
Other income (expense):
Interest and other income 313 2,965 (2,652)
Interest expense (7,180) (10,660) 3,480
Change in fair value of warrants (702) (9) (693)
Total other expense (7,569) (7,704) 135
Net loss before benefit from income taxes (122,725) (91,250) (31,475)
Benefit from income taxes - 110 (110)
Net loss $ (122,725) $ (91,140) $ (31,585)
Product revenues, net
Product revenues, net were $49.3 million and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $29.1 million increase is primarily due to an increase in demand and the acquisition of a new product, Keveyis.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold were $13.3 million and $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $4.0 million was primarily made up of product cost on increased unit sales of $6.1 million, primarily offset by lower excess and obsolete expenses.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher pharmaceutical process development and clinical service costs across multiple programs of $4.3 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative costs increased $52.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately $24.4 million of the increase related to the acquisition of Strongbridge, primarily including restructuring and related employee costs of $11.0 million, transaction costs of $8.4 million and insurance costs of $3.5 million. In addition, we incurred $16.8 million of increased commercial-related costs, including an increase to our sales force of $9.4 million and
increased commercial support for Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev of $7.4 million. The remaining change due to an increase in general expenses.
Other income (expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest and other income decreased $2.7 million in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower average balances in cash equivalents and investments and lower interest rates. Additionally, in 2020 other income included a legal settlement of $1.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense decreased $3.5 million in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2020. The higher interest expense in 2020 was primarily due to a loss on conversion of convertible debt of $2.6 million and a loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.7 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary uses of cash are to fund costs related to the manufacturing, marketing and selling of products, the research and development of our product candidates, general and administrative expenses and working capital requirements. Historically, we have funded our operations primarily through private placements of convertible preferred stock, public equity offerings of common stock, and issuance of debt. In June 2018, we completed our IPO of 6,555,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $15.00 per share for aggregate net proceeds of $88.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other equity offering expenses. In February 2019, we completed an equity offering and sold an aggregate of 5,996,775 shares of common stock at a price of $10.00 per share. Net proceeds from this equity offering were $55.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other equity offering expenses. In September 2019, we entered into the Amended Loan Agreement that provided for term loans of up to an aggregate of $85.0 million, of which $60.0 million was drawn in September 2019 and of which $20.0 million was repaid in June 2020. Additional tranches of $15.0 million (the "Term B Loan") and $10.0 million (the “Term C Loan”) were contingent on achievement of certain revenue targets which were not achieved. In August 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which covers the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate of $250.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units. We simultaneously entered into a Sales Agreement with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent, to provide for the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to $50.0 million of our common stock from time to time in "at-the-market" offerings under the shelf. As of October 5, 2021, the acquisition closing date, we have sold an aggregate of 204,427 shares of common stock in at-the-market offerings under the shelf for gross proceeds of $1.8 million. The shelf ceased to be accessible upon the consummation of the Transactions. In January 2022, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which covers the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate of $250.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units.
In February 2020, we completed an equity offering and sold 10,299,769 shares of common stock. Net proceeds from this equity offering were $39.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other equity offering expenses. In June 2020, we completed a public notes offering and sold $86.3 million aggregate principal amount of 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes, including $11.3 million pursuant to the underwriters' option to purchase additional notes which was fully exercised in July 2020. Concurrently with the public notes offering, in June 2020, we completed an equity offering and sold 8,510,000 shares of common stock, including 1,110,000 shares pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock which was also fully exercised in July 2020. Net proceeds from both June 2020 offerings (including the net proceeds from the exercise of the underwriters' over-allotment options in July 2020) were $102.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other offering expenses. During the second half of 2020, $39.1 million in principal amount of Convertible Notes were converted into 13,171,791 shares of our common stock. In March 2021, we completed a registered direct offering of 6,553,398 shares of our common stock, the net proceeds of which were $26.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of Convertible Notes was $47.2 million. In October 2020, we entered into a fourth amendment to the Amended Loan Agreement which provided for an additional $3.5 million term loan which was drawn in November 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance under the Amended Loan Agreement was $43.5 million. On May 3, 2021, we entered into a fifth amendment to the Amended Loan Agreement which provides that if we achieve a certain revenue milestone prior to November 30, 2021, then the period for interest-only payments is extended six months to July 2022 and the term loan will be payable in 24 equal monthly installments. If we achieve another revenue milestone prior to May 31, 2022, the period for interest-only payments is further extended three months to October 2022 and the term loan will be payable in 21 equal monthly installments. If we achieve a third revenue milestone by August 31, 2022, the period for interest-only payments is further extended three months, to January 2023 and the term loan will be payable in 18 equal monthly installments. We achieved all revenue milestones and therefore classified the amounts due under the Amended Loan Agreement as non-current on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. On January 2, 2022, we entered into a securities purchase agreement in connection with the Private Placement with Armistice for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $30.0 million and completed the transaction on January 3, 2022.
In March 2022, Xeris Biopharma, Xeris Pharma and certain subsidiary guarantors of the Company entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty (the "Hayfin Loan Agreement") with the lenders from time to time parties thereto (the “New Lenders”) and Hayfin Services LLP, as administrative agent for the New Lenders, pursuant to which we and our subsidiaries party thereto granted a first priority security interest on substantially all of our assets, including intellectual property, subject to certain exceptions. The Hayfin Loan Agreement provided for the New Lenders to extend $100.0 million in term loans (the “Initial Loan”) to us on the closing date and up to an additional $50.0 million in delayed draw term loans during the one year period immediately following the closing date (the “Delayed Draw Term Loans” and, together with the Initial Loan, the "Loans") in no more than three drawings of no less than
$10.0 million per drawing subject to us being in pro forma compliance with the financial covenants and other conditions set forth therein. In conjunction with the execution of the Hayfin Loan Agreement, the Amended Loan Agreement balance of $43.5 million was repaid in full and fees of $2.1 million in connection with the loan repayment were paid. In addition to utilizing the proceeds to repay the obligations under the Amended Loan Agreement in full, the proceeds will otherwise be used for general corporate purposes. After repayment, the Loans may not be re-borrowed.
Capital Resources and Funding Requirements
We have incurred operating losses since inception, and we have an accumulated deficit of $460.1 million at December 31, 2021. Based on our current operating plans and existing working capital at December 31, 2021, we believe that our cash resources are sufficient to sustain operations and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. We expect to incur substantial additional expenditures in the near term to support the marketing and selling of Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev as well as and our ongoing research and development activities. We expect to continue to incur net losses for at least the next 12 months. Our ability to fund marketing and selling of Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev, as well as our product development and clinical operations, including completion of future clinical trials, will depend on the amount and timing of cash received from product revenue and potential future financings. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
< the successful integration of the Acquisition and achievement of expected revenue and synergies
< the costs of commercialization activities, including product marketing, sales and distribution;
< our degree of success in commercializing Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev;
< the costs, timing and outcomes of clinical trials and regulatory reviews associated with our product candidates;
< the effect on our product development activities of actions taken by the FDA or other regulatory authorities;
< the number and types of future products we develop and commercialize;
< the emergence of competing technologies and products and other adverse market developments; and
< the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims.
We may not be able to successfully integrate and combine the businesses of Xeris and Strongbridge following the completion of the Transactions and we may not realize the anticipated benefits from the Transactions. Also, as we continue the marketing and selling of Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev, we may not generate a sufficient amount of product revenues to fund our cash requirements. Accordingly, we may need to obtain additional financing in the future which may include public or private debt and/or equity financings. There can be no assurance that such funding may be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all, or that we will be able to successfully market and sell Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev. Market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors could also adversely impact our ability to access capital as and when needed. The issuance of equity securities may result in dilution to stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt, which may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our common stockholders, the terms of the debt could impose significant restrictions on our operations. The failure to raise funds as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and ability to pursue our business strategies. If additional funding is not secured when required, we may need to delay or curtail our operations until such funding is received, which would have a material adverse impact on our business prospects and results of operations.
Cash Flows
Years Ended December 31,
(in thousands)
2021 2020
Net cash used in operating activities $ (95,535) $ (80,558)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities 97,964 (27,405)
Net cash provided by financing activities 27,247 126,064
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $95.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $80.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by a change in working capital and an increase in net losses due to higher personnel related costs from increased headcount, one-time transaction cost of Strongbridge acquisition and related restructuring costs. For a discussion regarding product revenues, net and increases in spending, refer to "Results of Operations" included in this Item 2, "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $98.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was
primarily due to a greater number of investments maturing or being sold and invested in cash equivalents to fund operations, as well as $38.5 million of cash acquired from the acquisition of Strongbridge.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $27.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $126.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the net proceeds of $26.9 million from the March 2021 registered direct offering of our common stock, as compared to the net proceeds of $81.2 million from the convertible debt offering and $3.5 million from the drawdown on the senior loan, $61.5 million from equity offerings of our common stock, partially offset by the $20.0 million pay down of principal on the senior loan.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including, among others, those related to revenue recognition and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in "Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies".
Revenue recognition
We apply the guidance in ASC 606, Revenue Recognition, to all contracts with customers within the scope of the standard.
We sell product primarily to wholesalers or a specialty pharmacy who subsequently resell to retail pharmacies or patients. We enter into arrangements with payors, group purchasing organizations, and healthcare providers that provide for government-mandated or privately-negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts related to our products. We currently sell Gvoke, Keveyis and Recorlev in the United States only and Ogulo (European brand name of Gvoke) in the United Kingdom.
Revenue is recognized when our customer (e.g., a wholesaler or specialty pharmacy) obtains control of promised goods or services, which is when our obligations under the terms of the contract with the customer are satisfied, based on the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
Revenues are recorded at the net product sales price, which includes estimated allowances for patient copay assistance programs, prompt payment discounts, payor rebates, chargebacks, service fees, and product returns, all of which are recorded at the time of sale to the pharmaceutical wholesaler or other customer. The Company applies significant judgments and estimates in determining some of these allowances. If actual results differ from its estimates, adjustments are made to these allowances in the period in which the actual results or updates to estimates become known.
Patient Copay Assistance Program
We offer savings programs to commercially insured patients under which the cost of a prescription to a patient is discounted. We reimburse pharmacies for this discount through a third-party vendor. We record an accrual to reduce gross sales for the estimated copay on units sold to wholesalers and other customers. The estimate is based on estimated percentages of products that will be prescribed to qualified patients, expected patient utilization of the discount program, average assistance paid based on reporting from the third-party vendor as well as industry data and estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel. Accrued copay fees are recorded as a reduction of product revenues and included in accrued trade discounts and rebates on the consolidated balance sheets.
Commercial Rebates
We contract with certain private payor organizations, primarily insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers, to provide rebates with respect to utilization of the products and contracted formulary status. We accrue estimated rebates based on actual average rebate amounts and estimated percent of product that will be prescribed to qualified patients and records the rebate as a reduction of product revenues. Accrued commercial rebates are included in accrued trade discounts and rebates on the consolidated balance sheets.
Government Rebates
We participate in certain federal and state government rebate programs such as the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, TRICARE Retail Refunds Program, and Medicare Part D Program. We accrue estimated rebates and discounts based on actual average rebate amounts and estimated percent of product that will be prescribed to qualified patients and records the rebates as a reduction of product revenues. Accrued government rebates are included in accrued trade discounts and rebates on the consolidated balance sheets.
Chargebacks
We arrange with certain commercial and government entities allowing them to buy products directly from wholesalers at specific prices. These entities purchase products through wholesalers at the discounted price, and the wholesalers charge the difference between their list price and the discounted price back to us. We accrue estimated chargebacks based on estimated percentages of products sold to these entities, contract prices, and estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel and records the chargebacks as a reduction of product revenues. Accrued chargebacks are recorded as an allowance against trade receivables on the consolidated balance sheets.
Product Returns
For some products, our customers generally have the right to return product during the period beginning six months prior to the product expiration date and up to one year after the product expiration date. We do not have extensive history of product returns and uses various factors to estimate the provision for returns, including the launch date of products, third-party industry data for comparable products in the market and estimated channel inventory data. In a reporting period, we may decide to constrain revenue for product returns based on information from various sources, including channel inventory levels, inventory dating, prescription data, the expiration dates of product currently being shipped, price changes of competitive products and introductions of generic products. While we believe that our returns reserve is sufficient to avoid a significant reversal of revenue in future periods, if it were to increase or decrease the rate by 1%, it would have a $0.6 million impact on revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021. We record estimated product returns in accrued returns reserve on the consolidated balance sheets and as a reduction of product revenues.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Acquisition related costs are expensed as incurred. Upon acquisition, the accounts and results of operations are consolidated as of and subsequent to the acquisition date.
When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. We utilize commonly accepted valuation techniques, such as the income approach in establishing the fair value of intangible assets.
Contingent considerations
The fair value of the CVRs was calculated by using a discounted cash flow method for the Keveyis patent milestone and an option pricing method for the Recorlev and Keveyis sales milestones. In the case of Keveyis milestones, we applied a scenario-based method and weighted them based on the possible achievement of each milestone. This fair value measurement is based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represents a Level 3 measurement as defined in ASC 820. This value is then remeasured for future expected payout as well as the increase in fair value due to the time value of money. These gains or losses, if any, are included as a component of operating cash flows.
Warrants
Some of our warrants are classified as liabilities as they represent a financial instrument for a share of common stock. The warrants are revalued each reporting period with the change in fair value recorded in the accompanying statements of operations until the warrants are exercised, expire, or otherwise settled. Upon completion of the Acquisition, each outstanding and unexercised Strongbridge private placement warrant was assumed by the Company such that the applicable holders will have the right to subscribe for the Company's Shares, in accordance with certain terms of the Strongbridge private placement warrants. Pursuant to the terms of the warrant agreement, we could be required to settle the warrants in cash and, as a result, the warrants are required to be measured at fair value and reported as a liability in the consolidated balance sheet. We recorded the fair value of the warrants upon issuance using the Black-Scholes Model and are required to revalue the warrants at each reporting date with any changes in fair value recorded on the statement of operations.
Stock-based compensation expense
The following table summarizes the reporting of total stock-based compensation expense resulting from employee stock options, restricted stock units, and employee stock purchases under the employee stock purchase plan (in thousands):
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
Cost of goods sold $ 106 $ 151
Research and development 1,696 1,229
Selling, general and administrative 9,579 6,893
Total stock-based compensation expense $ 11,381 $ 8,273
We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation ("ASC 718"). ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statements of operations based on their grant date fair values. We estimate the grant date fair value of each option award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We recognize stock-based compensation expense, equal to the grant date fair value of stock options, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures as they are incurred.
Estimating the fair value of options requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the estimated fair value of our common stock, the expected life of the option, stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates and involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management’s judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model are estimated as follows:
∎ Expected Term. We do not believe we are able to rely on our historical exercise and post-vesting termination activity to provide accurate data for estimating the expected term for use in determining the fair value-based measurement of our options. Therefore, we have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options, which is the average of the weighted-average vesting period and contractual term of the option.
∎ Expected Volatility. As we have limited trading history for our common stock, the expected stock price volatility assumption is determined based on the historical volatilities of a peer group of publicly traded companies for the period of the term prior to our IPO in June 2018 as well as the historical volatility of our own common stock since we began trading subsequent to our IPO. In evaluating similarity, we consider factors such as stage of development, risk profile, enterprise value and position within the industry. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own common stock share price becomes available.
∎ Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of the grant for the zero-coupon U.S. Treasury note with a term similar to the expected term of the option.
∎ Expected Dividends. The expected dividend yield is 0% because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend on our common stock.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Refer to "Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies", for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our financial statements.
JOBS ACT ACCOUNTING ELECTION
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 ("JOBS Act") was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of such extended transition period.