ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements.
For the discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 19, 2021.
Overview
We are a late-stage clinical biopharmaceutical company focused on the research, development and commercialization of novel therapeutics for the treatment of rare diseases, with an initial focus on people with immune system dysfunction. Our lead product candidate, mavorixafor, is a first-in-class, small molecule inhibitor of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and is being developed as a once-daily oral therapy. Due to mavorixafor’s demonstrated ability to antagonize CXCR4 and improve the healthy maturation and trafficking of white blood cells, we believe that mavorixafor has the potential to provide therapeutic benefit across a wide variety of diseases, including primary immunodeficiencies (“PIDs”) and certain types of cancer.
We are currently studying the safety and efficacy of mavorixafor in a global Phase 3 clinical trial of mavorixafor for the treatment of patients with Warts, Hypogammaglobulinemia, Infections, and Myelokathexis (“WHIM”) syndrome, a rare, inherited PID, caused by genetic mutations in the CXCR4 receptor gene. We are also conducting a Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in people with a range of chronic neutropenia disorders, both with and without CXCR4 mutations, and a Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in combination with the Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor (“BTKi”) ibrutinib in people with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia (“Waldenström’s”), a rare B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder, and confirmed mutations to both the CXCR4 and MYD88 genes.
We completed enrollment our global Phase 3 clinical trial of mavorixafor, which we refer to as the 4WHIM trial, in the third quarter of 2021, with 31 patients enrolled and currently expect to report top-line data from the trial in the fourth quarter of 2022.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) has granted certain special designations to mavorixafor, including Breakthrough Therapy Designation for the treatment of adults with WHIM syndrome, Fast Track Designation for adults with WHIM syndrome, and Rare Pediatric Designation for the treatment of people aged 12 to 18 with WHIM syndrome, which could result in accelerated review and approval by the agency. We have begun building our commercial team in anticipation of a possible New Drug Application (“NDA”) submission to the FDA in the second half of 2023, with the goal of obtaining approval for mavorixafor for the treatment of people in the United States, aged 12 and older with WHIM syndrome, should the final Phase 3 data support the filing of an NDA.
Following announcements of positive preliminary data from both of the ongoing Phase 1b clinical trials of mavorixafor during 2021, we are continuing patient enrollment in the trials. Additional data are expected from the Phase 1b clinical trial in chronic neutropenia by the third quarter of 2022 and from the Phase 1b clinical trial in Waldenström’s in the second half of 2022.
In addition to mavorixafor, we are advancing earlier-stage product candidates to further expand our pipeline. We have advanced a lead optimization program: X4P-003, a second-generation CXCR4 antagonist is designed to have an enhanced properties relative to mavorixafor, potentially enabling broader opportunities in CXCR4 disorders and primary immunodeficiencies. A second program is in lead optimization: X4P-002, a CXCR4 antagonist designed to cross the blood-brain barrier and provide appropriate therapeutic exposures to potentially treat brain cancers in combination therapy. We are also continuing to leverage our insights into CXCR4 biology and our research capabilities to identify other targets and develop additional product candidates. We anticipate that we will file an Investigational New Drug application with the FDA to begin clinical development of X4P-002 in the second half of 2022.
To date, we have not generated revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate significant revenue from the sale of our products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Our Pipeline
X4 Pharmaceuticals, Data on File 1. Phase 2 open label trial extension (OLE) trial for WHIM ongoing 2. Company market research. Qessential market research, 2019 and IPM. ai artificial intelligence study, 2020 3. Estimate using Andersen et al. J Intern Med. 2016 Jun:279(6):566-75 4. WM Epidemiology Analysis Nemetz Group.
COVID-19 Business Update
In light of the continued COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented business continuity measures designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees, our business, including our clinical trials, supply chains and third-party providers. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic as we evolve our business continuity plans and response strategy. While we are currently operating under a “hybrid” model in which in-person attendance in the office is optional, we expect all employees who have been vaccinated back to the office in early 2022. While we are experiencing limited financial impacts at this time, given overall disruptions to the global economy, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and continued uncertainty related to its abatement or the possible discovery of new variants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected.
Clinical Development
With respect to clinical development, we continue to implement risk-based approaches in accordance with FDA and European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) COVID-19 guidance, which includes virtual and remote patient visits and monitoring where possible, while prioritizing patient safety, maintaining trial continuity and preserving data integrity. We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, a disruption or delay in our ability to initiate trial sites and/or enroll and assess patients in several of our clinical programs as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, notwithstanding vaccination efforts. While not currently impacted, there could be an impact on our ability to supply study drug, report trial results, or interact with regulators, ethics committees or other important agencies due to limitations in regulatory authority employee resources or otherwise. In addition, we rely on contract research organizations (“CROs”) or other third parties to assist us with clinical trials, and we cannot guarantee that they will continue to perform their contractual duties in a timely and satisfactory manner as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists, we could experience further disruptions to our clinical development timelines, which would adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects.
Supply Chain
We continue to work closely with our third-party manufacturers, distributors and other partners to manage our supply chain activities and mitigate potential disruptions to our clinical supply as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We have business continuity plans in place and have manufacturing plans that will meet our global supply demands going forward. To best support our patients, we continue to work with our vendors to provide the option for direct-to-patient drug shipments from clinical sites. If the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic impacts essential distribution systems we could experience disruptions to our supply chain and operations, which could adversely impact our ability to carry out our clinical trials.
Regulatory Activities
We expect that we could experience delays in the timing of review and/or our interactions with the FDA or the European Commission (“EC”) due to, for example, inability to conduct planned physical inspections related to regulatory approval, or the diversion of efforts of the FDA or EC and attention to approval of other therapeutics or other activities related to COVID-19, which could delay approval decisions with respect to the preparation and submission to the FDA of a new drug application (“NDA”), or the preparation and submission to the EC of a Marketing Authorization Application (“MAA”), and otherwise delay or limit our ability to make planned regulatory submissions or obtain new product approvals.
Financial Impact
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and has already resulted in a significant disruption of global financial markets. If the disruption continues or future variants of COVID-19 emerge globally we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the periods indicated:
License Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $3.0 million in revenue related to our license agreement with Abbisko Therapeutics Co., Ltd., or Abbisko, due to the achievement of a financial milestone in March 2020. There was no similar revenue recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021. Pursuant to our license agreement with Abbisko, we are eligible to receive potential development and regulatory milestone payments, which vary based on the number of indications developed, and potential commercial milestone payments based on annual net sales of mavorixafor-based licensed products. The transaction price related to these development and regulatory milestones has been allocated to the delivery to Abbisko of the license to develop and commercialize mavorixafor, was satisfied at the inception of the arrangement in July 2019 and has been fully constrained. With respect to the remaining development and regulatory milestones, we will re-evaluate the constraint on the transaction price associated with these milestones in each reporting period and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances
occur.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates, including employee salaries and related expenses, expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contract research organizations (“CROs”); the cost of manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”); facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct or allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance; costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and payments made under third-party licensing agreements. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
Research and development expenses were $50.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“2021”), as compared to $41.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (“2020”), reflecting an increase of $8.7 million. The increase in research and development expenses in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher clinical trial expenses and third-party manufacturing costs related to mavorixafor to support our three ongoing clinical trials and increased consulting and professional services expenses related to these clinical trials. Research and development expenses also increased in 2021 due to an increase in unallocated expenses, primarily due to an increase in head count within our manufacturing, regulatory and clinical operations functions, resulting in higher compensation expenses, including stock-based compensation. In addition, unallocated research and development expense increased due to additional facility costs associated with our leased facilities, which are allocated to research and development departments based on respective head-count.
We expect that our research and development expenses, particularly for our mavorixafor programs, will increase over the next several years as we continue to conduct our WHIM4 trial and our Phase 1b clinical trials of mavorixafor in CN and Waldenström’s. Research and development expenses related to our X4P-002 and X4P-003 programs were not significant in 2021 relative to our overall research and development expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs, as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting, and audit services.
General and administrative expenses were $24.7 million in 2021, as compared to $21.0 million in 2020, reflecting an increase of $3.7 million. The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation costs, higher recruiting costs and an increase in facility costs. Our head-count in general and administrative functions was relatively consistent with the prior period. We expect general and administrative expenses will grow in the future as we continue to build out our selling, general and administrative functions.
Goodwill Impairment
Goodwill is tested quantitatively for impairment at the reporting unit level annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. During the fourth quarter of 2021, our market capitalization, measured as the price of our common stock multiplied by shares of common stock outstanding, dropped below the value of our net assets, including goodwill. As we have one reporting unit, we determine its fair value based on the market approach, taking into consideration the market value of the company as a whole and any control premium that might be realized upon the sale of the reporting unit. As a result of the sustained decline in the market price of our common stock, the fair value of our single reporting unit, measured based on our market capitalization as of December 31, 2021, was lower than its carrying value and we concluded that goodwill was impaired. Accordingly, we recorded an impairment charge of $9.8 million to reduce the carrying amount of goodwill to $17.4 million as of December 31, 2021. Should the market value of our common stock continue to decline, additional impairment charges may be recorded in future periods.
Other Expense, Net
The increase in other expense, net, of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher interest expense due to a higher average outstanding borrowings associated with our loan facility with Hercules Capital Inc. (“Hercules”) and a decline in interest income earned on our money market investments.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an immaterial income tax provision related to our Austrian subsidiary. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax provision of $0.1 million related to local withholdings associated with a milestone payment received from a customer in a foreign jurisdiction. We do not expect to record a significant income tax benefit or expense for several years as we have significant net operating loss carryforwards that are fully reserved until such time as we begin to generate meaningful taxable income in our U.S. jurisdiction. We expect this will occur when and if we are able to commercialize our drug products in the future.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of common stock, warrants and prefunded
warrants for the purchase of our preferred stock and our common stock, sales of preferred stock, proceeds from the issuance of
convertible debt and borrowings under loan and security agreements. We have entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (“ATM Sales Agreement”), with B. Riley Securities, Inc., Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., and Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated (collectively the “Sales Agents”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, at our sole discretion through one or more of the Sales Agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. To date, we have sold approximately $15.0 million of our common stock, prior to issuance costs, under the ATM Sales Agreement.
In October 2020, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement, the (“Aspire Agreement”) with Aspire Capital LLC (“Aspire Capital”), pursuant to which Aspire Capital committed to purchase, at our request from time to time over a 36-month period, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million, subject to certain limitations. In January 2022, we terminated the Aspire Agreement and entered into an agreement, (the“LPC Agreement”) on similar terms with Lincoln Park Capital Fund LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park shares of our
common stock, having an aggregate value of up to $50.0 million, subject to certain limitations and conditions , at our request during a 36-month period. The shares of common stock that we may sell under the LPC Agreement are capped at 5.6 million, which amount may be adjusted under certain conditions as defined in the LPC Agreement. In January 2022, we raised $3.0 million from the sale of shares of our common stock through the LPC Agreement.
In March 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional and accredited investors (“Investors”) pursuant to which we issued and sold shares of common stock and, in lieu of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $53.0 million, before offering expenses. We subsequently registered for resale the common stock and the issuance of the shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants held by the Investors. In November 2021, we raised approximately $10.0 million through the sale of pre-funded warrants to an investor. We subsequently registered for resale the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the pre-funded warrants held by this investor. All of our outstanding prefunded warrants are currently exercisable for a nominal amount subject to a cap on the applicable investor’s beneficial ownership interest in our common stock of 9.99%.
To date we have borrowed $32.5 million through our loan facility with Hercules. Under this facility we may borrow an additional $17.5 million in term loans through December 2022 at the lender’s sole discretion. Principal payments under the loan facility with Hercules commence in February 2023, and the Hercules agreement matures in July 2024. The Hercules loan agreement contains a minimum cash covenant as described below.
Going Concern
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products for several years, if at all. As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $81.8 million and our restricted cash balance was $1.3 million. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase as we focus on completing the necessary development, obtaining regulatory approval and preparing for potential commercialization of our product candidates. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the fourth quarter of 2022. We have a covenant under our loan facility with Hercules that requires that we maintain a minimum level of cash, as defined, beginning on September 1, 2022. If we are in violation of this covenant, Hercules could require the repayment of all outstanding debt.
These conditions and events raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the one-year period following the issuance of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. To finance our operations, we will need to raise additional capital, which cannot be assured. Unless and until we reach profitability in the future, we will require additional capital to fund our operations, which could be raised through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations and strategic alliances. If we are unable to obtain funding, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion or commercialization efforts, which would adversely affect our business prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities: During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $70.9 million, primarily resulting from our net losses of $88.7 million, adjusted for noncash expenses of $19.3 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.5 million. Noncash expenses primarily includes a goodwill impairment of $9.8 million and stock-based compensation expense of $6.2 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in prepaid expenses due to the timing of payments related to our CROs and a reduction in lease liabilities due to monthly rent payments made during 2021; partially offset by an increase in accounts payable due to an increase in our operating expenses. Cash used in operating activities was higher for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year primarily due to higher net losses in the current year.
Investing Activities: During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities of $0.6 million, primarily related to furniture and laboratory equipment purchases related to leased facility in Vienna, Austria. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $1.4 million, primarily related to furniture and laboratory equipment purchases related to our Boston lease, and our research and development center in Vienna, Austria.
Financing Activities: During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $74.2 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from two private placements of our equity securities, which included prefunded warrants, and the sale of shares of our common stock through our ATM Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $12.4 million, consisting primarily of proceeds from our loan facility with Hercules, as amended.
Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc.
In October 2018, we entered into a loan facility with Hercules, which was subsequently amended in December 2018, June 2019, March 2020, December 2020, and February 2022 (as amended, the “Hercules Loan Agreement”). As of December 31, 2021, we have borrowed an aggregate of $32.5 million under the Hercules Loan Agreement, which provides for aggregate maximum borrowings of $50.0 million, including $32.5 million of current borrowings, and additional term loans available through December 31, 2022, of up to $17.5 million in the discretion of Hercules’ investment committee.
Borrowings under the Hercules Loan Agreement bear interest at a variable rate equal to the greater of (i) 8.75% or (ii) 8.75% plus The Wall Street Journal prime rate minus 6.0%. In an event of default and until such event is no longer continuing, the interest rate applicable to borrowings under the agreement would be increased by 4.0%. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate applicable to borrowings was 8.75% and we were not in default on the Hercules Loan Agreement.
Borrowings are repayable in monthly interest-only payments through January 1, 2023, and in equal monthly payments of principal and accrued interest from February 1, 2023 until the maturity date of the loan, which is July 1, 2024. At our option, we may prepay all, but not less than all, of the outstanding borrowings, subject to a prepayment premium of up to 1.0% of the principal amount outstanding as of the date of repayment, in each case depending on when such repayment is made. In addition, aggregate end-of-term charges of $2.9 million are payable in the amounts of $0.8 million, which was paid on January 1, 2022, and $1.3 million and $0.8 million on July 1, 2023 and July 1, 2024, respectively, which dates are accelerated upon the prepayment of the Hercules Loan Agreement at our election or upon an event of default.
Borrowings under the Hercules Loan Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our personal property and other assets except for our intellectual property (but including rights to payment and proceeds from the sale, licensing or disposition of the intellectual property). Our obligations under the agreement are subject to acceleration upon occurrence of specified events of default, including payment default, insolvency and a material adverse change in our business, operations or financial or other conditions.
Under the Hercules Loan Agreement, we have agreed to affirmative and negative covenants. The covenants also include a requirement that, from and after a defined initial test date of September 1, 2022 that we maintain cash in an aggregate amount equal to the greater of $30.0 million or six multiplied by a metric based on prior months’ cash expenditures; provided, however, that from and after our achievement of certain financing milestones through June 30, 2022, we must maintain cash in an account or accounts in which Hercules has a first priority security interest in an aggregate amount of $30.0 million. Following the achievement of certain performance milestones, the required cash shall be reduced to the greater of $20.0 million, or, if we had not met the financing milestones noted above, three multiplied by the current cash expenditures metric; and provided further, that subject to the achievement of additional operational milestones, this covenant will be extinguished. A breach of any of the covenants under the Hercules Loan Agreement could result in a default under the loan. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under the loan facility with Hercules, the lender could elect to declare all amounts outstanding, if any, to be immediately due and payable and terminate all commitments to extend further credit. If there are any amounts outstanding that we are unable to repay, the lenders could proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure such indebtedness.
Lease Obligations
We have long-term lease obligations for office and laboratory space. Non-cancellable lease obligations are $1.6 million in 2022, $1.6 million in 2023, $1.4 million in 2024, and $3.1 million thereafter.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will allow us to fund operations into the fourth quarter of 2022. As noted above, in order to satisfy a minimum cash covenant in our Hercules Loan Agreement, we will be required to raise additional capital, which may be through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations and strategic alliances. During 2022 and beyond, assuming no changes to our current operational expectations, we expect our expenses to continue to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the current and anticipated clinical trials of our product candidates in development. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our funding requirements. Our short term and long term funding requirements will depend on and could increase significantly as a result of many factors, including:
•the scope, number, initiation, progress, timing, costs, design, duration, any potential delays, and results of clinical trials and nonclinical studies for our current or future product candidates, particularly our Phase 3 pivotal clinical trial of mavorixafor for the treatment of patients with WHIM syndrome, our Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in CN and our Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in Waldenström’s;
•the continued global impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our ongoing clinical trials, our supply chain and the financial markets in general;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory reviews, approvals or other actions to meet regulatory requirements established by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities, including the potential for the FDA or comparable foreign regulatory authorities to require that we perform more studies for our product candidates than those that we currently expect;
•our ability to obtain marketing approval for our product candidates;
•the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights covering our product candidates, including any such patent claims and intellectual property rights that we have licensed from Genzyme pursuant to the terms of our license agreement with Genzyme;
•our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us or our product candidates;
•the cost and timing of completion of commercial-scale outsourced manufacturing activities with respect to our product candidates;
•our ability to establish and maintain licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements on favorable terms and whether and to what extent we retain development or commercialization responsibilities under any new licensing, collaboration or similar arrangement;
•the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own;
•the success of any other business, product or technology that we acquire or in which we invest;
•the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies;
•our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
•the costs to continue to operate as a public company, including the need to implement additional financial and reporting systems and other internal systems and infrastructure for our business;
•market acceptance of our product candidates, to the extent any are approved for commercial sale; and
•the effect of competing technological and market developments.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties. We have effective universal shelf registration statements on Form S-3 registering the sale of our common stock, warrants to purchase our common stock and other securities on terms that we may determine; due to our current public float and applicable SEC rules and regulations, our ability to raise capital pursuant to these shelf registration statements may be limited. We have an ATM Sales Agreement with the Sales Agents, pursuant to which we have offered to sell and continue to offer to sell, at our sole discretion through one or more of the Sales Agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million, of which we have sold $15.0 million to date. We have entered into a common stock purchase agreement with Lincoln Park Capital, pursuant to which Lincoln Park Capital has committed to purchase, at our request from time to time over a 36-month period, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million, of which $3.0 million have been sold to date, subject to certain limitations.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through future equity offerings or debt financings, the ownership interest of our stockholders may be materially diluted, and the terms of such securities could include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specified actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or eliminate our product development efforts or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to them at that time. For our significant vendors, we confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with preclinical development activities;
•CROs and investigative sites in connection with preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials.
We base the expense recorded related to external research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and CROs that supply, conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation. We measure all stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and consultants based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The stock-based awards that we have issued to date include a service-based vesting condition and the expense for these awards is recognized using the straight-line method. We have also issued stock-based awards with performance-based vesting conditions that vest in part upon our achievement of operational milestones and over time thereafter for the subsequent two years as the employee continues to provide services. We assess the probability of achievement of these operational milestones and recognize stock-based compensation for these awards using the accelerated attribution model based on the fair value of the awards as of the date of grant and our best estimate of the date each operational milestone will be achieved. We update our estimates related to the probability and timing of achievement of the operational milestones each period until the award either vests or is forfeited.
The fair value of stock option grants is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of the stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and an expected dividend yield. Prior to the closing of the Merger and the listing of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market, our board of directors historically determined, as of the date of each option grant and with input from our management, the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist the estimated fair value of our common stock on the date of grant based on a number of objectives and subjective factors. Since the Merger and the listing of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market, we have relied on the market price of our common stock to determine the fair value on the date of grant. As our common stock does not have a sufficient history of trading, we estimate our volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies. We estimate the expected term of our stock awards by utilizing the “simplified” method, which calculates the expected term based on weighted average midpoint of the award’s vesting and expiration dates. We determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. We estimate that no dividends will be paid as we do not expect to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent the best estimates of our management, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, the resulting share-based compensation expense could be materially different.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenues are generated primarily through research, development and commercialization agreements. The terms of such agreements may contain multiple promised goods and services, which may include (i) licenses, or options to obtain licenses, to our intellectual property, and (ii) in certain cases, payment in connection with the manufacturing and delivery of clinical supply materials. Payments to us under these arrangements typically include one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; option exercise fees; milestone payments; payments for clinical product supply, and royalties on future product sales. To date, our license agreement with Abbisko represents our only revenue-generating agreement.
We analyze our arrangements to assess whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities. For collaboration arrangements that are deemed to be within the scope of ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements, or ASC 808, we allocate the contract consideration between such joint operating activities and elements that are reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and, therefore, within the scope of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Our policy is to recognize amounts allocated to joint operating activities as a reduction in research and development expense.
Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract and determine whether these are distinct; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy our performance obligation(s).
We must make significant judgments in our revenue recognition process, including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each performance obligation. In addition, arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered discretionary purchase options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations.
Goodwill. Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method. The total purchase price of an acquisition is allocated to the underlying identifiable net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, probabilities of success, discount rates, and asset lives, among other items. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is tested quantitatively for impairment at the reporting unit level annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Examples of such events or circumstances include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in legal or business climate, an adverse regulatory action or unanticipated competition.
We have determined that we operate in a single operating segment and have a single reporting unit. To perform its quantitative test, we compare the fair value of our single reporting unit to the carrying value of its net assets, including goodwill. We use our market capitalization (common shares outstanding multiplied by the price per share of our common stock) to measure the fair value of the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of its net assets, goodwill is not impaired, and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, we measure the impairment loss as the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the reporting unit. See Note 4 for more information on our goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2021.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an emerging growth company (“EGC”), as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). The JOBS Act permits an EGC to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to “opt out” of this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards when they are required to be adopted by public companies that are not EGCs.
In addition, we are also a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as (i) our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.