Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering and developing engineered monoclonal antibody and cytokine therapeutics to treat patients with cancer and autoimmune diseases who have unmet medical needs. We are advancing a broad portfolio of clinical-stage XmAb® drug candidates from our proprietary Fc technology platforms. We also use our protein engineering capabilities to increase our understanding of protein structure and interactions and to design new Fc technologies and XmAb development candidates with improved properties. In addition to engineering protein-target interactions, our approach to protein design includes engineering Fc domains, the part of an antibody that interacts with multiple segments of the immune system and controls antibody structure. The Fc domain is constant and interchangeable among antibodies, and our engineered Fc domains can be readily substituted for natural Fc domains.
Our protein engineering capabilities and Fc technologies enable us and our partners to develop XmAb antibodies and biotherapeutic drug candidates with improved properties and function, which can provide innovative approaches to treating disease and potential clinical advantage over other treatment options. For example, we developed an antibody scaffold to rapidly create novel bispecific antibodies that bind two different targets simultaneously, creating entirely new biological mechanisms. Other applications of our Fc technologies enhance antibody performance by increasing immune inhibitory activity, improving cytotoxicity, extending circulating half-life and stabilizing novel protein structures, such as engineered cytokines. Three medicines have been developed with our Fc technologies. The medicines are marketed by our partners and, are generating royalty revenues for us, which partially offset our internal development costs.
Refer to Part I, Item 1, "XmAb Bispecific Technologies" and "Other XmAb Fc Technologies" in the description of our business included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of our core Fc technology platforms.
COVID-19
We are closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to evaluate its impact on all aspects of our business, including how it will affect our partners, collaborations, supply chains and research and development operations. While the pandemic did not significantly disrupt our business during the year ended December 31, 2021, the evolving nature of the pandemic prevents us from reasonably predicting how the pandemic will affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows due to numerous uncertainties. These uncertainties include the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impacts and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. Many states, including California, where we are headquartered and where our principal place of business is located, and cities therein have ongoing restrictions, rules and guidelines that affect the continued operation of businesses. Other countries and states where we conduct manufacturing of our drug product, testing activities and clinical sites where patients are enrolled in our clinical trials have enacted similar restrictions that could affect our ability to conduct our drug candidate development and clinical operations.
The potential impacts on our business, revenue, clinical studies and research and development activities of the COVID-19 pandemic include:
● Business: Our broad protein engineering capabilities and technologies are uniquely suited to provide us with opportunities to identify and enhance compounds that may target the novel coronavirus and potentially treat patients with COVID-19. For example, sotrovimab, an antibody that targets the SARS-CoV-2 virus, received an EUA from the FDA for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in high-risk adults and pediatric patients, and is made available by Vir and its partner GlaxoSmithKline Plc. Sotrovimab incorporates our Xtend Fc technology for longer duration of action. VIR-7832, a second antibody licensed to Vir, which also targets the SARS-CoV-2 virus, incorporates Xtend technology and other XmAb Fc technologies, and it is currently enrolling patients in a Phase 1b/2a study. We are eligible to receive a mid-single digit percentage royalty on the net sales of both sotrovimab and VIR-7832. Our partner Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) has also licensed our Xtend technology to improve the half-life of antibodies that target SARS-CoV-2 and is supporting a Phase 2 study for a combination of two half-life-extended antibodies. We are eligible to receive royalties on net sales of the BMS candidate.
● Revenue: We receive upfront payments, milestone payments and royalties from licensing our XmAb technologies and drug candidates. The COVID-19 pandemic has not adversely affected the amount of revenue we generate from such partnerships and collaborations for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year, we received $204.9 million from our partnerships and collaborations including those with Vir, MorphoSys, Alexion, Janssen, and Viridian.
Our ability to earn revenue from these and other partnerships is dependent on the ability of our partners to generate sales from products, such as sotrovimab, Ultomiris®, and Monjuvi®, the ability of our partners to advance our partnered programs through regulatory approval, and the ability of our partners to advance our partnered programs into later stages of development, which would entitle us to potential milestone payments. If the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects the sales or clinical, development and regulatory progress of partnered programs, the amount of future revenue we could earn would be adversely affected.
● Clinical studies: We are currently enrolling patients into multiple trials evaluating our drug candidates, and our partner Genentech is enrolling patients in the Phase 1 study of XmAb306 (also known as RG6323), our co-development program with Genentech. Many partners are also enrolling patients in clinical trials with drug candidates that incorporate one or more of our XmAb technologies. Although the pandemic has not materially affected the development of our clinical programs for the year ended December 31, 2021, some of our clinical programs temporarily experienced slower patient enrollment, and the initiations of new studies for certain programs have been delayed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These delays have not broadly affected the status of our portfolio programs and have been limited to specific trials and specific sites. Many clinical sites have delayed starting new clinical trials and others have postponed enrollment to address the pandemic.
● Research, development, and administrative activities: We have implemented environmental, health and safety procedures for all employees and have also offered reimbursement of costs incurred and time off to employees to receive vaccinations that have been authorized. We believe we provide a safe and healthy environment for our onsite employees who have been able to continue research operations, following an initial period of reduced onsite activities while new policies and procedures were developed and implemented. As of December 31, 2021, these activities have continued without interruption from the pandemic.
Our development activities include initiating a Phase 1 study of XmAb819, our first 2+1 CD3 bispecific candidate that targets ENPP3, and conducting IND-enabling studies for XmAb808, our first tumor selective CD28 bispecific candidate that targets B7-H3, and XmAb662, our reduced-potency engineered IL12 cytokine candidate. Several other bispecific antibody and cytokine programs are in earlier stages of development. Certain manufacturing and supply companies have indicated supply chain issues and shortages of research and manufacturing supply materials. The development timelines for additional early-stage programs and ongoing clinical programs could be affected if the supply shortages and delays continue for an extended period.
Advancements in Our Clinical Portfolio of XmAb Bispecific Antibodies and Cytokine Candidates
Our modular XmAb bispecific technology and protein engineering capabilities enable us to rapidly advance multiple drug candidates into clinical development. We and our partners are currently enrolling Phase 1 or Phase 2 studies for seven wholly owned or co-development candidates to treat patients with many different types of cancer and autoimmune diseases, and an eighth, to be developed for patients with kidney cancer, is expected to enter clinical development in early 2022.
Plamotamab (CD20 x CD3): Plamotamab is a bispecific antibody that targets CD20, an antigen on B-cell tumors, and CD3, an activating receptor on T cells. At the ASH Annual Meeting in December 2021, we presented updated safety and anti-tumor activity data from the Phase 1 dose-escalation study of plamotamab in B-cell malignancies, including from patients with relapsed or refractory NHL. The results indicated that plamotamab monotherapy was generally well tolerated and demonstrated encouraging clinical activity in heavily pretreated patients at the recommended intravenous Phase 2 dose. We are currently enrolling patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in the monotherapy dose expansion cohorts to further evaluate the safety and efficacy of plamotamab monotherapy at the Phase 2 recommended dose, and we plan to present data from these cohorts in the second half of 2022. Additionally, pharmacokinetic modeling supports subcutaneous administration, which we plan to incorporate into our ongoing Phase 1 monotherapy study.
In October 2021, we entered a global collaboration and license agreement with Janssen Biotech, Inc. (Janssen), to advance plamotamab and XmAb CD28 bispecific antibody combinations for the treatment of patients with B-cell malignancies, which expands our strategy to develop multiple highly active chemotherapy-free regimens across B-cell cancers. Janssen received worldwide exclusive development and commercial rights, and we will collaborate with Janssen on further clinical development of plamotamab, with us paying 20% of costs. Under the collaboration, we will develop B-cell targeted CD28 bispecific antibodies to selectively enhance T-cell cytotoxic activity in combination with plamotamab.
In 2022, we plan to initiate a potentially registration-enabling Phase 2 study to evaluate the chemotherapy-free triple combination of plamotamab, tafasitamab and lenalidomide in patients with relapsed or refractory DLBCL Plamotamab, which redirects T cells to tumors, and tafasitamab, a CD19-directed XmAb antibody, combine powerful and distinct immune pathways, and the study is designed to generate new clinical insights and accelerate development timelines for the program. MorphoSys AG and Incyte Corporation will provide tafasitamab for the studies.
Vudalimab (PD-1 x CTLA-4): Vudalimab is a bispecific antibody that targets PD-1 and CTLA-4, two immune checkpoint receptors, to selectively activate the tumor microenvironment, and it is being developed for patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer, as well as for patients with other types of solid tumors. In November 2021, we presented updated data from the Phase 1 study of vudalimab in patients with multiple types of advanced solid tumors at the SITC Annual Meeting. Data from the Phase 1 study indicate that vudalimab was generally well-tolerated in heavily pretreated patients with encouraging clinical activity.
We have initiated a Phase 2 study of vudalimab in patients with certain molecular subtypes of CRPC, as a monotherapy or in combination depending on the molecular subtype, as these patients represent a high unmet medical need. We plan to present initial data from the Phase 2 study in mCRPC in the second half of 2022.
We are initiating a second Phase 2 study for patients with advanced gynecologic and genitourinary malignancies, and the study will include a cohort to evaluate vudalimab in patients with clinically-defined high-risk mCRPC.
Tidutamab (SSTR2 x CD3): Tidutamab is a bispecific antibody that targets somatostatin receptor 2, (SSTR2), a target on many neuroendocrine-like tumor types, and CD3. Dose-escalation and expansion data from the Phase 1 study in patients with neuroendocrine tumors (NET) indicates that tidutamab was generally well tolerated at the recommended dose identified for the expansion portion of the study. Tidutamab induced sustained activation of cytotoxic T cells and engagement of the SSTR2 target and demonstrated an encouraging safety profile. We are enrolling patients in a Phase 2 clinical study for tidutamab in patients with Merkel cell carcinoma and small cell lung cancer, which are SSTR2-
expressing tumor types known to be responsive to immunotherapy.
XmAb306/RO7310729 (IL15/IL15Rα-Fc Cytokine): XmAb306 is a reduced-potency IL15/IL15Rα-Fc fusion protein that incorporates our Xtend extended half-life technology, and we are co-developing this program in collaboration with Genentech. In November 2021, we announced encouraging early preliminary data from an ongoing Phase 1 study in patients with advanced solid tumors, while further dose escalation in both study arms continues.
We share in 45 percent of worldwide development and commercialization costs for XmAb306 and will receive a share of net profits or net losses from product sales at the same percentage rate. We retain the right to perform clinical studies with XmAb306, as well as with other collaboration programs developed in combination with other therapeutic agents, subject to certain restrictions and at our sole expense. Additional studies of XmAb306 in combination with other agents, such as NK- or T-cell recruiting therapies, are being planned.
XmAb564 (IL2-Fc Cytokine): XmAb564 is a wholly owned, monovalent, reduced-potency IL2-Fc fusion protein that we are developing for the treatment of patients with autoimmune diseases. XmAb564 is engineered to selectively activate and expand regulatory T cells (Tregs), with reduced binding affinity for IL-2's beta receptor and increased binding affinity for its alpha receptor. In preclinical studies, XmAb564 was well-tolerated, promoted the selective and sustained expansion of Tregs and exhibited a favorable pharmacokinetic profile. In April 2021, the first subject was dosed in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-ascending dose (SAD) Phase 1 clinical study to evaluate the safety and tolerability of XmAb564, administered subcutaneously in healthy adult volunteers. In 2022, we plan to present tolerability, durability, and biomarker data from the Phase 1 SAD study, and we plan to initiate a multiple-ascending dose study in patients with autoimmune diseases.
Additional wholly owned XmAb bispecific antibody programs in Phase 1 clinical studies include XmAb841 (CTLA-4 x LAG-3) and XmAb104 (PD-1 x ICOS). We have completed the dose escalation portions of these studies and are enrolling patients with advanced solid tumors.
XmAb968 (CD38 x CD3): XmAb968 is a bispecific antibody that targets CD38 and CD3. We are supporting a Phase 1 investigator sponsored trial, which is evaluating XmAb968 in patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma and acute myeloid leukemia.
Vibecotamab is a bispecific antibody that targets CD123 and CD3. In August 2021, Novartis notified us it was terminating its rights with respect to the vibecotamab program, effective February 2022. We do not intend any further internal development of this program.
Advancements Expanding XmAb Bispecific Platforms
We conduct further research into the function and application of antibody Fc domains in order to expand the scope of our XmAb technology platforms and identify additional XmAb drug candidates. We use the modularity of our XmAb bispecific Fc technology to build bispecific antibodies and cytokines in a variety of formats, and we recently introduced CD3 bispecific antibodies of a mixed valency format, the XmAb 2+1 bispecific antibody. XmAb 2+1 bispecific antibodies may preferentially kill tumor cells with high target expression, which may be especially beneficial in designing antibodies that target solid tumors. This selectivity potentially empowers CD3 bispecifics to address an expanded set of tumor antigens. Our lead XmAb 2+1 bispecific antibody candidate is XmAb819, a first-in-class ENPP3 x CD3 bispecific antibody. ENPP3 is a tumor-associated antigen in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and exhibits low level expression on normal tissues. We are currently initiating a Phase 1 study to evaluate XmAb819 in patients with RCC.
Additionally, we have engineered CD28 bispecific antibodies to provide conditional CD28 co-stimulation of T cells, activating them when bound to tumor cells. Targeted CD28 bispecific antibodies may provide conditional co-stimulation of T cells, for example, to T cells recognizing neoantigens or in concert with CD3 T-cell engaging bispecific antibodies. We are advancing wholly owned CD28 candidates including our lead candidate, XmAb808, a B7-H3 x CD28 bispecific antibody designed to be evaluated for the treatment of patients with a range of solid tumors, which is currently advancing in IND-enabling studies. We plan to submit an IND application for XmAb808 in the first half of 2022 and initiate a Phase 1 study in the second half of 2022.
Our CD28 platform is also the subject of two collaborations with Janssen. The first collaboration was announced in 2020 and involves our research efforts to create and characterize CD28 bispecific antibody candidates against a prostate tumor target specified by Janssen. In November 2021, we completed our research efforts under the collaboration. Janssen selected a CD28 bispecific for further development, and we received a $5.0 million milestone payment. The second Janssen collaboration was announced in October 2021 and includes conducting research activities with Janssen to create and characterize CD28 bispecific antibody candidates against B-cell targets during a two-year period, with Janssen having an exclusive worldwide license to develop selected molecules from the research activities and also selected molecules in combination with plamotamab and other agents, such as other CD3 bispecific antibodies.
In November 2021, we presented emerging preclinical data from early-stage programs that highlighted several of our platform technologies at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer, with poster presentations with data from our IL-12-Fc cytokine program, PD-L1 x CD28 bispecific antibody program, TGFβR2 bispecific program, and bispecific NK cell engager platform.
Progress Across Partnerships
A key part of our business strategy is to leverage our protein engineering capabilities, XmAb technologies and drug candidates with partnerships, collaborations and licenses. Through these arrangements we generate revenues in the form of upfront payments, milestone payments and royalties. For partnerships for our drug candidates, we aim to retain a major economic interest in the form of keeping major geographic commercial rights; profit-sharing; co-development options; and the right to conduct studies with drug candidates developed in the collaboration. The types of arrangements that we have entered with partners include product licenses, novel bispecific antibody collaborations, technology licensing agreements and strategic collaborations.
Product Licenses
Product licenses are arrangements in which we have internally developed drug candidates and, based on a strategic review, licensed partial or full rights to third parties to continue development and potential commercialization. We seek partners that can provide infrastructure and resources to successfully develop our drug candidates, have a track record of successfully developing and commercializing medicines, or have a portfolio of development-stage candidates and commercialized medicines which could potentially be developed in rational combinations with our drug candidates.
The FDA approved Monjuvi® (tafasitamab-cxix) under accelerated approval in July 2020. Monjuvi is a CD19-directed cytolytic antibody indicated in combination with lenalidomide for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) not otherwise specified, including DLBCL arising from low grade lymphoma, and who are not eligible for autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT). This indication is approved under accelerated approval based on overall response rate. Continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification and description of clinical benefit in a confirmatory trial(s). In August 2021, the European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization for Minjuvi® (tafasitamab) in combination with lenalidomide, followed by tafasitamab monotherapy, for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) who are not eligible for autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). Tafasitamab was created and initially developed by us. Tafasitamab is co-marketed by Incyte and MorphoSys under the brand name Monjuvi in the U.S. and is marketed by Incyte under the brand name Minjuvi in the E.U. Incyte has exclusive commercialization rights to tafasitamab outside the U.S. Monjuvi® and Minjuvi® are registered trademarks of MorphoSys AG. In April 2021, MorphoSys and Incyte announced the initiation of a Phase 3 study (inMIND) evaluating the addition of tafasitamab to lenalidomide and rituximab in patients with relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma or marginal zone lymphoma. In May 2021, MorphoSys and Incyte announced the initiation of a pivotal Phase 3 study (frontMIND) evaluating tafasitamab and lenalidomide in addition to rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (R-CHOP) compared to R-CHOP alone as first-line treatment for high-intermediate and high-risk patients with untreated DLBCL. In 2021, we earned $12.5 million for the development milestone related to the inMind trial, and we recognized royalty revenue of $5.9 million on net sales of Monjuvi.
In March 2021, our two-year research collaboration with Genentech to discover new targeted IL-15 cytokine candidates concluded, and we may independently advance into development targeted IL-15 programs not previously
nominated under the agreement. A targeted IL-15 program was identified as a development candidate under the Genentech Agreement in October 2020, and we were sharing in 45% of development costs for this candidate. In August 2021, Genentech and Xencor ceased development of the targeted IL-15 program due to observations in preclinical studies that suggested an undesirable clinical profile. No additional development of this candidate is planned by Genentech or us. Genentech and we are planning to study additional combination agents with XmAb306.
In October 2017, we entered into an agreement with INmune, pursuant to which we provided INmune with an exclusive license to our XPro1595 drug candidate. INmune is currently conducting or planning Phase 2 studies in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment and treatment resistant depression. In connection with the license, we received shares of INmune common stock and an option to acquire up to 10% of the outstanding common stock of INmune for $10.0 million. In June 2021, we sold the option to INmune for $15.0 million in cash and $3.3 million in additional shares of INmune common stock. In September 2021, we exercised an option to acquire an additional 108,000 shares of INmune common stock for $0.8 million.
In November 2021, we entered into an agreement with Zenas BioPharma (Cayman) Limited (Zenas), to which we licensed the exclusive worldwide rights to develop and commercialize obexelimab, a bifunctional antibody that targets CD19 with its variable domain and uses our XmAb Immune Inhibitor Fc Domain. Zenas issued a warrant giving us the right to acquire additional Zenas equity, such that our total equity in Zenas would be 15% of its fully diluted capitalization following the closing of Zenas’ next round of equity financing, subject to certain requirements. We are eligible to receive up to $470.0 million based on the achievement of certain clinical development, regulatory and commercial milestones and are eligible to receive tiered, mid-single digit to mid-teen percent royalties upon commercialization of obexelimab, dependent on geography.
Novel Bispecific Antibody Collaborations
Novel bispecific antibody collaborations are arrangements in which our partner seeks to create a bispecific antibody using one or more of our XmAb bispecific technologies. Our partners provide an antibody or a tumor-associated antigen, and we conduct limited research and development to create potential bispecific antibody candidates for further development and commercialization by our partners.
In November 2020, we entered an agreement with Janssen, focused on the discovery of XmAb bispecific antibodies against CD28, an immune co-stimulatory receptor on T cells, and an undisclosed prostate tumor target, for the potential treatment of patients with prostate cancer. Additionally, we have a right to access select, predefined agents from Janssen’s portfolio of clinical-stage drug candidates and commercialized medicines to evaluate potential combination therapies in prostate cancer with agents in our own pipeline, subject to some limitations. Janssen has the same right with our portfolio to evaluate potential combination therapies in prostate cancer, as well. The ability to study combinations of therapies from both companies’ prostate cancer portfolios leverages our broad clinical pipeline and Janssen's leading prostate cancer therapeutics portfolio. In 2021, we received a $5.0 million milestone payment related to our first agreement with Janssen, which selected an XmAb CD28 bispecific antibody candidate for further development.
Other XmAb bispecific antibodies being developed by our partners include Amgen's AMG 509, a STEAP1 x CD3 XmAb 2+1 bispecific antibody, which is being evaluated in a Phase 1 study for patients with prostate cancer; Astellas’ ASP2138, a CLDN18.2 x CD3 bispecific antibody, which is entering Phase 1 development for patients with gastric/GEJ adenocarcinomas and pancreatic adenocarcinoma and an undisclosed bispecific antibody candidate being developed by Novartis, which is also in Phase 1 development.
Technology License Agreements
We enter into technology licensing agreements in which we license access to one or more of our XmAb Fc technologies on a restricted basis, typically to an XmAb Cytotoxic Fc Domain and/or the Xtend Fc Domain. Our partners are responsible for all research, development and commercialization activities of the drug candidates. The plug-and-play nature of XmAb technologies allows us to license access to our platforms with limited or no internal research and development activities.
Alexion’s Ultomiris® uses Xtend Fc technology for longer half-life. Ultomiris has received marketing authorizations from regulatory agencies in the U.S. and multiple global markets for the treatment of patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and for patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). Alexion is also evaluating Ultomiris in a broad late-stage development program across many indications in neurology and nephrology. In 2021, we earned $22.2 million in royalties from Alexion.
In August 2019, we provided Vir a non-exclusive license to our Xtend Fc technology for two targets in infectious disease. Vir has advanced two programs under this agreement. In the second quarter of 2021, Vir announced plans to initiate a Phase 2 trial of VIR-3434 in combination with an siRNA drug candidate as a potential treatment for patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection, and we earned $0.5 million for the development milestone.
In March 2020, we entered a second agreement with Vir Biotechnology, Inc., under which Vir has non-exclusive access to our Xtend Fc technology to extend the half-life of novel antibodies being investigated as potential treatments for patients with COVID-19. In May 2021, the FDA granted EUA to sotrovimab for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in high-risk adults and pediatric patients. In December 2021, the EU granted a temporary authorization for sotrovimab, and several other countries have also provided temporary or conditional authorizations for its use. A second drug candidate, VIR-7832, is in a Phase 1b/2a trial of adults with mild-to-moderate COVID-19. In 2021, we earned estimated $52.2 million in royalties from Vir.
In May 2021, we entered into a technology license agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (BMS) under which BMS has access to Xtend Fc technology to extend the half-life of a novel antibody combination therapy that is intended to neutralize the SARS-CoV-2 virus for the treatment or prevention of COVID-19. Phase 2 and 3 studies are planned as part of the NIH ACTIV-2 trial examining treatment of infected outpatients. Under the terms of the agreement, BMS is solely responsible for the activities and costs related to research, development, regulatory, and commercial activities for their COVID-19 drug candidates, and we are eligible to receive royalties on net sales.
In December 2021, we entered into an agreement with Viridian Therapeutics, inc. (Viridian) for a non-exclusive license to certain antibody libraries developed by us. Under the agreement, Viridian received a one-year research license to review the antibodies and the right to select up to three antibodies for further development. Viridian is responsible for all further development of the selected antibodies. We received an upfront payment of 394,737 shares of Viridian common stock valued at $7.5 million and are eligible to receive development, regulatory and sales milestones in addition to royalties on net sales of approved products under the agreement.
In connection with our June 2016 collaboration and license agreement with Novartis, we granted Novartis a non-exclusive license to certain non-bispecific Fc technologies to apply against up to ten targets. In 2021, Novartis exercised its right to incorporate our Xtend Fc domain into a drug candidate. In 2021, we earned $3.0 million in milestones for a development milestone related to an undisclosed XmAb antibody program that Novartis has advanced into Phase 1 clinical studies.
Strategic Collaborations
We enter into strategic collaborations where we can create synergies between our partners' strengths and assets and our own protein engineering capabilities, Fc technologies and XmAb drug candidates. Through these arrangements we seek to create new drug candidates, investigate novel combination therapies and potentially identify additional indications for our portfolio of XmAb drug candidates.
In February 2021, we announced an agreement with the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) to develop therapeutic antibodies, pairing novel targets proposed by scientists at UCLA and utilizing our XmAb Fc domains. UCLA’s Technology Development Group will work with faculty to propose potential antibody drug candidates, and for selected candidates, we will use a streamlined framework with predefined terms to enter sponsored research agreements and potential license agreements.
Refer to Part IV, Item 15, Note 10, "Collaboration and Licensing Agreements" of the notes to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of the key terms of our arrangements.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
Our revenues to date have been generated primarily from our collaboration agreements, our product licensing agreements, and our technology licensing agreements. Revenue recognized from our collaboration and product licensing agreements includes non-refundable upfront payments, milestone payments and royalties on net sales of approved products while revenue from our technology licensing agreements includes upfront payments, option payments to obtain commercial licenses, milestone payments and royalties on net sales of approved products. Since our inception through December 31, 2021, we have generated $820.7 million in revenues under the various product development partnership and technology license arrangements. Several of our product development partnership and technology license agreements provide us the opportunity to earn future milestone payments, royalties on product sales and option exercise payments.
Summary of Collaboration and Licensing Revenue by Partner
The following is a comparison of collaboration, product licensing, and technology licensing revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
Research and Development Expenses
The following is a comparison of research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
Internal research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, related personnel costs, supplies, and allocated overhead including facility costs. External research and development expenses include preclinical testing costs, clinical trial costs and fees paid to external service providers. External service providers include CROs and
contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) to conduct clinical trials, manufacturing and process development, IND-enabling toxicology testing and formulation of clinical drug supplies. We expense research and development expenses as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expense when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received. We estimate contract manufacturing, preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed pursuant to the contracts with manufacturing, research institutions and clinical research organizations that manufacture and conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf based on the actual time and expenses incurred by them. We accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on the level of patient enrollment and activity according to the related agreement. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and adjust estimates accordingly. Our estimates of clinical trial expense have fluctuated on a period-to-period basis due to changes in the stage of the clinical trials and patient enrollment levels. We expect to experience a continuing pattern of fluctuations in clinical trial expenses as current clinical trials are completed and as we initiate additional and later stage clinical trials. To date, we have not experienced significant differences between our periodic estimates of clinical trial expense and the actual costs incurred. We expect changes in future clinical trial expenses to be driven by changes in service provider costs and changes in clinical stage and patient enrollment.
We expect that our future research and development expenses will increase overspending levels in recent years if we are successful in advancing our current clinical-stage drug candidates or any of our preclinical programs into later stages of clinical development. The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. We or our partners may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates. Numerous factors may affect the probability of success for each product candidate, including preclinical data, clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability, approval by regulatory authorities and commercial viability.
Our research and development operations are conducted such that design, management and evaluation of results of all of our research and development is performed internally, while the execution of certain phases of our research and development programs, such as toxicology studies in accordance with Good Laboratory Practices (GLP), and manufacturing in accordance with cGMP, is accomplished using CROs and CMOs. We account for research and development costs on a program-by-program basis except in the early stages of research and discovery, when costs are often devoted to identifying preclinical candidates and improving our discovery platform and technologies, which are not necessarily allocable to a specific development program. We assign costs for such activities to distinct projects for preclinical pipeline development and new technologies. We allocate research management, overhead, commonly used laboratory supplies and equipment, and facility costs based on the percentage of time of full-time research personnel efforts on each program.
The following is a comparison of research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
*Includes net payments to, and reimbursements from our partners pursuant to agreements that include cost-sharing arrangements.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation related to our executive, finance, business development, and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include intellectual property costs, facility costs, and professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services.
Other Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income, net, consists primarily of realized and unrealized gain on equity securities during the year, while for the year ended December 31, 2020, other income, net, consists primarily of interest income from our investments during the year.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments, and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our management believes judgment is
involved in determining revenue recognition, the fair value-based measurement of stock-based compensation, the fair value estimate of marketable securities, the capitalization and recoverability of intellectual property costs, valuation of deferred tax assets and accruals. Our management evaluates estimates and assumptions as facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to the financial statements. If our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material adverse effect on our statements of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 1 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We have, to date, earned revenue from research and development collaborations, which may include research and development services, licenses of our internally developed technologies, licenses of our internally developed drug candidates, or combinations of these.
The terms of our license and research and development and collaboration agreements generally include non-refundable upfront payments, research funding, co-development reimbursements, license fees, and milestone and other contingent payments to us for the achievement of defined collaboration objectives and certain clinical, regulatory and sales-based events, as well as royalties on sales of any commercialized products.
The terms of our licensing agreements include non-refundable upfront fees, contractual payment obligations for the achievement of pre-defined preclinical, clinical, regulatory and sales-based events by our partners. The licensing agreements also include royalties on sales of any commercialized products by our partners.
In certain transactions for licensing of our technologies or our product candidates, we may receive an equity interest from our partners as full or partial consideration for an upfront payment due under the arrangement. We record the initial equity at its fair value and mark the value to market quarterly for publicly traded securities and review for impairment for equity that is not publicly traded on a national exchange.
Capitalized Intellectual Property Costs
We capitalize and amortize third-party intellectual property costs such as amounts paid to outside patent counsel for filing, prosecuting and obtaining patents for our internally developed technologies and product candidates, to the extent such patents are deemed to have probable future economic benefit. We also capitalize amounts paid to third parties for licenses that we acquire for intellectual property or for research and development purposes where the technology has alternative uses. The net capitalized patents, licenses, and other intangible assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $16.5 million and $16.0 million, respectively. We believe that these costs should be capitalized as the intellectual property portfolio creates the underlying property right to our technologies and product candidates and supports the upfront payments, licensing fees, milestone payments and royalties made by our collaboration partners for licensing our technologies and product candidates.
We begin amortization of capitalized patent costs during the period that we obtain a patent relating to the capitalized cost over the shorter of the patent life or the estimated economic useful life. Capitalized licensing costs are amortized beginning in the period that access to the license or technology is available and is amortized over the shorter of the license term or the estimated economic useful life of the licensed asset. Such amortization is recorded as general and administrative expenses.
On a regular basis we review the capitalized intellectual property portfolio and determine if there have been changes in the scientific or patent landscape that leads us to decide to abandon an in-process patent application or abandon a previously issued patent. While we confer with outside patent counsel, the decision to continue prosecuting certain patent claims or abandon other claims are made by us based on our judgment and existing knowledge of our
technology, current U.S. and foreign patent authority rulings and expected rulings, and scientific advances and patent filings by competitors operating in our technology or drug development field. We record an expense for the write-off of capitalized intangible assets in the period that the decision to abandon a claim or license is made. We also review the carrying value of capitalized licensing costs on a regular basis to determine if there have been any changes to the useful life or estimated amortization period over which the costs should be amortized. We recorded a charge for abandoned intangible assets of $0.9 million and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such charges are reflected as general and administrative expenses.
We determine if there has been an impairment of our intangible assets which include the capitalized patent and licensing costs whenever events such as recurring operating losses or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
● CROs and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
● contract manufacturers in connection with the production of and testing of clinical trial materials; and
● vendors in connection with preclinical development activities.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing these costs, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed for which we have not been invoiced and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized as income in the period that such tax rate changes are enacted. The measurement of a deferred tax asset is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Financial statement recognition of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return is determined based on a more-likely-than not threshold of that position being sustained. If the tax position meets this threshold, the benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. Our policy is to record interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense. We have concluded that there are no material uncertain tax positions and have not recorded an income tax expense or liability for uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2021.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA) was enacted into law, which beginning in 2018, made several changes to U.S. corporate income tax provisions including a reduction in the U.S. corporate rate from a maximum rate of 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018. The TCJA also allowed net operating losses incurred after January 1, 2018 to be carried forward indefinitely.
The other material change in our tax provision from the TCJA is elimination of the U.S. corporate alternative minimum tax (AMT) system and allowance for a tax refund for AMT credit carryovers as of December 31, 2017, which do not expire. We received a tax refund of $0.8 million in each of 2020 and 2019 related to federal AMT credit carryovers.
We recorded net deferred tax assets of $93.6 million as of December 31, 2021, which was fully offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits. The deferred tax assets are primarily comprised of deferred revenue, federal and state tax net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards. As of December 31, 2021, we had cumulative net operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of approximately $168.2 million; $63.9 million of such losses were incurred prior to December 31, 2017 and $104.3 million were incurred in the years ending on or after December 31, 2018. We also had available tax credit carryforwards of $34.0 million for federal tax purposes. We had cumulative state tax loss carryforwards at December 31, 2021 of $161.6 million, and available state tax credit carryforwards of approximately $17.8 million, which can be carried forward to offset future taxable income, if any.
Our federal net operating loss carryforwards incurred prior to January 1, 2018 expire starting in 2026; state net operating loss carryforwards expire starting in 2035; and federal tax credit carryforwards begin to expire starting in 2020. Approximately $0.5 million of federal tax credits will expire if unused from 2021 through 2024.
No income tax expense or benefit was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Valuation of Stock-Based Compensation
We record the fair value of stock options and shares issued under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) to employees as of the grant date as compensation expense over the service period, which is generally the vesting period. For non-employees, we also record the fair value of stock options as of the grant date as compensation expense over the service period. We then periodically re-measure the awards to reflect the current fair value at each reporting period until the non-employee completes the performance obligation or the date on which a performance commitment is reached. Expense is recognized over the related service period.
We calculate the fair value of stock-based compensation awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant.
Common Stock Options Fair Value
We recognize stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. The use of a Black-Scholes model requires us to apply judgment and make assumptions and estimates that include the following:
● Expected Volatility-Volatility is a measure of the amount by which a financial variable such as a share price has fluctuated (historical volatility) or is expected to fluctuate (expected volatility) during a period.
● Expected Dividend Yield-We have never declared or paid dividends and have no plans to do so in the foreseeable future.
● Risk-Free Interest Rate-This is the U.S. Treasury rate for the week of each option grant during the year, having a term that most closely resembles the expected life of the option.
● Expected Term-This is the period of time that the options granted are expected to remain unexercised. Options granted have a maximum term of ten years and we have estimated the expected life of the option term to be between six and eight years. We use a simplified method to calculate the average expected term for employee awards.
Results of Operations
The discussion that follows includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For a comparison of our results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. see “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our 2020 Annual report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
Revenues
Increased research collaboration revenues in 2021 is primarily revenue recognized under our Janssen and Novartis agreements, while research collaboration revenues in 2020 is primarily revenue recognized under our Genentech agreement.
Milestone payments decreased by $29.2 million in 2021 over 2020 amounts primarily due to milestones received from Janssen and MorphoSys in 2021, compared to milestones received from Alexion and MorphoSys in 2020.
Licensing revenues in 2021 primarily consist of revenues recognized from Janssen, Viridian, and Zenas, and licensing revenues in 2020 primarily consist of revenues recognized from various technology and product license agreements entered throughout the year.
Increased royalty revenues for 2021 is primarily due to revenue recognized from our Alexion, MorphoSys, and Vir agreements over royalty amounts in 2020, which is primarily revenue recognized from our Alexion agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
*Includes net reimbursements from our partners pursuant to agreements that include cost-sharing arrangements.
Research and development expenses increased by $22.7 million in 2021 over 2020 amounts as we continue to expand our pipeline of bispecific antibody and cytokine candidates. Increased research and development spending in 2021 was primarily driven by increased spending on our XmAb819 program and other early-stage programs including IND enabling studies for our B7-H3 x CD28 program and early development work on XmAb662, our IL-12 cytokine program, during the year.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $9.1 million in 2021 over 2020 amounts primarily due to increased general and administrative staffing, and additional spending on facilities and intellectual property costs including licensing fees.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased by $31.3 million in 2021 over 2020 amounts reflecting the gain realized from the sale of the INmune option, and the unrealized gain recognized from the change in accounting for our investments in equity securities in connection with our licensing transactions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have been primarily financed through proceeds from public offering, private sales of our equity, and payments received under our collaboration and development partnerships and licensing arrangements. We have devoted our resources to funding research and development programs, including discovery research, preclinical and clinical development activities.
We have incurred substantial operating losses since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur operating losses into the foreseeable future as we advance the ongoing development of our bispecific antibody and cytokine product candidates, evaluate opportunities for the potential clinical development of our other preclinical programs, and continue our research efforts.
In 2021, we received a total of $204.9 million in upfront payments, milestones, and royalties in connection with licensing of our technologies and products.
At December 31, 2021, we had $664.1 million of cash, cash equivalents, marketable debt securities, and receivables compared to $610.2 million at December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to receive additional payments from our collaborators for research and development services rendered, additional milestone, contingent payments, opt-in and royalty payments. Our ability to receive milestone payments and contingent payments from our partners is dependent upon either our ability or our partners’ abilities to achieve certain levels of research and development activities and is therefore uncertain at this time.
Funding Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to do so until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize one or more of our product candidates. At the current stage of our clinical development programs, it will be some time before we expect to achieve this, and it is uncertain that we ever will. We expect that our operating expenses will continue to increase in connection with ongoing as well as additional planned clinical and preclinical development of product candidates in our pipeline. We expect to continue our collaboration arrangements and will look for additional collaboration and licensing opportunities.
Although it is difficult to predict our funding requirements, based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with interest thereon and expected milestone and royalty payments will be sufficient to fund our operations through the end of 2025. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 reflect the operating expenses incurred in each year offset by the upfront, milestone, and royalty payments received during the respective year.
Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of proceeds from maturities of marketable securities offset by purchases of marketable securities available-for-sale, acquisition of intangible assets and purchases of property and equipment. In 2021, we purchased $24.4 million of marketable securities, net of $485.2 million of proceeds from sales and maturities. In 2020, we redeemed $114.0 million of marketable securities, net of $643.7 million of purchase. We acquired $2.7 million and $3.2 million of intangible assets in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We purchased $11.8 million and $10.5 million of capital equipment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We also purchased a $5.0 million convertible note for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 consists primarily of proceeds from issuance of common stock in connection with our Janssen collaboration, stock option exercises, and proceeds from the sales of shares under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP). Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consists primarily of cash from stock option exercises and the sales of shares under the ESPP.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We are obligated to make future payments to third parties under in-license agreements, including sublicense fees, royalties, and payments that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones. We have also entered into agreements with third-party vendors which will require us to make future payments upon the delivery of goods and services in future periods.
In February 2015, we entered into a license agreement with BIO-TECHNE Corporation (BIO-TECHNE) for a non-exclusive license to certain antibody technology including monoclonal antibodies which recognize human somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2). The variable domain of this antibody is incorporated in our tidutamab drug candidate. Under this license agreement, we may be required to make $3.8 million in additional contingent payments which include $0.8 million of clinical milestones and $3.0 million of regulatory milestones, in addition to royalties upon commercial sales of products of less than 1%. We made an upfront payment of $0.2 million in connection with this license and made a Phase 1 milestone payment of $0.1 million in 2018. We made a Phase 2 milestone payment of $0.2 million in 2021.
We entered into a second agreement with BIO-TECHNE, effective February 2018, for a non-exclusive license to a certain recombinant monoclonal antibody reactive with human programmed death protein, PD-1. Under this license agreement, we may be required to make $22.0 million in additional contingent payments which include $1.5 million of clinical milestones, $4.5 million of regulatory milestones and milestones on the achievement of certain sales of $16.0 million, in addition to royalties upon commercial sales of products of 1%. We made an upfront payment in connection with this license in 2019 and have not made any additional payments under this license agreement.
In February 2016, we entered into a worldwide exclusive commercial license agreement with Selexis SA to develop and commercialize products produced from the Selexis cell line that was manufactured in connection with our plamotamab drug candidate. In connection with the license, we may be required to make CHF 1.7 million in additional contingent obligations which include CHF 500,000 in development milestones, CHF 400,000 in regulatory milestones and CHF 800,000 in sales milestones, in addition to royalties upon commercial sales of products of less than 1%.
In December 2017, we entered into worldwide exclusive commercial license agreements with Selexis to develop and commercialize products produced from the Selexis cell line that was manufactured for each of our bispecific
antibody and cytokine drug candidates: tidutamab, vudalimab, XmAb841, XmAb104, XmAb306, XmAb564 and XmAb819. The terms for each agreement are identical and for each licensed cell line we may be required to make up to CHF 1.4 million in total development, regulatory and sales milestones which include CHF 425,000 in development milestones, CHF 340,000 in regulatory milestones and CHF 680,000 in sales milestones. In addition, we may be obligated to pay royalties upon commercial sales of approved products of less than 1%. In 2019, we made a milestone payment of CHF 75,000 in connection with an IND submission, and in 2020, we recorded a milestone payment due of CHF 75,000 in connection with an IND submission. In 2021, we recorded a milestone payment due of CHF 170,000 upon an initiation of Phase 2.
In December 2012, we entered into a Cross-License Agreement with MedImmune, LLC (MedImmune) for a non-exclusive license to certain MedImmune patents related to half-life technology. Under the terms of the agreement, we made payments in connection with the use of our Xtend™ technology, including use by us in our development candidates and also for use by our licensees. Our obligations to make payments under this agreement expired in December 2021. We made milestone payments under this agreement of $375,000 and $1,275,000 for 2020 and 2021, respectively.
As the amount and timing of sublicense fees and the achievement and timing of these milestones are not probable and estimable, such commitments have not been included on our balance sheet or in the contractual obligations and commitment tables above.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements in the accompanying financial statements for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements.