Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
XOMA, a Delaware corporation, is a biotech royalty aggregator. We have a sizable portfolio of economic rights to future potential milestone and royalty payments associated with partnered pre-commercial therapeutic candidates. Our portfolio was built through licensing our proprietary products and platforms from our legacy discovery and development business, combined with the acquisition of rights to future milestones and royalties that we have made since our royalty aggregator business model was implemented in 2017. Our drug royalty aggregator business is focused on early to mid-stage clinical assets, primarily in Phase 1 and 2, with significant commercial sales potential that are licensed to large-cap partners. We expect that most of our future revenue will be based on payments we may receive for milestones and royalties related to these programs.
The generation of future revenues related to licenses, milestones, and royalties is dependent on the achievement of milestones or product sales by our existing licensees. Although we generated net income of $15.8 million and $13.3 million and positive cash flows from operations of $22.7 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, we do not expect these results to be indicative of future performance. The payments we received from Novartis pursuant to our Anti-TGFβ Antibody License Agreement in 2021 and 2020 of $35.0 million and $25.0 million, respectively, were one-time milestone payments that do not represent recurring revenue.
Significant Developments
Royalty and Commercial Payment Purchase Agreements
Commercial Payment Purchase Agreement with Affitech
In October 2021, we entered into the Affitech CPPA, pursuant to which we purchased a future stream of commercial payment rights to Roche’s faricimab from Affitech for an upfront payment of $6.0 million. We are eligible to receive commercial payments from Roche consisting of 0.50% of future net sales of faricimab for a ten-year period following the first commercial sales in each applicable jurisdiction.
In January 2022, Genentech, a member of the Roche group, received approval from the FDA to commercialize faricimab (faricimab-svoa) for the treatment of wet, or neovascular, age-related macular degeneration and diabetic macular edema. Pursuant to the Affitech CPPA, we paid Affitech a $5.0 million regulatory approval milestone tied to these U.S. marketing approvals. We may pay up to an additional $15.0 million to Affitech based upon the achievement of certain regulatory approval milestones and sales milestones representing a portion of the commercial payment receipts.
Kuros Royalty Purchase Agreement
In July 2021, we entered into the Kuros RPA, pursuant to which we acquired the rights to 100% of the potential future royalties from commercial sales, which are tiered from high single-digit to low double-digits, and up to $25.5 million in pre-commercial milestone payments associated with an existing license agreement related to Checkmate Pharmaceuticals’ vidutolimod (CMP-001), a Toll-like receptor 9 agonist, packaged in a virus-like particle, for an upfront payment of $7.0 million. We may pay additional sales-based milestones to Kuros of up to $142.5 million representing a portion of the future royalties on commercial sales.
Viracta Royalty Purchase Agreement
In March 2021, we entered into the Viracta RPA, pursuant to which we acquired the right to receive future royalties, milestones, and other payments related to two clinical-stage drug candidates for $13.5 million. The first candidate, DAY101 (pan-RAF kinase inhibitor), is being developed by Day One Biopharmaceuticals, and the second candidate, vosaroxin (topoisomerase II inhibitor), is being developed by Denovo Biopharma. We acquired the right to receive (i) up to $54.0 million in potential milestones, potential royalties on sales, if approved, and other payments related
to DAY101, excluding up to $20.0 million consideration retained by Viracta, and (ii) up to $57.0 million in potential regulatory and commercial milestones and high single-digit royalties on sales related to vosaroxin, if approved.
License and Collaboration Agreements
Rezolute - RZ358 Antibody
In January 2022, Rezolute dosed the last patient in its Phase 2b clinical trial for RZ358, which triggered a $2.0 million milestone payment due to XOMA pursuant to our Rezolute License Agreement.
Novartis - Anti-TGFβ Antibody
In October 2021, we earned a $35.0 million milestone payment upon dosing of the first patient in Novartis’ first NIS793 Phase 3 clinical trial. We are eligible to receive remaining milestones up to a total of $410.0 million under the Anti-TGFβ Antibody License Agreement. Upon receipt of regulatory approval to commercialize NIS793, we will receive tiered royalties on any net product sales that range from the mid single-digit to the low double-digit percentage rates. In July 2021, Novartis announced the FDA had granted Orphan Drug Designation to NIS793 in combination with standard of care chemotherapy for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
Novartis - Anti-CD40 Antibody
In September 2021, Novartis announced its decision to discontinue its study of CFZ533 (iscalimab) in the prevention of organ rejection in patients receiving a kidney transplant after an interim analysis of data. Novartis is continuing other iscalimab studies in indications other than kidney transplant, for example, liver transplant, Sjögren’s Syndrome and Lupus Nephritis.
Compugen
In September 2021, we earned a $0.5 million milestone payment under our license agreement with Compugen triggered by the dosing of the first patient in a Phase 1/2 study of AZD2936, a TIGIT/PD-1 bispecific antibody, in patients with advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. AZD2936 is derived from COM902 and is being developed by AstraZeneca.
Janssen
In May 2021, we announced we earned a $0.5 million milestone from Janssen, upon dosing of the first patient in a Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating one of Janssen’s biologic assets. In December 2021, we earned a $0.2 million milestone pursuant to our agreement with Janssen.
Affimed
In April 2021, we entered into a new agreement with Affimed under which we are eligible to receive payments from Affimed on potential future commercial sales related to three ICE molecules and pre-loaded natural killer cells containing the ICE molecules. Additionally, we are eligible to receive a milestone upon the first product candidate in each program achieving marketing approval.
Public Offering of Series B Depositary Shares Representing Interest in Series B Preferred Stock
In April 2021, we closed a public offering of 1,600,000 Series B Depositary Shares at the price of $25.00 per Series B Depositary Share. Total gross proceeds from the offering were $40.0 million. Total offering costs of $2.9 million were offset against the proceeds from the sale of Series B Depositary Shares, for net proceeds of $37.1 million.
NIAID Contract Closeout
Prior to the sale of our biodefense business in 2016, we performed contract work for the U.S. government under multi-year contracts funded with federal funds from NIAID. The contract work was performed on a cost plus fixed fee basis and invoices were provisional until finalized. As such, we operated under provisional rates from 2010 through 2015, subject to adjustment based on final approved rates upon agreement with the government. In 2019, NIH engaged KPMG to perform an audit of our incurred cost submissions for 2013, 2014 and 2015, and, based on the results of KPMG’s procedures, which were completed in December 2020, we recognized an estimated refund liability representing amounts owed to NIH of $1.4 million on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. In December 2021, NIH completed its review of the audit as part of the related contract close-out process, which included the finalization of rates for years 2010 through 2015, and approved a finalized refund liability of $1.3 million. The $0.1 million reduction in the liability, from its previously recorded $1.4 million estimated amount, was recognized as an increase of revenue from contracts with customers in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2021. In December 2021, we paid the final amount owed to NIH of $1.3 million and no balance of the contingent liability remained on the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021.
Debt Extinguishment
Novartis Note
In June 2021, we repaid our outstanding principal balance to Novartis of $9.1 million. No amount was recorded as an extinguishment gain or loss in other (expense) income, net of the consolidated statement of operations. No outstanding principal balance of the Novartis Note remained as of December 31, 2021.
SVB Loan
In June 2021, we repaid our principal balance of $6.5 million and paid the 8.5% final payment fee of $1.4 million to SVB. We recognized a non-cash loss on extinguishment of $0.3 million in other (expense) income, net of the consolidated statement of operations. No outstanding principal balance of the SVB Loan remained as of December 31, 2021.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to pose risks to our business as clinical trials industry-wide have slowed. Our business is dependent on the continued development and commercialization efforts of our licensees and our royalty agreement counterparties and their licensees. We have been monitoring and continue to monitor our portfolio programs for potential delays in underlying research programs and elections of our partners to continue or cease development. Delays in clinical trials and underlying research programs have and may further lead to delayed revenue from milestones from our licensees and royalty agreement counterparties or, if certain research programs are discontinued, we may recognize impairment charges for our royalty receivables. COVID-19, the related variants, and the timing of vaccine distribution may impact our underlying programs in a variety of ways which are unknown in length and scope at this time.
Critical Accounting Estimates
A summary of the significant accounting policies is provided in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if:
● it requires a significant level of estimation uncertainty; and
● changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
We believe the following critical accounting policies and estimates describe the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from all contracts with customers according to ASC 606, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We have certain license arrangements in the scope of ASC 606. The terms of these agreements may contain multiple performance obligations, which primarily include transfer of our licenses. Prior to recognizing revenue, we make estimates of the transaction price, including variable consideration that is subject to a constraint. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Variable consideration may include payments based upon the achievement of specified milestones, and royalty payments based on product sales derived from the license agreements. The royalty payments will be recognized as revenue when the related sales occur, as far as there are no unsatisfied performance obligations remaining. If there are multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. All licenses we grant to customers are unique, as each uses a specific technology of XOMA or is geared towards a specific unique product candidate. Thus, there is no observable evidence of standalone selling price for the licenses. The standalone selling price is generally determined using a valuation approach based on discounted cash flow analysis. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgement to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time. Under our license agreements, the nature of the combined performance obligation is the granting of licenses to the customers. As such, we recognize revenue related to the combined performance obligation upon transfer of the license to the customers or completion of the transfer of related materials and services (i.e., point in time).
Sale of Future Revenue Streams
In 2016, prior to the implementation of our royalty aggregator business model, we sold our rights to receive certain milestones and royalties on product sales pursuant to our agreement with HCRP. We defer recognition of the proceeds we received from HCRP and recognize such unearned revenue as revenue under the units-of-revenue method over the life of the underlying license agreement. Under the units-of-revenue method, amortization for a reporting period is calculated by computing a ratio of the proceeds received from the purchaser to the total payments expected to be made to the purchaser over the term of the agreement, and then applying that ratio to the period’s cash payment.
Estimating the total payments expected to be received by HCRP over the term of the arrangement requires management to use subjective estimates and assumptions. Changes to our estimate of the payments expected to be made to HCRP over the term of the arrangement could have a material effect on the amount of revenues recognized in any particular period.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for stock options and other stock awards is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value-based measurement. The valuation of stock-based compensation awards is determined at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model (the “Black-Scholes Model”). This model requires highly complex
and subjective inputs, such as the expected term of the option and expected volatility. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. Our current estimate of volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock price. To the extent volatility in our stock price increases in the future, our estimates of the fair value of options granted in the future could increase, thereby increasing stock-based compensation cost recognized in future periods. To establish an estimate of expected term, we consider the vesting period and contractual period of the award and our historical experience of stock option exercises, post-vesting cancellations and volatility. The risk-free rate is based on the yield available on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
We review our valuation assumptions quarterly and, as a result, we likely will update our valuation assumptions used to value stock-based awards granted in future periods utilizing current data. In the future, as additional empirical evidence regarding these input estimates becomes available, we may change or refine our approach of deriving these input estimates. These changes could impact our fair value-based measurement of stock options granted in the future. Changes in the fair value-based measurement of stock awards could materially impact our operating results.
Purchase of Rights to Future Milestones, Royalties and Commercial Payments
We have purchased rights to receive a portion of certain future developmental, regulatory and commercial sales milestones, and royalties on sales of products currently in clinical development. We acquired such rights from various entities and recorded the amount paid for these rights as long-term royalty receivables. We have accounted for the purchased rights as a financial asset in accordance with ASC 310.
We account for milestone and royalty rights related to developmental pipeline products on a non-accrual basis using the cost recovery method. Except for faricimab, these developmental pipeline products are non-commercialized, non-approved products that require FDA or other regulatory approval, and thus have uncertain cash flows. The related receivable balances are classified as noncurrent since no payments are probable to be received in the near term. Faricimab (faricimab-svoa) received FDA approval in January 2022, and we do not yet have a foundation upon which to estimate receipts expected to be collected in the near term; therefore, they remain classified as noncurrent until such time an estimate can be made. Under the cost recovery method, any milestone, royalty, or other payment received is recorded as a direct reduction of the recorded receivable balance. When the recorded receivable balance has been fully collected, any additional amounts collected will be recognized as revenue.
We may be obligated to make contingent payments related to certain product development and regulatory approval milestones and sales-based milestones. If the contingent payments fall within the scope of ASC 815, the contingent payments are measured at fair value at the inception of the arrangement, subject to remeasurement to fair value at the end of each reporting period. Any changes in the estimated fair value are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income.
We review these balances for impairment on a quarterly basis using updates from our partners, press releases and public information on clinical trials. If we determine an impairment is necessary, the impairment recorded will be based on an estimate of discounted future cash flows, which will rely on assumptions including probability of technical success and discount rate. Changes to these assumptions could have a material impact on our financial statements. No impairment has been recorded as of December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were as follows (in thousands):
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Revenue from contracts with customers includes upfront fees, annual licenses fees and milestone payments related to the out-licensing of our product candidates and technologies. The primary components of revenue from contracts with customers in 2021 was $35.0 million in milestone revenue earned under our Anti-TGFβ Antibody License Agreement with Novartis, $0.5 million of milestone revenue recognized in the third quarter of 2021 under our license agreement with Compugen and $0.5 million and $0.2 million of milestone revenue recognized in the second and fourth quarter of 2021, respectively, related to milestone events under our license agreement with Janssen. The primary components of revenue from contracts with customers in 2020 was $25.0 million in milestone revenue earned under our Anti-TGFβ Antibody License Agreement with Novartis and $2.0 million earned under our collaboration agreement with Takeda. The milestones received from Novartis in 2021 and 2020 are one-time payments and do not represent recurring revenue.
Revenue recognized under units-of-revenue method
Revenues recognized under the units-of-revenue method include the amortization of unearned revenue from the sale of royalty interests to HCRP in 2016. The increase in 2021 compared with 2020 was due to increased sales of products underlying the agreements with HCRP.
R&D Expenses
R&D expenses were consistent at $0.2 million in 2021 and 2020. We do not expect to incur substantial internal R&D expenses in 2022 due to the focus on our royalty aggregator business model.
G&A Expenses
G&A expenses include salaries and related personnel costs, professional fees, and facilities costs. In 2021, G&A expenses were $20.5 million compared with $16.8 million in 2020.
The increase of $3.7 million in 2021 as compared with 2020 was primarily due to a $2.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expense for stock options, $0.8 million increase in salary and related expenses, $0.4 million increase in legal and consulting costs and $0.2 million increase in insurance costs.
Other (Expense) Income
Interest Expense
Amortization of debt issuance costs and discounts are included in interest expense. Interest expense is shown below for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The decrease in interest expense compared with 2020 is due to the repayment of our SVB and Novartis loans in June 2021. We expect our interest expense to further decrease in 2022 as we have no outstanding loan balances, however if we elect to obtain new debt financing, our interest expense may increase.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
The following table shows the activity in other (expense) income, net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The fluctuation in other (expense) income, net for 2021 as compared to 2020, is primarily due to the change in fair value of equity securities which consist of shares of Rezolute’s common stock.
We own equity securities consisting of shares of Rezolute’s common stock which are remeasured at fair value at each reporting period. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we remeasured the fair value of the equity securities and recognized a loss of $0.9 million and a gain of $1.0 million, respectively.
The decrease in investment income for 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 is due to lower rates of return on our cash deposits.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded a $1.5 million income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the CARES Act, which was enacted on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act permits us to carry back losses from 2018 to offset income in 2017 resulting in an income tax receivable. During the second quarter of 2021, we received $1.5 million in cash for our income tax receivable. We recorded a $0.1 million income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We continue to maintain a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. We had a total of $5.9 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits, none of which would impact our effective tax rate to the extent that we continue to maintain a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. We do not expect our unrecognized tax benefits to change significantly over the next twelve months.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our unrestricted cash, our working capital and our cash flow activities as of and for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Our primary source of cash provided by operating activities in 2021 was the $35.0 million milestone payment received from Novartis, partially offset by our operating expenses of $20.6 million excluding non-cash expenses including stock-based compensation of $6.2 million. Our primary source of cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was the $17.7 million cash portion of the $25.0 million milestone received from Novartis, partially offset by our operating expenses of $17.0 million, less non-cash expenses including stock-based compensation of $4.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, of $26.5 million was due to our acquisitions under RPAs and a CPPA, including a $13.5 million payment pursuant to the Viracta RPA, a $7.0 million payment pursuant to the Kuros RPA and a $6.0 million payment pursuant to the Affitech CPPA. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $0.2 million was due to the purchase of milestone and royalty rights of $1.2 million in connection with the Second Bioasis RPA in November 2020, partially offset by $1.0 million milestone payment received in connection with the Agenus RPA.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $12.8 million was primarily due to the receipt of net cash proceeds of $37.1 million from our public offering of Series B Preferred Stock, $1.1 million net cash provided from the exercise of stock options after related tax payments, partially offset by $4.3 million cash used in the principal payments of debt, $17.1 million cash used to extinguish outstanding loans and $3.5 million payment of dividends on our Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, of $19.8 million was primarily due to the receipt of net cash proceeds of $22.6 million from the public offering of Series A Preferred Stock and $2.4 million net cash provided from the exercise of stock options after related tax payments, partially offset by $5.3 million cash used in the principal payments of debt.
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $93.3 million and $2.0 million in unrestricted and restricted cash, respectively. Based on our current cash balance and our ability to control discretionary spending, such as royalty acquisitions, we have evaluated and concluded our financial condition is sufficient to fund our planned operations, commitments, and contractual obligations for a period of at least one year following the filing date of this report.
Our planned spending includes increased personnel related costs to hire a new CEO and fund our employee retention efforts. To support our royalty aggregator business model, we engage third parties to assist in our evaluation of potential acquisitions of milestone and royalty streams. Additional operating expenses, including consulting and legal costs, may increase in 2022 in response to an anticipated increase in the volume of acquisition targets evaluated or completed.
We have primarily financed our operations and acquisitions through the issuance of our common stock, Series A and Series B Preferred Stock, and amounts received as milestone payments under our license agreements. The generation of future revenues related to licenses, milestones, and royalties is dependent on the achievement of milestones or product sales by our existing licensees. Milestone payments earned in 2021 and 2020 are not indicative of anticipated milestones in future periods. We may seek additional capital through use of our 2018 Common Stock ATM Agreement or 2021 Series B Preferred Stock ATM Agreement (see Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements), or through other public or private debt or equity transactions. Our ability to raise additional capital in the equity and debt markets, should we choose to do so, is dependent on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the market demand for our common and preferred stock, which are subject to a number of development and business risks and uncertainties, our creditworthiness and the uncertainty that we would be able to raise such additional capital at a price or on terms that are favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds when we need them, our business and operations may be adversely affected.
Our recent financing activities are summarized below and described in more detail in Note 12 of our Consolidated Financial Statements:
● Public Offering of Series A Preferred Stock: In December 2020, we sold 984,000 shares of 8.625% Series A Preferred Stock at the price of $25.00 per share, through a public offering for aggregate gross proceeds of $24.6 million. Total offering costs of $2.0 million were offset against the proceeds from the sale of Series A Preferred Stock, for net proceeds of $22.6 million.
● Public Offering of Depositary Shares Representing Interest in Series B Preferred Stock: In April 2021, we closed a public offering of 1,600,000 Series B Depositary Shares at the price of $25.00 per depositary share. Total gross proceeds from the offering were $40.0 million. Total offering costs of $2.9 million were offset against the proceeds from the sale of Series B Depositary Shares, for net proceeds of $37.1 million.
● Novartis Note Extinguishment: In June 2021, we repaid our outstanding principal balance to Novartis of $9.1 million. No amount was recorded as an extinguishment gain or loss in other (expense) income, net of the consolidated statement of operations. No outstanding principal balance of the Novartis Note remained as of December 31, 2021.
● SVB Loan Extinguishment: In June 2021, we repaid our principal balance of $6.5 million and paid the 8.5% final payment fee of $1.4 million to SVB. We recognized a non-cash loss on extinguishment of $0.3 million in other (expense) income, net of the consolidated statement of operations. No outstanding principal balance of the SVB Loan remained as of December 31, 2021.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements in the short and long term consist of the following expenditures:
Operating expenditures: Our primary uses of cash and operating expenses relate to employee and related costs, consultants to support our administrative and business development efforts, legal and accounting services, insurance, investor relations and IT services. Our headquarters lease expires in February 2023, and we are currently evaluating our office space needs, however, due to our small staff and minimal operating space requirements, we do not expect to incur material incremental costs associated with our current or future building leases.
RPAs and CPPAs: A significant component of our business model is to acquire rights to potential future milestone and royalty streams. We expect to continue deploying capital toward these acquisitions in the near and long term.
We also have potential contingent consideration of $8.1 million recorded on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021, for development and regulatory approval milestones due under our agreements with Affitech and Bioasis. We paid $5.0 million in regulatory approval milestones to Affitech in January 2022 and expect the remaining $3.1 million contingent payments may become due in the near term. We have evaluated and concluded our existing capital resources are adequate to meet those needs.
We also have potential sales-based milestones that may become due under our agreements with Aronora, Kuros and Affitech. All of these sales-based milestones represent a portion of the funds we may receive in the future pursuant to these agreements, and therefore will be fully funded by the related royalty or commercial payment receipts.
Collaborative Agreements, Royalties and Milestone Payments: We have committed to make potential future milestone payments and legal fees to third parties as part of licensing and development programs. Payments under these agreements become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain developmental, regulatory and commercial milestones by our licensees. Because it is uncertain if and when these milestones will be achieved, such contingencies, aggregating up to $6.3 million have not been recorded on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. We are unable to determine precisely when and if our payment obligations under the agreements will become due as these obligations are based on milestone events, the achievement of which is subject to a significant number of risks and uncertainties. All payments due will be funded by a portion of the related milestone or royalty revenue we receive or will be reimbursed by our licensees.
Dividends: Holders of our Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, when and as declared by our Board of Directors, cumulative cash dividends at the rate of 8.625% of the $25.00 liquidation preference per year (equivalent to $2.15625 per share of Series A Preferred Stock per year). Holders of Series B Depositary Shares are entitled to receive, when and as declared by our Board of Directors, cumulative cash dividends at the rate of 8.375% of the $25,000 liquidation preference per share of Series B Preferred Stock ($25.00 per depositary share) per year, which is equivalent to $2,093.75 per year per share of Series B Preferred Stock ($2.09375 per year per depositary share). Dividends on the Series A and Series B Preferred Stock are payable in arrears on or about the 15th day of January, April, July and October of each year. Since original issuance, all dividends have been paid as scheduled. We expect to continue making these dividend payments as scheduled using our existing capital resources.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding new accounting pronouncements.