Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information which Xos’ management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that are included elsewhere in this Report. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section entitled “Risk Factors”. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we”, “us”, “our”, and “the Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Xos and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
We are a mobility solutions company manufacturing Class 5 to 8 battery-electric commercial vehicles. We facilitate the transition of fleets from internal combustion engine vehicles to zero-emission vehicles with proprietary technology suited to the commercial use case. We also provide a range of services to facilitate the transition of fleets to electric vehicles, including charging infrastructure, vehicle maintenance, financing and service.
Our X-Platform (our proprietary, purpose-built vehicle chassis platform) and X-Pack (our proprietary battery system) provide modular features that allow us to accommodate a wide range of last-mile applications and enable us to offer clients at a lower total cost of ownership compared to traditional diesel fleets. The X-Platform, our chassis platform, and X-Pack, our battery technology, are available for purchase as part of the Xos vehicle. The X-Platform and X-Pack were both engineered to be modular in nature to allow fleet operators to customize their vehicles to fit their commercial applications (e.g., upfitting with a specific vehicle body and/or tailoring battery range). In addition to a competitive vehicle purchase price, our technology can also drive savings throughout ownership through increased vehicle uptime, greater payload capacity and reduced service and maintenance expense. Ninety percent of vehicles in our targeted segments operate on routes under 200 miles per shift (referred to as “last-mile” routes). Vehicles that fulfill these predictable last-mile routes generally return to base hubs on a daily basis. Such vehicles are ideal candidates for electrification as operators are able to connect them to dedicated charging infrastructure at return-to-base hubs. Our modular and cost-effective vehicles have been on the road and in customers’ hands since 2018, further validating the durability of satisfaction with our vehicles. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 22 vehicles and 22 powertrains, respectively. Since inception and up to December 31, 2021, we have delivered 71 vehicles and powertrains combined. Actual sales performance during the current year is down relative to anticipated deliveries due to delay in our battery production activities, which has resulted in manufacturing backlog in our vehicle assembly line.
We have taken a conservative approach to capital investment with our Flex manufacturing strategy, which leverages our strategic partners’ existing facilities and labor to assemble up to 5,000 vehicles annually per facility once fully ramped up. This strategy will enable us to scale our operations in a capital efficient manner and in lockstep with market demand. We have partnered with two third-party contract manufacturer partners to operate two Flex facilities. Our Flex facilities are currently tooled to produce up to approximately 2,000 vehicles per annum in total, assuming we are able to mitigate current supply chain constraints.
Our Fleet-as-a-Service product facilitates the transition from traditional internal combustion engine vehicles to battery electric vehicles and provides fleet operators with a comprehensive set of solutions and products (including, but not limited to, Energy Services, service and maintenance, vehicle telematics, OTA updates and financing) to transition to and to operate an electric fleet. This product offering will combine traditionally disaggregated services into a bundled service package, thus reducing the cost and friction associated with electrifying commercial fleets. Services to be offered in our Fleet-as-a-Service offerings include our proprietary technologies and in-house services and offerings from our industry partners. Our Fleet-as-a-Service offering includes (i) Energy Services (on-site vehicle charging infrastructure as well as our proprietary mobile charging unit Xos HubTM); (ii) service and maintenance (provided by our internal maintenance team and industry partners); (iii) replacement parts; (iv) financing via our external partners; (v) risk mitigation products (e.g., GAP insurance and warranties); and (vi) our telematics unit, the Xosphere Intelligence Platform. Fleet-as-a-Service is expected to increase the lifetime revenue of each vehicle sold by us. For the year-ended December 31, 2021, we have generated $4.9 million in revenue (or 97% of revenue) from vehicle sales and $0.1 million from ancillary revenue (or 3% of revenue).
We believe our growth in the coming years is supported by the strong secular tailwinds of an increased focus on the impact of climate change and the growth of e-commerce and last-mile delivery. Commercial trucks are the largest emitters of greenhouse gases per capita in the transportation industry. The U.S. federal, state and foreign governments, along with corporations such as FedEx, UPS and Amazon, have set ambitious goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Simultaneously, e-commerce continues to grow rapidly and has been accelerated by changes in consumer purchasing behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the increased regulation relating to commercial vehicles, the launch of sustainability initiatives from leading financial and corporate institutions and the rapid growth of last-mile logistics will fuel accelerated adoption of our products worldwide.
We expect both our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•continue to invest in research and development and further develop and commercialize our core proprietary technologies including our X-Platform chassis platform, X-Pack battery system and Fleet-as-a-Service platform;
•increase our investment in marketing and advertising, sales and distribution infrastructure to accelerate the growth in sales of our products and services;
•continue to invest in servicing our growing portfolio of vehicles on the road including account management, maintenance and service technicians and the Xosphere Intelligence Platform;
•continue to build out supply chain team as well as additional battery and vehicle Flex assembly lines to bolster manufacturing capacity and meet demand targets, and to adjust to macroeconomic changes, including supply chain shortages;
•continue to build out finance operations to maintain and improve financial controls, financial planning and risk management;
•invest in operations functions including IT, administration and human resources to maintain and improve our operational systems, processes and procedures;
•obtain, maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio including patents, trade secrets, trademarks and copyrights; and
•further invest in infrastructure to operate in accordance with public company standards and guidelines.
Recent Developments
On March 23, 2022, we entered into a Standby Equity Purchase Agreement (the "SEPA") with YA II PN, Ltd. (“Yorkville”), whereby we shall have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Yorkville up to $125.0 million of shares of our Common Stock at our request any time during the 36 months following the execution of the SEPA, subject to certain conditions. We expect to use any net proceeds for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On August 20, 2021, the transactions contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger, as amended on May 14, 2021, by and among NextGen, Sky Merger Sub I, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of NextGen (“Merger Sub”), and Xos, Inc., a Delaware corporation (now known as Xos Fleet, Inc., “Legacy Xos”), were consummated (the “Closing”), whereby Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Xos, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased and Legacy Xos became the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of NextGen (such transaction the “Merger” and, collectively with the transfer by way of continuation and deregistration of NextGen from the Cayman Islands and the continuation and domestication of NextGen as a corporation incorporated in the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”), the “Business Combination”). As a result of the Merger, NextGen completed the Domestication, Merger Sub merged with and into Xos Fleet, Inc. (which was formerly known as Xos, Inc.), the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased and Xos Fleet, Inc. was to be the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of NextGen, and NextGen changed its name to “Xos, Inc.” Xos Fleet, Inc. is the accounting predecessor and the combined entity will be the successor SEC registrant, and Xos’ financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in the registrant’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, NextGen has been treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes. The most significant change in the successor’s future reported financial position and results is an increase in cash by $216.7 million, net of transaction costs and redemptions. Total non-recurring transaction costs was approximately $55.4 million.
As a consequence of the completion of the Business Combination, we became the successor to an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company with ticker “XOS”, which has required us and will continue to require us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We have incurred and expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section entitled “Risk Factors”.
Successful Commercialization of our Products and Services
We expect to derive future revenue from sales of our vehicles, battery systems and Fleet-as-a-Service offering. As many of these products are in development, we will require substantial additional capital to continue developing our products and services and bring them to full commercialization as well as fund our operations for the foreseeable future. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our operations through commercialization and production with proceeds from the Business Combination. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements, if any, will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our commercialization efforts.
Customer Demand
We have sold a limited number of our vehicles to our existing customers, have agreements with future customers and have received interest from other potential customers. We expect that the sales of our vehicles and services to our existing and future customers will be an important indicator of our performance.
Production of Lyra Series, Improved Battery Pack System
We have begun the production of the Lyra Series of battery packs to be installed on new Xos vehicles beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021. The Lyra series of battery packs features a 52% improvement in gravimetric energy density and a 45% improvement in volumetric energy density, and is compatible with all Xos on-highway vehicles. The battery packs come in two configurations: Lyra 30 (29.4kWh) and Lyra 60 (61.8kWh) offering 25 and 50 miles of range, respectively. Each pack features individual, recirculated air cooling and an independent battery management system, offering improved reliability and the ability to mix-and-match packs to cater to each customer’s unique range requirements.
Supply Chain Management
As described more fully below, there are certain areas in our supply chain management that have been disrupted due to global economic conditions and the prolonged effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our ability to find alternative solutions to meet customer demands will affect our financial performance.
Global economic conditions, which the COVID-19 pandemic has contributed to, has impacted our ability to source certain of our critical inventory items. The series of restrictions imposed and the speed and nature of the recovery in response to the pandemic has placed a burden on our supply chain management, including but not limited to the following areas:
•Semiconductor chip shortage: The global silicon semiconductor industry has experienced a shortage in supply and difficulties in ability to meet customer demand. This shortage has led to an increase in lead-times of production of semiconductor chips and components since the beginning of 2020.
•Battery cells: The battery cell industry is facing a shortage in supply which is causing suppliers to limit customer allocations.
•Supply limitation on vehicle bodies and aluminum: Vehicle body suppliers are currently experiencing elevated pricing or a shortage of key materials such as aluminum.
Despite supply chain disruptions, we have continued to source inventory for our vehicles and our purchasing team has been working with vendors to find alternative solutions to areas where there are supply chain constraints. Where appropriate and critical, we have placed orders in advance of projected need to try and offset disruptions. While we are working to minimize the impact of these supply limitations, we cannot be certain that all inventory will be able to be delivered in time for production plans.
Tightness in supply availability could lead to previously unforeseen cost and delivery pressures on certain material and logistical costs in 2022. As the Company accelerates execution of its strategic plans, we will endeavor to be strategic in our cost action plans, including working with various vendors and service providers to provide us cost-effective arrangements.
Impact of COVID-19
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the ultimate extent of the impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition will be primarily driven by the severity and duration of the pandemic as well as the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies. During the year ended December 31, 2021, despite the continued COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to operate our business at full capacity, including all of our manufacturing and research and development operations, with the adoption of enhanced health and safety practices. Although we have made our best estimates based upon current information, actual results could materially differ from the estimates and assumptions developed by management. Accordingly, it is reasonably possible that the estimates made in the financial statements have been, or will be, impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Xos and its wholly owned subsidiaries, Legacy Xos and Xos Services, Inc. (f/k/a Rivordak, Inc.). All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. All long-lived assets are maintained in, and all losses are attributable to, the United States.
Currently, we conduct business through one operating segment. We are an early-stage growth company with minimal commercial operations and our activities to date have been conducted exclusively within North America. For more information about our basis of operations, refer to Note 1 - Description of Business in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
To date, we have primarily generated revenues from the sale of electric step van and stripped chassis vehicles and battery systems and the licensing of our software systems. Our stripped chassis is our vehicle offering that comprises our X-Platform electric vehicle base and X-Pack battery systems, which customers can upfit with their preferred vehicle body. As we continue to expand our commercialization, we expect our revenue to come from these products and other vehicle offerings including chassis cabs, which will feature our chassis and powertrain with the inclusion of a proprietary designed cab, and tractors, a shortened version of the chassis cab designed to haul trailers (also known as “day cabs”), that travel in last-mile use cases. In addition, we will offer a full suite of service offerings including energy services, service and maintenance, telematics and financing.
Revenue consists of product sales, inclusive of shipping and handling charges, net of estimates for customer allowances. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for delivering products. All revenue is recognized when we satisfy the performance obligations under the contract. We recognize revenue by delivering the promised products to the customer, with the revenue recognized at the point in time the customer takes control of the products. For shipping and handling charges, revenue is recognized at the time the products are delivered to or picked up by the customer. The majority of our current contracts have a single performance obligation, which is met at the point in time that the product is delivered, and title passes, to the customer, and are short term in nature.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes materials and other direct costs related to production of our vehicles, including components and parts, batteries, direct labor costs and manufacturing overhead, among others. Materials include inventory purchased from suppliers, as well as assembly components that are assembled by company personnel, including allocation of stock-based compensation expense. Direct labor costs relate to the wages of those individuals responsible for the assembly of vehicles delivered to customers. Cost of goods sold also includes depreciation expense on property and equipment related to cost of goods sold activities, calculated over the estimated useful life of the property and equipment on a straight-line basis. Upon property and equipment retirement or disposal, the cost of the asset disposed, and the related accumulated depreciation from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss), allocated to cost of goods sold.
Cost of goods sold also includes reserves to write down the carrying value of our inventory to their net realizable value and to provide for obsolete and on-hand inventory in excess of forecasted demand.
We are continuing to undertake efforts to find more cost-effective vendors and sources of parts to lower our overall cost of production. Direct labor and overhead costs relate primarily to expenses incurred through our third-party manufacturing partners. We expect these expenses to increase in future periods as production volume increases to meet expected growth in customer demand.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, as well as expenses for facilities, non-sales related travel, and general office supplies and expenses. Personnel-related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, allocations of stock-based compensation, and associated payroll taxes. Overhead items including rent, insurance, utilities, and other items are included as G&A expenses. G&A expenses also include depreciation expense on property and equipment related to G&A activities, calculated over the estimated useful life of the property and equipment on a straight-line basis. Upon property and equipment retirement or disposal, the cost of the asset disposed, and the related accumulated depreciation from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss), allocated to G&A.
We expect our G&A to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services. Corporate executives, finance legal and other administrative functions’ personnel-related expenses will remain as G&A expense.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the design and development of our vehicles and battery systems, which include:
•Expenses related to materials and, supplies consumed in the development and modifications to existing vehicle designs, new vehicle designs contemplated for additional customer offerings, and our battery pack design;
•Fees paid to third parties such as consultants and contractors for engineering and computer-aided design (“CAD”) work on vehicle designs and other third-party services; and,
•Payroll expense for employees primarily engaged in R&D activities, including allocation of stock-based compensation expense.
We expect our research and development costs to increase materially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development of our battery systems, chassis design and certain other technologies. As such, we expect salaries, benefits, and expenses related to those employees whose primary function is in the design and development of new and redesigned vehicle and battery design (primarily in our engineering department) to increase and be allocated.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing (“S&M”) expenses consist primarily of expenses related to our marketing of vehicles and brand initiatives, which includes:
•Travel expenses of our sales force who are primarily responsible for introducing our platform and offerings to potential customers.
•Web design, marketing and promotional items, and consultants who assist in the marketing of the Company.
•Payroll expense for employees primarily engaged in S&M activities, including allocation of stock-based compensation expense.
•Depreciation expense on property and equipment related to S&M activities, calculated over the estimated useful life of the property and equipment on a straight-line basis. Upon property and equipment retirement or disposal, the cost of the asset disposed, and the related accumulated depreciation from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss), allocated to S&M.
We expect these expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as travel expands due to the planned expansion of our sales team and increasing deployment of both direct and indirect marketing efforts. We expect an increase in our cost of sales and marketing expenses as we expand our ongoing hybrid distribution strategy that utilizes both direct distribution and indirect distribution through partnerships with our dealer network.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net includes interest income from our investments in marketable debt securities, available-for-sale and interest paid on our equipment loans and convertible notes, as well as the amortization of the associated discount on the convertible notes.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
____________
(1) Percentage changes greater than or equal to 400% are not meaningful and noted as nm in the table above.
Revenues
Our total revenue increased by $2.4 million, or 91%, from $2.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $5.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenue recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily attributable to our product revenue from dealer relationships (stepvans) and our longstanding customer relationship (powertrains). During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold forty four units (22 stepvans and 22 powertrains), compared to 17 units (stepvans and powertrains combined) in the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased by $5.1 million or 217% from $2.3 million in year ended December 31, 2020 to $7.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in cost of goods sold is directly attributable to the increase in our revenues and increases of (i) $1.1 million in the inventory reserve with no such comparable reserve during the year ended December 31, 2020 and (ii) $4.0 million in direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead.
The increase in direct labor costs is primarily attributable to an increased headcount to produce and fulfill orders for current and future orders. The increase in direct material costs, is due to not having supply contract agreements necessary to get competitive pricing for raw materials. As production increases and we order materials in larger quantities, we expect to have supply contract agreements that decrease the costs of raw materials. A significant portion of the overhead costs incurred include indirect salaries, facility rent, utilities, and depreciation of production equipment, which are primarily fixed in nature and allocated based on production levels. Accordingly, these costs are still incurred when we experience a reduction in production volume. In the near term, we plan to increase production activities, expecting fixed and semi-fixed overhead costs to be absorbed through the production of our batteries and chassis.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $23.6 million, or 654%, from $3.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $27.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, attributable to increases of (i) $10.0 million in headcount and personnel cost for supply chain, sales, legal, accounting, information technology and general and administrative functions necessary to support our business growth (ii) $3.2 million in insurance costs driven by overall coverage increase and purchase of D&O insurance, (iii) $2.5 million in consultant costs related to the implementation of our new ERP system, financial processes, and the Business Combination, (iv) $2.1 million in facility expenses driven by an increase in rent, building and vehicle repair and maintenance and warehouse supplies, (v) $1.0 million in investment for equipment and technology driven by an increase in our headcount and (vi) $4.8 million in other operating expenses, including abnormal loss on inventory shrinkage, depreciation, travel, recruiting, freight and sales tax.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $13.1 million, or 186%, from $7.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $20.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The growth was primarily due to increases of (i) $5.6 million attributable to materials, the utilization of consultants, and software licenses for the development of new battery designs and product offerings, as well as further refinement of our chassis design, (ii) $6.1 million in allocation of personnel costs driven by higher headcount in engineering, including the allocation of stock-based compensation expense, and (iii) $1.4 million in net other costs, driven by equipment and software used solely for R&D purposes.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $2.0 million, or 127%, from $1.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The growth was primarily due to increases of (i) $0.6 million related to consulting fees, public relations costs, participation in tradeshows and general marketing efforts to enhance brand recognition and (ii) $1.4 million in allocation of personnel costs driven by higher headcount, including the allocation of stock-based compensation expense.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net increased by $3.3 million. or (101%), from $(3.3) million net interest expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.04 million net other income in the year ended December 31, 2021. The interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to interest income earned on our investments in marketable debt securities, available-for-sale, partially ofsett by interest expense from our equipment loan payables. The interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to expense from our equipment loan payables and the interest expense on the convertible notes, which was extinguished during the quarter ended March 31, 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Derivatives
This represents changes in the fair value of the derivatives, mainly attributed to the (i) Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants, and the (ii) conversion feature on the convertible notes issued in prior years. The convertible note was extinguished during the first quarter of 2021, resulting in the release of the derivative liability and hence, a significant fair value gain adjustment in 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Earn-out Interests Liability
This represents changes in the fair value of the contingent earn-out interests liabilities.
Write-off of Subscription Receivable
In 2020, we had a promissory note receivable in the amount of $364,000 due from our COO, Giordano Sordoni. The note was utilized to exercise options provided to him by the Company. The principal balance of the note and the associated accrued interest was subsequently forgiven during the year ended December 31, 2021. No similar transaction occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Realized Loss on Debt Extinguishment
This represents the loss on the conversion of convertible debt into preferred shares during the year ended December 31, 2021. No similar transaction occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as net loss before other non-operating expense or income, income tax expense or benefit, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation and other non-recurring items determined by management. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing the Company’s financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. The reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below should be used as a supplement and no single financial measurement should be used to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We consummated the Business Combination, which resulted in net cash proceeds of approximately $216.7 million (including proceeds from NextGen trust account and PIPE investment less transaction costs and redemptions). As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents (excluding restricted cash) and investments in marketable debt securities, available-for-sale aggregating $165.7 million. In December 2020, we had the initial closing of our Series A Financing, and in the first quarter of 2021, we completed the Series A Financing, including the conversion of all our convertible notes into shares of Legacy Xos preferred stock. Prior to our Series A Financing in December 2020 and the Business Combination, we had financed our operations primarily from the sales of convertible notes.
As an early stage growth company, the net losses and cash outflows we have incurred since inception are consistent with our strategy and budget. We will continue to incur net losses and cash outflows in accordance with our operating plan as we continue to expand our research and development activities with respect to our vehicles and battery systems, scale our operations to meet anticipated demand and establish our Fleet-as-a-Service offering. Our ability to access capital when needed is not assured and, if capital is not available to us when and in the amounts needed, we could be required to delay, scale back or abandon some or all of our development programs and other operations, which could materially harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
We believe that our existing cash resources, including capital raised in the Series A Financing and Business Combination, are sufficient to support planned operations for the next 12 months. Additionally, on March 23, 2022, the Company entered into a Standby Equity Purchase Agreement (the "SEPA") with YA II PN, Ltd. ("Yorkville"), whereby the Company shall have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Yorkville up to $125.0 million of its shares of common stock at the Company's request during the 36 months following the execution of the SEPA, subject to certain conditions. The Company expects to use the net proceeds received from sales of common stock pursuant to the SEPA for working capital and general corporate purposes. As a result, our management believes that our current financial resources are sufficient to continue operating activities for at least 12 months past the issuance date of the financial statements.
Cash Flows Summary
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by the growth of our business primarily related to research and development and selling, general, and administrative activities. Our operating cash flows are also affected by our working capital needs to support growth in inventory reserves and fluctuations in accounts payable and other current assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $88.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of a cash-basis net loss of $49.7 million from normal operations of the Company (after non-cash adjustments of $72.8 million), and $39.5 million in working capital movements, primarily relating to inventory cost build-up and increase in prepayments as production ramps up.
Net cash used in operating activities was $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of a net loss of $16.7 million from normal operations of the Company, non-cash adjustments of $3.5 million, and $0.8 million in working capital movements.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We continue to experience negative cash flows from investing activities as we expand our business. Cash flows from investing activities primarily relate to capital expenditures to support our growth, as well as investing available cash from the Business Combination to earn interest income. Net cash used in capital expenditures is expected to continue to expand.
Net cash used in investing activities was $155.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of property and equipment additions of $4.9 million and net purchase of investments in marketable debt securities, available-for-sale of $150.2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of property and equipment additions.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $252.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of the $20.7 million proceeds from the consummation of the Business Combination (including proceeds from NextGen trust account and PIPE investment less transaction costs and redemptions), $31.8 million proceeds from additional Series A financing in January and February 2021, $2.4 million collection of the outstanding subscription receivable and $2.7 million proceeds from the exercise of Legacy Xos Preferred Stock Warrant. These increases were partially offset by $0.3 million of taxes paid related to net share settlement of stock-based awards.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily relating to the Series A Financing in December 2020, resulting in the receipt of $23.1 million in cash and subscription receivables. As part of this financing, we also converted all of our convertible debt and accrued interest to additional shares of Legacy Xos preferred stock in January 2021.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We did not have any material contractual obligations or other commitments as of December 31, 2021, other than what is disclosed in Note 14. Commitments and Contingencies in this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) which requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the balance sheet date, as well as reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Our most significant estimates and judgments involve valuation of stock-based compensation, including the fair value of our Common Stock, and the valuation of the convertible notes payable, the SAFE, and derivative liability. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences could be material to our financial statements.
We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements (see Note 2 - Basis of Presentation, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements in the accompanying audited financial statements), we believe that the following accounting policies require a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from the sale of its commercial electric vehicles, powertrains and battery packs, the licensing of its software systems, and warranty contracts. ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, requires us to recognize revenue in a way that depicts the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We determine revenue recognition by applying the following steps:
1. Identifying the contract with a customer;
2. Identifying the performance obligations in the contract;
3. Determining the transaction price;
4. Allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations; and
5. Recognizing revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied.
We recognize revenue consisting of product and vehicle parts sales, inclusive of shipping and handling charges, net of estimates for customer allowances. Revenue contracts are identified when an enforceable agreement has been made with a customer. Performance obligations are identified in the contract for each distinct products provided within the contract. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products. All revenue is recognized when we satisfy its performance obligations under the contract. Any deposits from customers represent contract liabilities. We recognize revenue by transferring the promised products to the customer, with the revenue recognized at the point in time the customer takes control of the products as agreed in the contracts. We recognize revenue for shipping and handling charges at the time the products are delivered to or picked up by the customer. The majority of its contracts have a single performance obligation, which is met at the point in time that the product is delivered, and title passes to the customer, and are short term in nature.
See Note 2 - Basis of Presentation, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Note 3 - Revenue Recognition for additional information.
Income Taxes
We apply the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be realized or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
In assessing the realizability of deferred income tax assets, ASC 740 requires a more likely than not standard be met. If we determine that it is more likely than not that deferred income tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance must be established. We record a valuation allowance, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Estimates of the realizability of deferred tax assets, as well as its assessment of whether an established valuation allowance should be reversed, are based on projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversal of deferred tax liabilities, and tax planning strategies. When evaluating whether projected future taxable income will support the realization of deferred tax assets, we consider both its historical financial performance and general economic conditions. In addition, we consider the time frame over which it would take to utilize the deferred tax assets prior to their expiration.
We utilize a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain income tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) or other taxing authorities, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount which is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and may not accurately forecast actual outcomes.
See Note 16 - Income Taxes for additional information.
Investments in Marketable Debt Securities, Available-for-Sale
We maintain a portfolio of investments in a variety of fixed and variable rate debt securities, including U.S. treasuries, corporate debt, asset-backed securities and other, non-U.S. government and supranational bonds and certificate of deposit. We consider our investments in marketable debt securities to be available-for-sale, and accordingly, are recorded at their fair values. We determine the appropriate classification of investments in marketable debt securities at the time of purchase. Interest along with amortization of purchase premiums and accretion of discounts from the purchase date through the estimated maturity date, including consideration of variable maturities and contractual call provisions, are included in other income (expenses), net in the consolidated statements of net and comprehensive income. We typically invest in highly-rated debt securities, and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires substantially all investments to be investment grade, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss.
We review quarterly its investment portfolio of all securities in an unrealized loss position to determine if an impairment charge exists. See Note 7 - Investments in Marketable Debt Securities, Available-for-Sale for additional information.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, under which shared based payments that involve the issuance of Common Stock to employees and non-employees and meet the criteria for equity-classified awards are recognized in the financial statements as compensation expense based on the fair value on the date of grant.
Prior to the Business Combination, we issued stock options to purchase shares of common stock (“Options”) to employees and non-employees under the Xos, Inc. 2018 Stock Plan (the “2018 Stock Plan”). We allow employees to exercise options prior to vesting. We consider the consideration received for the early exercise of an option to be a deposit and the related amount is recorded as a liability. The liability is relieved when the options vest. We have the right to repurchase any unvested (but issued) shares upon termination of service of an employee at the original exercise price. We stopped issuing options under the 2018 Stock Plan in the fourth quarter of 2020.
We estimate the fair value of options on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Each of the Black-Scholes inputs generally require significant judgement, including the assumptions discussed below.
•Fair value of Common Stock - equals the closing stock price on the day of award grant.
•Expected term - the expected term represents the period that our Options are expected to be outstanding and is determined based on the “simplified” method, as prescribed in SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 107. The expected term of non-employee options is equal to the contractual term.
•Risk-free rate - the risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on the U.S. Treasury securities with an equivalent expected term of the options.
•Expected volatility - we determine the price volatility factor based on the historical volatilities of several publicly listed peer companies as we do not have trading history for its Common Stock.
•Expected dividend yield - the expected dividend yield assumption is based on our current expectations about its anticipated dividend policy.
After the Business Combination, we ceased issuing equity under the 2018 Stock Plan and instead issued restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to employees and non-employees under the Xos, Inc. 2021 Stock Plan (the “2021 Stock Plan”). We initially valued RSUs based on the grant date closing price of our common stock. For awards with periodic vesting, we recognize the related expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the entire award, subject to periodic adjustments to ensure that the cumulative amount of expense recognized through the end of any reporting period is at least equal to the portion of the grant date value of the award that has vested through that date. We account for forfeitures prospectively as they occur.
If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested share-based awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unrecognized or previously recorded stock-based compensation expense.
See Note 11 - Stock-Based Compensation for additional information.
Public and Private Placement Warrants
The warrants issued in connection with NextGen’s initial public offering and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815.
The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants underlying the units sold in the initial public offering, except that the Private Placement Warrants and the Common Stock issuable upon exercise of the Private Placement Warrants were not transferable, assignable or salable until September 19, 2021, subject to certain limited exceptions. Additionally, the Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the Private Placement Warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by us and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants.
We determine the fair value of our Public Warrants based on the publicly listed trading price of such Warrants as of the valuation date. Accordingly, the Public Warrants are classified as Level 1 financial instruments. Additionally, since the Private Placement Warrants are substantially the same as the Public Warrants, we determined the fair value of our Private Placement Warrants based on the Public Warrant trading price. Accordingly, the Public Warrants are classified as Level 2 financial instruments.
See Note 10 - Derivative Instruments for additional information.
Contingent Earn-out Shares Liability
Earn-out shares represent a freestanding financial instrument classified as liabilities on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as we determine that these financial instruments are not indexed to our own equity in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Earn-out shares liability were initially recorded as fair value in the Business Combination and are adjusted to fair value at each reporting date with changes in fair value recorded in change in fair value of earn-out shares liability in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
The earn-out triggers included a change of control provision within five years of the Closing, and achieving certain volume weighted average share prices (“VWAPs”) within five years of the Closing. These conditions result in the instrument failing indexation guidance and are properly reflected as a liability as of December 31, 2021.
See Note 6 - Recapitalization and Contingent Earn-out Shares Liability for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Basis of Presentation, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements and our consolidated financial statements included in this filing for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
For purposes of this Report, we are not required to comply with the rules of the SEC implementing Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, based on our business combination date and are therefore not required to make a formal assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting for that purpose. We are excluding management’s report on internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 215.02 of the SEC’s Compliance and Disclosure Interpretations. We are required to disclose changes made in our internal controls and procedures on a quarterly basis, we are not required to make our first annual assessment of our internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 until the year following our first annual report required to be filed with the SEC post-manager. We have begun the process of establishing a system of internal control to support management’s evaluation of internal control subsequent to the completed Business Combination on August 20, 2021.
Effective internal controls are necessary to provide reliable financial reports and to assist in the effective prevention of fraud. Any inability to provide reliable financial reports or prevent fraud could harm our business. Any system of internal controls, however well designed and operated, is based in part on certain assumptions and can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurances that the objectives of the system are met. As part of our process to establish an effective system of internal controls, management has identified areas of improvement in our preliminary system of internal control over financial reporting that we are working diligently to address.
If we cannot conclude that we have effective internal control over our financial reporting, investors could lose confidence in the reliability of our financial statements, which could lead to a decline in our stock price. Failure to comply with reporting requirements could also subject us to sanctions and/or investigations by the SEC, the NASDAQ or other regulatory authorities. If we fail to remedy any deficiencies or maintain the adequacy of our internal controls, we could be subject to regulatory scrutiny, civil or criminal penalties or stockholder litigation. In addition, failure to maintain adequate internal controls could result in financial statements that do not accurately reflect our operating results or financial condition.