Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Xponential Fitness LLC (“XPO LLC”), the principal operating subsidiary of Xponential Fitness, Inc. (the "Company" or “XPO Inc.”), is the largest global franchisor of boutique fitness brands. On July 23, 2021, the Company completed an initial public offering (“IPO”) of 10,000,000 shares of Class A common stock at an initial public offering price of $12.00 per share. Pursuant to a reorganization into a holding company structure, the Company is a holding company with its principal asset being a controlling ownership interest in XPO LLC through its ownership interest in Xponential Intermediate Holdings, LLC (“XPO Holdings”). Information for any period prior to July 23, 2021 relates to XPO LLC.
The Company operates a diversified platform of ten brands spanning across verticals including Pilates, indoor cycling, barre, stretching, rowing, dancing, boxing, running, functional training and yoga. XPO LLC franchisees offer energetic, accessible, and personalized workout experiences led by highly qualified instructors in studio locations across 48 U.S. states, the District of Columbia and Canada and through master franchise agreements or international expansion in ten additional countries. The Company's portfolio of brands includes Club Pilates, the largest Pilates brand in the United States; CycleBar, the largest indoor cycling brand in the United States; StretchLab, a concept offering one-on-one and group stretching services; Row House, a high-energy, low-impact indoor rowing workout; AKT, a dance-based cardio workout combining toning, interval and circuit training; YogaSix, the largest franchised yoga brand; Pure Barre, a total body workout that uses the ballet barre to perform small isometric movements; Stride, a treadmill-based cardio and strength training concept; Rumble, a boxing-inspired full-body workout; and BFT, a functional training and strength-based program.
As of December 31, 2021, 1,954 studios were open, and franchisees were contractually committed to open an additional 1,806 studios in North America under existing franchise agreements. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had 176 studios open internationally, and our master franchisees were contractually obligated to sell licenses to franchisees to open an additional 956 new studios in ten countries, of which master franchisees have sold 184 licenses for studios not yet opened as of December 31, 2021. In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenue outside of the United States comprised approximately 1.7% and 1.1% of total revenue, respectively. No franchisee accounted for more than 5% of our revenue. We operate in one segment for financial reporting purposes.
Highlights of our platform’s recent financial results and growth include:
•increased the number of global open studios from 818 as of December 31, 2017 to 2,130 as of December 31, 2021, representing a compound annual growth rate (“CAGR”) of 27% and increased the number of global open studios from 1,796 as of December 31, 2020 to 2,130 as of December 31, 2021;
•increased cumulative global franchise licenses sold from 1,508 as of December 31, 2017 to 4,424 as of December 31, 2021, representing a CAGR of 31%, and increased global franchise licenses sold from 3,469 as of December 31, 2020 to 4,424 as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, franchisees were contractually obligated to open an additional 1,806 studios in North America. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had 176 studios open internationally and master franchisees were contractually obligated to sell licenses to franchisees to open an additional 956 studios in ten countries, of which master franchisees have sold 184 licenses for studios not yet opened as of December 31, 2021;
•generated system-wide sales of $710 million and $443 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively;
•experienced an increase in same store sales of 41% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the prior year, compared to a decline in same store sales of 34% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the prior year, which reflects a significant rebound of studio performance from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•generated run-rate AUV of $446 thousand and $287 thousand in 2021 and 2020, respectively;
•acquired certain assets and rights to two additional brands in 2021;
•completed an IPO of 10,000,000 shares of Class A common stock and sold an additional 904,000 shares upon exercise of underwriter's option to purchase additional shares; and
•completed a private sale of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock to certain institutional investors with gross proceeds of $200 million.
All metrics above are presented on an adjusted basis to reflect historical information of the brands we acquired and therefore includes time periods during which certain of the brands were operated by our predecessors. We acquired Club Pilates and CycleBar in September 2017, StretchLab in November 2017, Row House in December 2017, AKT in March 2018, YogaSix in July 2018, Pure Barre in October 2018, Stride in December 2018, Rumble in March 2021 and BFT in October 2021.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact global economic activities and poses the risk that prevents or restricts us and our employees, franchisees, members and suppliers from conducting business activities, as federal, state, local and foreign governments mandated stay-at-home orders and closures of businesses, encouraged social distancing measures and implemented travel restrictions and prohibitions on non-essential activities and business.
The COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted our ability to generate revenue. A substantial portion of our revenue is derived from royalty fees, which were affected by the decline in system-wide sales as almost all of our franchised studios were temporarily closed beginning in mid-March 2020. New studio openings were also delayed during this period. We also experienced a reduction in sales of new studio licenses and in installation of equipment in new studios. Additionally, we temporarily reduced our marketing fund fees from 2% to 1% of the sales of franchisees while studios were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related government mandates as part of our COVID-19 support response.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, franchisees temporarily closed almost all studios system-wide in mid-March 2020, although our franchised studios have resumed operations as of December 31, 2021. As the COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact areas in which our studios operate, certain of our studios have had to re-close or significantly reduce capacity, and additional studios may have to re-close or further reduce capacity, pursuant to local guidelines. We also experienced lower license sales and delays in new studios openings due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we have continued opening studios throughout the COVID-19 pandemic and franchisees have opened 555 studios globally from April 2020 through December 2021, including studios opened by Rumble and BFT.
Our proven operational model allowed us to provide robust support to franchisees during the COVID-19 pandemic and has led to no units permanently closed under our ownership. Even though studios were temporarily closed, franchisees maintained strong member loyalty, with many members maintaining actively paying accounts or putting their memberships “on hold.” Members who did not pay membership dues while “on hold” kept their agreements and preserved the ability to reactivate when studios reopened, mitigating high member cancellation rates. While studios were closed, we continued to generate revenue from franchise license and royalty payments as customers engaged with our digital platform services and purchased merchandise. We took significant action to support franchisees’ efforts to ensure they had access to resources that guided them on generating revenues and reducing operating costs, including a temporary reduction in marketing fund percentage collected.
The adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic began to decline during 2021, although, infection rates continue to fluctuate in various regions and new strains and variants of the virus, including the delta and omicron variants, remain a risk. During the second through fourth quarter of 2021 in particular, as vaccination rates have increased substantially in the United States and restrictions on indoor fitness classes in most states have either been reduced or eliminated, franchisees’ membership visits have increased. As of December 31, 2021, the membership levels and membership visits for the quarter ended December 31, 2021 were at 117% relative to the quarter ended December 31, 2019 (excludes Rumble and BFT). For the quarter ended December 31, 2021, run-rate Average Unit Volume ("AUVs") recovered to approximately 94% relative to the quarter ended December 31, 2019 (includes Rumble and BFT).
Following the significant disruption to the global fitness industry caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we took ownership of a greater number of studios than we would expect to hold in the normal course of our business. We are in the process of reselling the licenses for these studios to new or existing franchisees ("company-owned transition studios") as operating studios is not a component of our business model. However, we may not be able to do so and we may choose to close some or all such studios to the extent they are not profitable for an extended period of time and could incur charges in connection therewith for asset impairment and lease termination, employee severance and related matters, which could adversely affect our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The full extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance is uncertain and will depend on many factors outside of our control, including, without limitation, the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic; the availability, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines; the spread of new variants of COVID-19; the continued and renewed imposition of protective public safety measures; the disruption to global supply chain; rising inflation rates; the impact of the pandemic on the fitness industry and responses from our franchisees to the pandemic. Although we have implemented measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we expect the pandemic to continue to adversely affect franchisees, as well as our overall business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition.
Rumble Acquisition
On March 24, 2021, H&W Franchise Holdings LLC (parent entity prior to the IPO) entered into a contribution agreement with Rumble Holdings LLC, Rumble Parent LLC and Rumble Fitness LLC to acquire certain rights and intellectual property of Rumble Fitness LLC (“Rumble”), to be used by H&W Franchise Holdings LLC in connection with the franchise business under the “Rumble” trade name. Pursuant to this agreement, Rumble became a direct subsidiary of Rumble Parent LLC, which is owned by Rumble Holdings LLC, and H&W Franchise Holdings LLC acquired certain rights and intellectual property of Rumble Holdings LLC, which beneficially held all of the issued and outstanding membership interests of Rumble. As consideration, H&W Franchise Holdings, LLC (i) issued Class A Units equivalent to 1,300,032 shares of XPO Inc. Class A common stock to Rumble Holdings LLC, (ii) issued Class A Units equivalent to 2,024,445 shares of XPO Inc. Class A common stock to Rumble Holdings LLC, which are subject to vesting and forfeiture as provided in the contribution agreement and (iii) assumed and discharged any liabilities arising from and after the closing date under the assigned contracts and acquired assets. H&W Franchise Holdings, LLC then contributed the Rumble assets to H&W Intermediate Holdings, LLC, which then immediately contributed the Rumble assets to XPO LLC. As a result of this transaction, Rumble became a holder of 5% or more of the equity interests of H&W Franchise Holdings LLC.
Prior to the vesting and/or forfeiture of certain equity instruments issued to Rumble Holdings LLC, the instruments will be treated as a liability on our balance sheet instead of equity and will therefore be subject to a subsequent quarterly fair value remeasurement on a mark-to-market basis as a derivative liability. As a result, fluctuations in these quarterly liability valuations will impact our financial results following the IPO in accordance with movements in our stock price, and the related valuation of the derivative liability that we will be required to make on a quarterly basis. See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
BFT Acquisition
On October 13, 2021, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (“APA”) with GRPX Live Pty Ltd., an Australian corporation, and its affiliates (the “Seller”) whereby the Company acquired certain assets relating to the concept and brand known as BFT™. Assets acquired include franchise rights, brand, intellectual property and the rights to manage and license the franchise business (the “Franchise System”). The Company also assumed certain contingent liabilities associated with the purchased assets and provided certain indemnifications to the Seller. This acquisition is expected to enhance the Company’s franchise offerings and provide a platform for future growth, which the Company believes is complementary to its portfolio of franchises.
Consideration for the transaction included cash of $60.0 million AUD ($44.3 million USD based on the currency exchange rate as of the purchase date). In addition, the Company agreed to pay contingent consideration to the Seller consisting of quarterly cash payments based on the sales of the Franchise System and equipment packages in the United States and Canada, as well as a percentage of royalties collected by the Company, provided that aggregate minimum payments of $5.0 million AUD (approximately $3.7 million USD based on the currency exchange rate as of the purchase date) are required to be paid to the Seller for the two-year period ending December 31, 2023 and the aggregate amount of such payments for the two-year period ending December 31, 2023 is subject to a maximum of $14.0 million AUD (approximately $10.3 million USD based on the currency exchange rate as of the purchase date). Based on the purchase price allocation, the Company has determined that the fair value of the estimated contingent consideration liability as of the acquisition date is $9.4 million and is recorded in accrued expenses and contingent consideration from acquisitions in the consolidated balance sheets.
In addition, the Company entered into a Master Franchise Agreement (“MFA”) with an affiliate of the Seller (the “Master Franchisee”), pursuant to which the Company granted the Master Franchisee the master franchise rights for the BFTTM brands in Australia, New Zealand and Singapore. In exchange, the Company will receive certain fees and royalties, including a percentage of the revenue generated by the Master Franchisee under the MFA. The MFA contains an option for the Company to repurchase the master franchise rights granted under the MFA in either 2023 or 2024 at a purchase price based on the Master Franchisee’s EBITDA. If the Company (or a designee of the Company) does not exercise the option pursuant to the terms of the MFA, then the Company might be required to pay a cancellation fee to the Master Franchisee which might be material to the Company. If the Master Franchisee rejects an offer to repurchase the franchise rights, then the cancellation fee is not required to be paid.
At the acquisition date, there were certain claims and lawsuits against the Seller for which the Company has agreed to indemnify the Seller. The claims and lawsuits relate to alleged patent and trademark infringements. Plaintiff alleges that plaintiff has suffered, and is likely to continue to suffer, loss and damage due to breach of the patents by the Seller and is seeking damages or in the alternative an account of profits. The Seller has filed a cross-claim alleging that the defendant’s two Australian patents are, and always have been, invalid and that they should be revoked. The court in Australia held a trial in December 2020, and on February 14, 2022, the court issued a decision holding that the Plaintiff’s claims of infringement were invalid and that even if they were valid, the Seller did not infringe upon these patents and trademarks. In addition, the Plaintiff has brought related claims for patent infringement against the Seller in the United States District Court for Delaware, and these actions are currently pending. See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
In addition to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as described above, we believe that the most significant factors affecting our results of operations include:
•Licensing new qualified franchisees, selling additional licenses to existing franchisees and opening studios. Our growth depends upon our success in licensing new studios to new and existing franchisees. We believe our success in attracting new franchisees and attracting existing franchisees to invest in additional studios has resulted from our diverse offering of attractive brands, corporate level support, training provided to franchisees and the opportunity to realize attractive returns on their invested capital. We believe our significant investments in centralized systems and infrastructure help support new and existing franchisees. To continue to attract qualified new franchisees, sell additional studios to existing franchisees and assist franchisees in opening their studios, we plan to continue to invest in our brands to enable them to deliver positive consumer experiences and in our integrated services at the brand level to support franchisees.
•Timing of studio openings. Our revenue growth depends to a significant extent on the number of studios that are open and operating. Many factors affect whether a new studio will be opened on time, if at all, including the availability and cost of financing, selection and availability of suitable studio locations, delays in hiring personnel as well as any delays in equipment delivery or installation. To the extent franchisees are unable to open new studios on the timeline we anticipate, or at all, we will not realize the revenue growth that we expect. We believe our investments in centralized systems and infrastructure, including real estate site selection, studio build-out and design assistance help enable franchisees to open studios in a timely manner, and we plan to continue to invest in our systems to continue to provide assistance during the opening process.
•Increasing same store sales. Our long-term revenue prospects are driven in part by franchisees’ ability to increase same store sales (discussed below). Several factors affect our same store sales in any given period, including the number of stores that have been in operation for a significant period of time, growth in total memberships and marketing and promotional efforts. We expect to continue to seek to grow same store sales and AUVs by helping franchisees acquire new members, increase studio utilization and drive increased spend from consumers. We also intend to expand ancillary revenue streams, such as our digital platform offerings and retail merchandise.
•International expansion. We continue to invest in increasing the number of franchisees outside of North America. We have developed strong relationships and executed committed development contracts with master franchisees to propel our international growth. We plan to continue to invest in these relationships and seek new relationships and opportunities, including through acquisitions and partnerships, in countries that we have targeted for expansion.
•Consumer demand and competition for discretionary income. Our revenue and future success will depend in part on the attractiveness of our brands and the services provided by franchisees relative to other fitness and entertainment options available to consumers. Our franchisees’ AUVs are dependent upon the performance of studios and may be impacted by reduced capacity as a result of various factors, including the COVID-19 pandemic and shifting consumer demand and behavior for fitness services. Macroeconomic factors generally, and economic factors affecting a particular geographic territory, may also increase competition for discretionary income, impact the returns generated by franchisees and therefore impact our operating results.
Key Performance Indicators
In addition to our financial statements prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), we regularly review the following key metrics to measure performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, compensate our employees, and monitor our business. While we believe that these metrics are useful in evaluating our business, other companies may not use similar metrics or may not calculate similarly titled metrics in a consistent manner.
The following table sets forth our key performance indicators for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
*The definition of “Adjusted EBITDA” and a detailed reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below under the section entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
All metrics above, other than adjusted EBITDA, are presented on an adjusted basis to include historical information of Rumble and BFT prior to the acquisition by the Company in March and October 2021, respectively. All references to these metrics in this Form 10-K use this same basis of reporting.
System-Wide Sales
System-wide sales represent gross sales by all studios in North America. System-wide sales includes sales by franchisees that are not revenue realized by us in accordance with GAAP. While we do not record sales by franchisees as revenue, and such sales are not included in our consolidated financial statements, this operating metric relates to our revenue because we receive approximately 7% and 2% of the sales by franchisees as royalty revenue and marketing fee revenue, respectively. We believe that this operating measure aids in understanding how we derive our royalty revenue and marketing fee revenue and is important in evaluating our performance. System-wide sales growth is driven by new studio openings and increases in same store sales. Management reviews system-wide sales monthly, which enables us to assess changes in our franchise revenue, overall studio performance, the health of our brands and the strength of our market position relative to competitors.
Number of New Studio Openings
The number of new studio openings reflects the number of studios opened globally during a particular reporting period. We consider a new studio to be open once the studio begins offering classes. Opening new studios is an important part of our growth strategy. New studios may not generate material revenue in the early period following an opening and their revenue may not follow historical patterns. Management reviews the number of new studio openings in order to help forecast operating results and to monitor studio opening processes.
Number of Studios Operating
In addition to the number of new studios opened during a period, we track the number of total studios operating globally at the end of a reporting period. We view this metric on a net basis to take account of any studios that may have closed during the reporting period. While nearly all our franchised studios are licensed to franchisees, from time to time we own and operate a limited number of studios (typically as we take possession of a studio following a franchisee ceasing to operate it and as we prepare it to be licensed to a new franchisee). Management reviews the number of studios operating at a given point in time in order to help forecast system-wide sales, franchise revenue and other revenue streams.
Licenses Sold
The number of licenses sold in North America and globally reflect the cumulative number of licenses sold by us (or, outside of North America, by our master franchisees), since inception through the date indicated. Licenses contractually obligated to open refer to licenses sold net of opened studios and terminations. Licenses contractually obligated to open internationally reflect the number of licenses that master franchisees were contractually obligated to sell licenses to franchisees to open internationally that have not yet opened as of the date indicated. The number of licenses sold is a useful indicator of the number of studios that have opened and that are expected to open in the future, which management reviews in order to monitor and forecast our revenue streams. Of the franchisees that opened their first studio in 2019, on average it took approximately 12.2 months from signing the franchise agreement to open. The length of time increased during 2020 and 2021 due to COVID-related opening restrictions. Management also reviews the number of licenses sold globally and the number of licenses contractually obligated to open internationally in order to help forecast studio growth and system-wide sales.
Average Unit Volume
LTM AUV consists of the average sales for the trailing 12 calendar months for all studios in North America that have been open for at least 13 calendar months as of the measurement date. Run-rate AUV represents quarterly AUV multiplied by four, for studios that are at least six months old at the beginning of the respective quarter. AUV is calculated by dividing sales during the applicable period for all studios being measured by the number of studios being measured. AUV growth is primarily driven by changes in same store sales and is also influenced by new studio openings. Management reviews AUV to assess studio economics.
Same Store Sales
Same store sales refer to period-over-period sales comparisons for the base of studios. We define the same store sales base to include studios in North America that have been open for at least 13 calendar months as of the measurement date. Any transfer of ownership of a studio does not affect this metric. We measure same store sales based solely upon monthly sales as reported by franchisees. This measure highlights the performance of existing studios, while excluding the impact of new studio openings. Management reviews same store sales to assess the health of the franchised studios.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, is helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance. In addition, our management uses non-GAAP measures to compare our performance relative to forecasts and to benchmark our performance externally against competitors. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate and present similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measure as tools for comparison. A reconciliation is provided below for the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measures stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
We believe that the non-GAAP financial measures presented below, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP financial measures, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA (net income/loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization), adjusted for the impact of certain non-cash and other items that we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing operating performance. These items include equity-based compensation, acquisition and transaction expenses (income) (including change in contingent consideration), management fees and expenses (that was discontinued after July 2021), integration and related expenses, litigation expenses (consisting of legal and related fees for specific proceedings that arise outside of the ordinary course of our business), employee retention credit (a tax credit for retaining employees throughout the COVID-19 pandemic) and expense related to the remeasurement of our TRA obligation that we do not believe reflect our underlying business performance and affect comparability. EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry.
We believe that adjusted EBITDA, viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provides useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations because it eliminates the impact expenses that we believe reduce the comparability of our underlying core business performance from period to period and is therefore useful to our investors in comparing the core performance of our business from period to period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Results of Operations
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue
Total revenue. Total revenue was $155.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $106.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $48.5 million, or 45.5%. The increase in total revenue was primarily due to an increase in franchise revenue, franchise marketing fund revenue and other service revenue attributable to reopening of studios that were temporarily closed in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and opening of new studios in 2021.
Franchise revenue. Franchise revenue was $74.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $48.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $26.4 million, or 54.9%. Franchise revenue consisted of franchise royalty fees of $46.3 million, training fees of $6.7 million, franchise territory fees of $14.9 million and technology fees of $6.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to franchise royalty fees of $28.4 million, training fees of $5.8 million, franchise territory fees of $9.8 million and technology fees of $4.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in franchise royalty fees was primarily due to a 41% increase in same store sales due in large part to temporary studio closures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year period, and to 240 new studio openings in North America since December 31, 2020, which also contributed to the increase in franchise territory fees and technology fees, and to a lesser extent, the acquisition of Rumble and BFT during 2021.
Equipment revenue. Equipment revenue was $22.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $20.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.9 million, or 9.4%. Most equipment revenue is recognized in the period that the equipment is installed. Equipment installations in the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled 316 compared to 279 in the year ended December 31, 2020 with the average price of equipment installed decreasing in the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in average price is due to a brand mix, international versus North America mix and a higher proportion of equipment installed with brands with lower equipment prices.
Merchandise revenue. Merchandise revenue was $20.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $16.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3.5 million, or 21.0%. The increase was due primarily to a higher number of operating studios in the current year period and temporary closures of studios in the prior year period.
Franchise marketing fund revenue. Franchise marketing fund revenue was $13.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6.2 million, or 82.9%. The increase was primarily due to an increase in same store sales, 240 new studio openings in North America since December 31, 2020, and to a temporary reduction in the marketing fund percentage collected from 2% to 1% of the sales of franchisees whose studios were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Other service revenue. Other service revenue was $24.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $13.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $10.5 million, or 75.9%. The increase was primarily due to a $5.5 million increase in revenue from company-owned transition studios and a $6.2 million increase in other preferred vendor commission and convention revenue, partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in our digital platform revenue.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Costs of product revenue. Costs of product revenue was $28.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $25.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.8 million, or 11.0%, compared to an increase in related revenues of 14.6%. Costs of product revenue as a percentage of related revenue decreased to 66.8% in the year ended December 31, 2021, from 69.0% in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to a shift in equipment revenue mix in 2021 and a higher percentage of non-branded merchandise revenue in 2021 for which the company earns a commission with no corresponding cost of revenue.
Costs of franchise and service revenue. Costs of franchise and service revenue was $12.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $8.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.3 million, or 51.5%. The increase was primarily due to an increase in costs related to technology fee revenue, consistent with the related revenue increase.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $94.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $60.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $33.9 million, or 55.6%. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in salaries and wages and occupancy expenses of $7.9 million and $3.8 million, respectively, primarily related to the increase in number of company-owned transition studios; $8.0 million increase in equity-based compensation, primarily related to modification of awards in 2021 and new grants; increases in marketing and promotion expense and insurance expense of $4.7 million and $2.5 million, respectively; increases in legal costs of $4.1 million primary related to increased settlements and litigation costs; and net increases of $5.3 million in other variable expenses in 2021, partially offset by a reduction in bad debt expense of $2.4 million.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense was $10.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.5 million, or 32.9%. The increase was due primarily to increase in intangible assets related to the Rumble and BFT acquisitions in March and October 2021.
Marketing fund expense. Marketing fund expense was $13.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, and is consistent with the increase in franchise marketing fund revenue.
Acquisition and transaction expenses (income). Acquisition and transaction expenses (income) were $26.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to ($11.0) million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a change of $37.6 million, or 342.2%. These expenses (income) represent the non-cash change in contingent consideration related to business acquisitions, $1.0 million of transaction expenses in 2021 related to the acquisitions of Rumble and BFT and $25.1 million of expense in 2021 related to the change in contingent consideration related to the Rumble acquisition.
Other (Income) Expense, net
Interest income. Interest income primarily consists of interest on notes receivable and was insignificant in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Interest expense. Interest expense was $24.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3.3 million, or 15.4%. Interest expense consists of interest on notes payable and long-term debt, accretion of earn-out liabilities and amortization of deferred loan costs. The increase was due primarily to write off of $7.5 million of deferred loan costs and debt discount and $2.3 million prepayment penalty incurred in the year ended December 31, 2021, related to our credit agreement with Cerberus Business Finance Agency, LLC, which was replaced with a new credit facility in April 2021, and $115.0 million pay down of debt with IPO proceeds, compared to $1.5 million of prepayment and other penalties incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 and a write off of $1.8 million of deferred loan costs related to our credit agreement with Monroe Capital Management Advisors, LLC, which was replaced with a new credit facility in March 2020.
Gain on debt extinguishment. Gain on debt extinguishment of $3.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 represents the forgiveness of principal and interest on our PPP Loan.
Income Taxes
Income taxes. Income taxes were insignificant in years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue
Total revenue. Total revenue was $106.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $129.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $22.5 million, or 17.5%. The decrease in total revenue was primarily due to a decrease of $19.4 million of equipment revenue, which was due to the decrease in new studio openings caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and to a lesser extent merchandise revenue due to temporary studio closures and reduced usage during 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Franchise revenue. Franchise revenue was $48.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $47.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.7 million, or 1.5%. Franchise revenue consisted of franchise royalty fees of $28.5 million, training fees of $5.8 million, franchise territory fees of $9.8 million and technology fees of $4.0 million in 2020, compared to franchise royalty fees of $33.9 million, training fees of $6.6 million, franchise territory fees of $5.4 million and technology fees of $1.5 million in 2019. The decrease in franchise royalty fees was primarily due to a 34% decrease in same store sales due in large part to temporary studio closures, partially offset by 240 new studio openings in North America in 2020, which contributed to the increase in franchise territory fees and technology fees. The number of new studio openings does not reflect the number of new studios Rumble or BFT opened in 2020.
Equipment revenue. Equipment revenue was $20.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $40.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $19.4 million, or 48.4%. The decrease was primarily attributable to 240 new studio openings in North America in 2020, compared to 394 new studio openings in North America in 2019. The decrease in the number of new studio openings was due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including government mandated closures of in-person fitness studios. Most of the equipment revenue is recognized in the period that a new studio opens. The number of new studio openings in 2019 and 2020 do not reflect the number of new studios Rumble or BFT opened in 2019 and 2020.
Merchandise revenue. Merchandise revenue was $16.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $22.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $5.6 million, or 25.1%. The decrease was due primarily to temporary studio closures in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Franchise marketing fund revenue. Franchise marketing fund revenue was $7.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.2 million, or 13.9%. The decrease was primarily due to a 34% decrease in same store sales, and a temporary reduction in the marketing fund percentage collected from 2% to 1% of the sales of franchisees whose studios were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related government mandates as part of our COVID-19 support response, partially offset by 240 new studio openings in North America in 2020. The number of new studio openings does not reflect the number of new studios Rumble opened in 2020.
Other service revenue. Other service revenue was $13.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $10.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.9 million, or 26.7%. The increase was primarily due to a $2.2 million increase in our digital platform revenue and a $1.4 million increase in other preferred vendor commission revenue, partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in revenue from company-owned studios.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Costs of product revenue. Costs of product revenue was $25.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $41.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $15.7 million, or 37.9%. The decrease was consistent with the decrease in equipment and merchandise revenue in 2020.
Costs of franchise and service revenue. Costs of franchise and service revenue was $8.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.7 million, or 47.2%. The increase was primarily due to an increase in amortized franchise territory sales commissions, technology fees and our digital platform costs, consistent with related revenue increases, including the $2.5 million increase in technology fees, $2.2 million increase in our digital platform revenue and a $1.4 million increase in other preferred vendor commission revenue.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $60.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $80.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $19.6 million, or 24.3%. The decrease was primarily attributable a reduction in variable expenses in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, including a $5.7 million decrease in variable marketing and promotion, which includes advertising and convention expenses, a $1.3 million decrease in travel expenses, and a $15.5 million decrease in studio support expense, primarily related to a decrease in costs to integrate businesses acquired in 2018, which included updating existing Pure Barre studios for consistency with our standards. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in salaries and wages and occupancy expenses
of $1.1 million and $0.8 million, respectively, primarily related to studios acquired in 2020 and a $0.8 million increase in bad debt expense.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense was $7.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.3 million, or 19.8%. The increase was due primarily to depreciation expense related to property and equipment placed in service during the year ended December 31, 2020, including our new digital platform and assets related to company-owned studios.
Marketing fund expense. Marketing fund expense was $7.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.1 million, or 13.6%. The decrease was consistent with the decrease in franchise marketing fund revenue.
Acquisition and transaction expenses (income). Acquisition and transaction expenses (income) were ($11.0) million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a change of $18.9 million, or 238.3%. These expenses (income) represent the non-cash change in contingent consideration related to 2017 and 2018 business acquisitions.
Other (Income) Expense, net
Interest income. Interest income primarily consists of interest on notes receivable and was insignificant in each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Interest expense. Interest expense was $21.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $5.3 million, or 33.1%. Interest expense consists of interest on notes payable and long-term debt, accretion of earn-out liabilities and amortization of deferred loan costs. The increase was due primarily to a $2.6 million increase in amortization of debt issuance costs and a $4.2 million increase in interest on long-term debt due primarily to a higher average outstanding debt balance in 2020, partially offset by a $1.5 million decrease in earn-out accretion.
Income Taxes
Income taxes. Income taxes were $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $19.9 million of cash and cash equivalents, excluding $1.4 million of restricted cash for marketing fund purposes.
We require cash principally to fund day-to-day operations, finance capital investments, service our outstanding debt and address our working capital needs. Based on our current level of operations and anticipated growth, we believe that our available cash balance and the cash generated from our operations will be adequate to meet our anticipated debt service requirements and obligations under our tax receivable agreement, capital expenditures, payment of tax distributions and working capital needs for at least the next twelve months. Our ability to continue to fund these items and continue to reduce debt could be adversely affected by the occurrence of any of the events described under “Risk Factors.” There can be no assurance, however, that our business will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future borrowings will be available under our credit facility or otherwise to enable us to service our indebtedness, including our credit facility, or to make anticipated capital expenditures. Our future operating performance and our ability to service, extend or refinance the credit facility will be subject to future economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
Initial Public Offering
On July 23, 2021, XPO Inc. completed an initial public offering (“IPO”) of 10,000,000 shares of Class A common stock at a price to the public of $12.00 per share. After underwriter discounts and commissions, we received net proceeds from the IPO of approximately $111.9 million, before deduction of offering expenses. Also on July 23, 2021, we issued and sold 200,000 shares of Convertible Preferred for aggregate cash proceeds of $200 million, before deduction of offering costs. Holders of Convertible Preferred shares are entitled to quarterly coupon payments at the rate of 6.50% of the fixed liquidation preference per share, initially $1,000 per share. In the event the quarterly preferential coupon is not paid in cash, the fixed liquidation preference automatically increases at the PIK rate of 7.50%. The Convertible Preferred has an initial conversion price equal to $14.40 per share and is mandatorily convertible under certain circumstances and redeemable at the option of the holder beginning on the date that is eight years from the IPO or upon change of control. The issuance of Convertible Preferred shares and Class A common stock by us and the related net proceeds were recorded in the consolidated financial statements on July 23, 2021, the closing date of the IPO.
In August 2021, the underwriters exercised the option to purchase additional shares, pursuant to which XPO Inc. issued and sold 904,000 shares of Class A common stock at a price to the public of $12.00 per share. After underwriter discounts and commissions, we received net proceeds of approximately $10.1 million on August 24, 2021. We used (i) $9.0 million to purchase 750,000 LLC Units from our Chief Executive Officer and (ii) $1.1 million for working capital.
Credit Facility
On April 19, 2021, we entered into a Financing Agreement with Wilmington Trust, National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and MSD XPO Partners, LLC, MSD PCOF Partners XXXIX, LLC and DESALKIV Cayman C-2, Ltd. (f/k/a DELALV Cayman C-2, Ltd.) as the lenders (the “Credit Agreement”), which consists of a $212 million senior secured term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”, and the loans thereunder, the “Term Loan”). Affiliates of MSD XPO Partners, LLC, MSD PCOF Partners XXXIX, LLC and DESALKIV Cayman C-2, Ltd. (f/k/a DELALV Cayman C-2, Ltd.) (collectively, the “Preferred Investors”) also separately purchased 200,000 shares of our 6.50% Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series A Convertible preferred stock”) for $200 million. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by Xponential Intermediate Holdings, LLC and certain of our material subsidiaries, and are secured by substantially all of the assets of Xponential Intermediate Holdings, LLC and certain of our material subsidiaries.
Under the Credit Agreement, we are required to make: (i) monthly payments of interest on the Term Loan and (ii) quarterly principal payments equal to 0.25% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan. Borrowings under the Term Loan Facility bear interest at a per annum rate of, at our option, either (a) the LIBOR Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) plus a margin of 6.50% or (b) the Reference Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) plus a margin of 5.50% (7.5% at September 30, 2021).
The Credit Agreement also contains mandatory prepayments of the Term Loan with: (i) 50% of Xponential Intermediate Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries’ Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the Credit Agreement), subject to certain exceptions; (ii) 100% of the net proceeds of certain asset sales and insurance/condemnation events, subject to reinvestment rights and certain other exceptions; (iii) 100% of the net proceeds of certain extraordinary receipts, subject to reinvestment rights and certain other exceptions; (iv) 100% of the net proceeds of any incurrence of debt, excluding certain permitted debt issuances; and (v) up to $60 million of net proceeds in connection with an initial public offering of at least $200 million, subject to certain exceptions.
Unless agreed in advance, all voluntary prepayments and certain mandatory prepayments of the Term Loan made (i) on or prior to the first anniversary of the closing date are subject to a 2.00% premium on the principal amount of such prepayment and (ii) after the first anniversary of the closing date and on or prior to the second anniversary of the closing date are subject to a 0.50% premium on the principal amount of such prepayment. Otherwise, the Term Loan may be paid without premium or penalty, other than customary breakage costs with respect to LIBOR Rate Term Loans.
The Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including, among other things: (i) to maintain certain total leverage ratios, liquidity levels and EBITDA levels (in each case, as discussed further in the Credit Agreement); (ii) to use the proceeds of borrowings only for certain specified purposes; (iii) to refrain from entering into certain agreements outside of the ordinary course of business, including with respect to consolidation or mergers; (iv) restricting further indebtedness or liens; (v) restricting certain transactions with our affiliates; (vi) restricting investments; (vii) restricting prepayments of subordinated indebtedness; (viii) restricting certain payments, including certain payments to our affiliates or equity holders and distributions to equity holders; and (ix) restricting the issuance of equity. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with these covenants.
The Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, which could result in acceleration of amounts due under the Credit Agreement. Such events of default include, subject to the grace periods specified therein, our failure to pay principal or interest when due, our failure to satisfy or comply with covenants, a change of control, the imposition of certain judgments and the invalidation of liens we have granted.
The proceeds of the Term Loan were used to repay principal, interest and fees outstanding under our prior financing agreement (including a prepayment penalty of approximately $1.9 million) and for working capital and other corporate purposes. Principal payments of the Term Loan of $0.53 million are due quarterly.
Immediately following the IPO, on July 23, 2021 we executed a first amendment to the Credit Agreement, which amended the amount of the prepayment premium applicable to the prepayment of the Term Loan, and paid off $115.0 million of the principal balance of the Term Loan.
On October 8, 2021, we entered into a second amendment (the "Amendment") to the Credit Agreement. The Amendment provides for, among other things, additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $38 million (the “2021 Incremental Term Loan”), the proceeds of which were used to fund the BFT acquisition and the payment of fees, costs and expenses related to the Amendment. The Amendment also (i) increased the amount of the quarterly principal payments of the loans provided pursuant to the Credit Agreement (including the 2021 Incremental Term Loan) commencing on December 31, 2021 and (ii) amended the amount of the prepayment premium applicable in the event the 2021 Incremental Term Loan is prepaid within two years of the effective date of the Amendment. Outstanding borrowings on the Term Loan and Incremental Term Loan were $133.2 million at December 31, 2021.
PPP Loan
In April 2020, we entered into a promissory note with Citizens Business Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act pursuant to which Citizens Business Bank agreed to make a loan to us in the amount of approximately $3.7 million (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan matures in April 2022, bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum and requires no payments during the first 16 months from the date of the loan. On June 10, 2021, we were notified that the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) had forgiven the PPP Loan in full.
Cash Flows
The following table presents summary cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $14.5 million, compared to cash used of $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in cash provided of $15.2 million. Of the change, $9.1 million was due to a higher net loss offset by adjustments for non-cash items. Additionally, the following changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed to the increased operating cash flows:
•increase in cash inflows relating to (1) deferred revenue of $23.0 million due to an increase in sales of additional franchises; (2) other current liabilities of $2.4 million driven by $1.4 million increase in Tax Receivable Agreement ("TRA") liability; and (3) inventory of $0.6 million, partially offset by an
•increase in cash outflows relating to (1) accounts payable and accrued expenses of $3.0 million due to timing of payments; (2) increase in accounts receivable and prepaid expense of $10.9 million; and (3) deferred costs of $5.9 million due to an increase in sales of additional franchises.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $50.6 million, compared to $4.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $46.0 million. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in cash used to purchase BFT resulting in $44.3 million outflow, purchases of property and equipment and issuing notes receivables, partially offset by an increase in cash received from collection of notes receivable, increase in cash proceeds from sales of assets and decrease in cash used to purchase studios.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $46.2 million, compared to $7.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in cash provided of $38.9 million. The increase was primarily attributable to cash received resulting from the IPO and preferred stock issuance, net of offering costs, of $308.3 million, change to distributions to member of $62.6 million, lower payments on line of credit, lower debt issuance costs and increased borrowings from long term debt of $61.5 million, partially offset by $176.7 million payments made in connection with reorganization transactions as described in Note 11 of Notes to consolidated financial statements, $143.4 million increase in payments made to decrease net borrowings on our line of credit and long-term debt, an increase in dividend payment of $9.0 million, an increase in contingent consideration payment of $8.9 million and changes to the member contributions and receipts from member of $55.5 million.
The following table presents summary cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0.7 million, compared to cash provided of $1.5 million in 2019, a decrease in cash provided of $2.2 million. Of the change, $7.2 million was due to a lower net loss adjusted for non-cash items. This amount was more than offset by the following changes in cash flows from operating assets and liabilities:
•accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities decreased $6.5 million due to timing of
payments;
•deferred revenue decreased $28.1 million due to a decrease in sales of additional franchises;
•current assets, excluding deferred costs, increased $8.0 million due primarily to an increase in accounts receivable; and
•deferred costs increased $17.3 million due to a decrease in sales of additional franchises.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $4.6 million, compared to $9.8 million in 2019, a decrease of $5.2 million. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in cash used to purchase property and equipment and to fund notes receivable.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $7.3 million, compared to $6.4 million in 2019, an increase of $0.9 million. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net borrowings on our line of credit and long-term debt of $21.0 million, member contributions in 2020 of $27.3 million, net receipts from member and affiliates of $31.0 million partially offset by distributions to member of $73.2 million in 2020 and an increase in payment of debt issuance costs of $5.0 million.
Material Cash Commitments
The table below represents our material cash commitments, including the scheduled maturities of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021. The table excludes certain potential cash requirements because they may involve future cash payments that are considered uncertain and cannot be estimated because they vary based upon future conditions; however, the exclusion of these obligations should not be construed as an implication that they are immaterial, as they could significantly affect our short- and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs depending on a variety of future events, facts and conditions.
(1) We lease our facilities under non-cancelable operating leases.
(2) Represents scheduled debt obligation payments on debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
(3) Represents scheduled interest payments.
(4) Includes current and noncurrent estimated contingent consideration liabilities at December 31, 2021, based on expected achievement dates for earn-out targets, which includes the contingent consideration relating to purchase of BFT.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements including those that involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. A thorough understanding of these critical accounting policies is essential when reviewing our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting policies listed below are those that are most important to our results of operations or involve the most difficult management decisions related to the use of significant estimates and assumptions as described above. For a more detailed summary of our significant accounting policies, see the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Our contracts with customers consist of franchise agreements with franchisees. We also enter into agreements to sell merchandise and equipment, training, digital platform services and membership to company-owned studios. Our revenue consists of franchise revenue, merchandise revenue and franchise marketing fund revenue which we consider recurring revenue, as well as equipment revenue and other service revenue. In addition, we earn on-demand revenue, service revenue and other revenue.
Each of our primary sources of revenue and their respective revenue policies are discussed further below.
Franchise revenue
We enter into franchise agreements for each studio. Our performance obligation under the franchise license is granting certain rights to access our intellectual property; all other services we provide under the franchise agreement are highly interrelated, not distinct within the contract, and therefore accounted for as a single performance obligation, which is satisfied over the term of each franchise agreement. Those services include initial development, operational training, preopening support and access to our technology throughout the franchise term. Fees generated related to the franchise license include development fees, royalty fees, marketing fees, technology fees and transfer fees which are discussed further below. Variable fees are not estimated at contract inception, and are recognized as revenue when invoiced, which occurs monthly. We have concluded that our agreements do not contain any financing components.
Franchise development fee revenue: Our franchise agreements typically operate under ten-year terms with the option to renew for up to two additional five-year successor terms. We determined the renewal options are neither qualitatively nor quantitatively material and do not represent a material right. Initial franchise fees are non-refundable and are typically collected upon signing of the franchise agreement. Initial franchise fees are recorded as deferred revenue when received and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the franchise life, which we have determined to be ten years (and five years for renewals) as we fulfill our promise to grant the franchisee the rights to access and benefit from our intellectual property and to support and maintain the intellectual property.
We may enter into an area development agreement with certain franchisees. Area development agreements are for a territory in which a developer has agreed to develop and operate a certain number of franchise locations over a stipulated period of time. The related territory is unavailable to any other party and is no longer marketed to future franchisees by us. Depending on the number of studios purchased, under franchise agreements or area development agreements, the initial franchise fee ranges from $60,000 (single studio), to $350,000 (ten studios) and is paid to us when a franchisee signs the area development agreement. Area development fees are initially recorded as deferred revenue. The development fees are allocated to the number of studios purchased under the development agreement. The revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the franchise life for each studio under the development agreement. Development fees and franchise fees are generally recognized as revenue upon the termination of the development agreement with the franchisee.
We may enter into master franchise agreements with master franchisees, under which the master franchisee sells licenses to franchisees in one or more countries outside of North America. The master franchise agreements generally provide a ten-year period under which the master franchisee may sell licenses. The master franchise agreement term ends on the earlier of the expiration or termination of the last franchise agreement sold by the master franchisee. Initial master franchise fees are recorded as deferred revenue when received and are recognized on a straight-line basis over 20 years.
Franchise royalty fee revenue: Royalty revenue represents royalties earned from each of the franchised studios in accordance with the franchise disclosure document and the franchise agreement for use of the various brands’ names, processes and procedures. The royalty rate in the franchise agreement is typically 7% of the gross sales of each location operated by each franchisee. Royalties are billed on a monthly basis. The royalties are entirely related to our performance obligation under the franchise agreement and are billed and recognized as franchisee sales occur.
Technology fees: We may provide access to third-party or other proprietary technology solutions to the franchisee for a fee. The technology solution may include various software licenses for statistical tracking, scheduling, allowing club members to record their personal workout statistics, music and technology support. We bill and recognize the technology fee as earned each month as the technology solution service is performed.
Transfer fees: Transfer fees are paid to us when one franchisee transfers a franchise agreement to a different franchisee. Transfer fees are recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis over the term of the new or assumed franchise agreement, unless the original franchise agreement for an existing studio is terminated, in which case the transfer fee is recognized immediately.
Training revenue: We provide coach training services either through direct training of the coaches who are hired by franchisees or by providing the materials and curriculum directly to the franchisees who utilize the materials to train their hired coaches. Direct training fees are recognized over time as training is provided. Training fees for materials and curriculum are recognized at the point in time of delivery of the materials.
We also offer coach training and final coach certification through online classes. Fees received by us for online class training are recognized as revenue over time for the twelve-month period that we are obligated to provide access to the online training content.
Franchise marketing fund revenue: Franchisees are required to pay marketing fees of 2% of their gross sales. The marketing fees are collected by us monthly and are to be used for the advertising, marketing, market research, product development, public relations programs and materials deemed appropriate to benefit brands. Our promise to provide the marketing services funded through the marketing fund is considered a component of our performance obligation to grant the franchise license. We bill and recognize marketing fund fees as revenue each month as gross sales occur. Marketing fund expenses are recognized as incurred, and any marketing fund expenditures in excess of marketing fund fees are reclassified as selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Equipment and merchandise revenue
The following revenues are generated as a result of transactions with or related to franchisees.
Equipment revenue: We also sell authorized equipment to franchisees to be used in the franchised studios. Certain franchisees may prepay for equipment, and in that circumstance, the revenue is deferred until delivery. Equipment revenue is recognized when control of the equipment is transferred to the franchisee, which is at the point in time when delivery and installation of the equipment at the studio is complete.
Merchandise revenue: We sell branded and non-branded merchandise to franchisees for retail sales to members at studios. For branded merchandise sales, the performance obligation is satisfied at the point in time of shipment of the ordered branded merchandise to the franchisee. For such branded merchandise sales, we are the principal in the transaction as we control the merchandise prior to it being delivered to the franchisee. We record branded merchandise revenue and related costs upon shipment on a gross basis. Franchisees have the right to return and/or receive credit for defective merchandise. Returns and credit for defective merchandise were not significant for the years ended years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
For certain non-branded merchandise sales, we earn a commission to facilitate the transaction between the franchisee and the supplier. For such non-branded merchandise sales, we are the agent in the transaction, facilitating the transaction between the franchisee and the supplier, as we do not obtain control of the non-branded merchandise during the order fulfillment process. We record non-branded merchandise commissions revenue at the time of shipment.
Other service revenue
Service revenue: For company-owned transition studios, our distinct performance obligation is to provide the fitness classes to the member. Revenue from company-owned transition studios has been very limited as we typically only own a limited number of studios and only for a short period of time pending the resale of the licenses to a franchisee. The company-owned transition studios sell memberships by individual class and by class packages. Revenue from the sale of classes and class packages for a specified number of classes are recognized over time as the member attends and utilizes the classes. Revenues from the sale of class packages for an unlimited number of classes are recognized over time on a straight-line basis over the duration of the contract period.
Digital platform revenue: We grant subscribers access to an online platform, which contains a library of virtual classes that is continually updated, through monthly or annual subscription packages. Revenue is recognized over time on a straight-line basis over the subscription period.
Additionally, we earn commission income from certain of our franchisees’ use of certain preferred vendors other than from merchandise and equipment described above. In these arrangements, we are the agent as we are not primarily responsible for fulfilling the orders. Commissions are earned and recognized at the point in time the vendor ships the product to franchisees.
Sales taxes, value added taxes and other taxes that are collected in connection with revenue transactions are withheld and remitted to the respective taxing authorities. As such, these taxes are excluded from revenue. We account for shipping and handling as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the good. Therefore, shipping and handling fees that are billed to customers, who are primarily franchisees, are recognized in revenue and the associated shipping and handling costs are recognized in cost of product sold as soon as control of the goods transfers to the customer.
Contract Costs
Contract costs consist of deferred commissions resulting from franchise and area development sales by third-party and affiliate brokers and sales personnel. The total commission charged by the broker is deferred at the point of a franchise sale. The commissions are evenly split among the number of studios purchased under the development agreement and begin to be amortized when a subsequent franchise agreement is executed. The commissions are recognized on a straight-line basis over the initial ten-year franchise agreement term to align with the recognition of the franchise agreement or area development fees.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which results in the assets acquired and liabilities assumed being recorded at fair value.
The valuation methodologies used are based upon the nature of the asset or liability. The significant assets measured at fair value include intangible assets. The fair value of trademarks is estimated by following the relief from royalty method. The fair value of franchise agreements is based upon following the excess earnings method. The fair value of internal use software is based upon following the cost method. Inputs used in the methodologies primarily included sales forecasts, projected future cash flows, royalty rate and discount rate commensurate with the risk involved.
Amortization of definite-lived trademarks, franchise agreements and internal use software is recorded over the estimated useful lives of the assets using the straight-line method, which we believe approximates the period during which we expect to receive the related benefits.
Acquisition-Related Contingent Consideration
Some of the business combinations that we have consummated include contingent consideration to be potentially paid based upon the occurrence of future events, such as the achievement of franchise studio openings and change of control earn-outs. Acquisition-related contingent consideration associated with a business combination is initially recognized at fair value and remeasured each reporting period, with changes in fair value recorded in the consolidated statement of operations. The estimates of fair value involve the use of acceptable valuation methods, such as probability-weighted discounted cash flow analysis, and contain uncertainties as they require assumptions about the likelihood of achieving specified milestone criteria, projections of future financial performance and assumed discount rates. Changes in the fair value of the acquisition-related contingent consideration result from several factors including changes in the timing and amount of revenue estimates, changes in probability assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achieving specified milestone criteria and changes in discount rates. A change in any of these assumptions could produce a different fair value, which could have a material impact on our results of operations. Assuming there had been a 10% increase in the fair value of operational or change of control distribution valuations, contingent consideration would have increased by $0.1 million, $1.1 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets, Including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill has been assigned to our reporting units for purposes of impairment testing. Our ten reporting units are each of the brand names under which we sell franchises. We test for impairment of goodwill annually or sooner whenever events or circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. The annual impairment test is performed as of the first day of our fourth quarter. The annual goodwill test begins with a qualitative assessment, where qualitative factors and their impact on critical inputs are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we determine that a reporting unit has an indication of impairment based on the qualitative assessment, we are required to perform a quantitative assessment. We generally determine the estimated fair value using a discounted cash flow approach, giving consideration to the market valuation approach. If the carrying value exceeds the estimate of fair value a write-down is recorded. We calculate impairment as the excess of the carrying value of goodwill over the estimated fair value.
We test for impairment of indefinite-lived trademarks annually or sooner whenever events or circumstances indicate that trademarks might be impaired. We first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the trademarks is less than the carrying amount. In the absence of sufficient qualitative factors, trademark impairment is determined utilizing a two-step analysis. The two-step analysis involves comparing the fair value to the carrying value of the trademarks. We determine the estimated fair value using a relief from royalty approach. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, we impair the trademarks to their fair value.
We assess potential impairments to our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and amortizable intangible assets, whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of an asset is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded aggregate impairments of property and equipment and amortizing intangible assets related to company-owned transition studios aggregating $0.8 million. There were no impairment charges recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The estimated fair value of the respective reporting units substantially exceeds their carrying value.
Equity-Based Compensation
We have equity-based compensation plans under which we receive services from our employees as consideration for equity instruments, including profit interest units and restricted stock units ("RSUs"). The compensation expense is determined based on the fair value of the award as of the grant date. Prior to going public, we were issuing shares that were valued based on the underlying units of the parent entity. We utilized a discounted cash flow analysis, a market approach of comparable companies in our industry and a comparable acquisitions analysis. The market approach involves companies in our industry that we determine to be comparable. Comparable acquisitions analysis involves analyzing sales of controlling interests in companies that we determine are comparable. In conducting this valuation, we also took into consideration recent valuation reports of third-party valuation specialists prepared for us, as well as any significant internal and external events occurring subsequent to those reports that may have caused the value of the units to increase or decrease since the dates of those reports. Estimates used in our valuation of equity-based compensation are highly complex and subjective. Valuations and estimates of our common stock value is no longer necessary as we are a publicly traded company and at this point we rely on market price to determine the market value of our shares.
Compensation expense for time-based units is recognized over the vesting period, which is the period over which all of the specified vesting conditions are satisfied. Compensation expense for performance-based units will be recorded when the performance targets are met.
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates.