Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the Company’s operations and business environment. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties. See Part I, Item 1, “Business- Forward-Looking Statements and Associated Risks” in the beginning of this Form 10-K. The MD&A includes the following sections:
•Business - a general description of Dentsply Sirona’s business and how performance is measured;
•Results of Operations - an analysis of the Company’s consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020;
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates; and
•Liquidity and Capital Resources - an analysis of cash flows; debt and other obligations; off-balance sheet arrangements; and aggregate contractual obligations.
2021 Operational Highlights
For the year ended December 31, 2021,
•Net sales increased 27.2% compared to the prior year. On an organic basis (a Non-GAAP measure as defined under the heading "Key Performance Measurements" below) net sales increased 24.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to prior year. Net sales were positively impacted by approximately 2.9% due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar over the prior year period.
•Net income increased to $421 million as compared to the net loss of $83 million for the prior year. Diluted earnings per share was $1.91 per share compared to a net loss per share of $0.38 in the prior year.
•Cash from operations was $657 million, as compared to $635 million in the prior year.
Company Profile
DENTSPLY SIRONA Inc. (“Dentsply Sirona” or the “Company”), is the world’s largest manufacturer of professional dental products and technologies, with a 135-year history of innovation and service to the dental industry and patients worldwide. Dentsply Sirona develops, manufactures, and markets a comprehensive solutions offering including dental equipment and dental consumable products under a strong portfolio of world class brands. The Company also manufactures and markets healthcare consumable products. As The Dental Solutions Company, Dentsply Sirona’s products provide innovative, high-quality and effective solutions to advance patient care and deliver better, safer and faster dentistry. Dentsply Sirona’s worldwide headquarters is located in Charlotte, North Carolina. The Company’s shares of common stock are listed in the United States on Nasdaq under the symbol XRAY.
BUSINESS
The Company operates in two operating segments, Technologies & Equipment and Consumables.
The Technologies & Equipment segment is responsible for the design, manufacture, sales and distribution of products including dental implants, CAD/CAM systems, orthodontic clear aligner products, imaging systems, treatment centers, instruments, as well as certain healthcare device products, primarily catheters.
The Consumables segment is responsible for the design, manufacture, sales and distribution of dental consumable products which include categories of preventive, restorative, endodontic, and dental laboratory application.
The impacts of COVID-19 and the Company’s response
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant volatility and uncertainty in the overall markets particularly in the year that followed the initial outbreak late in 2019, leading to changes in consumer behavior, government restrictions on individuals and businesses, and significant disruption to supply chains in several sectors, including dental equipment and medical supplies.
The Company’s 2020 results were materially impacted by this disruption at the outset of the pandemic, including the closure or reduced operations of dental practices. During 2021, demand for the Company’s products has largely recovered, although impacts from the pandemic continue to be experienced as evidenced by the more recent shortages and higher prices of raw materials such as electronic components, transportation and shipping services, and labor.
The impacts of COVID-19 on the Company’s operations during 2021 were as follows:
•The Company has seen customer demand and dental patient traffic normalize in major markets. Despite the resurgence of cases late in 2021 due to variants of the COVID-19 virus, public and private dental practices largely remain open, although many continue to operate at less than pre-pandemic capacities. Certain of the Company's markets including regions of Southeast Asia have experienced setbacks in demand in the second half of the year as a result of renewed COVID-19 infections from recent variants of the virus. While most government authorities have lifted many of their restrictions, the end dates for all restrictions being lifted are still unknown, and it is uncertain when customer demand will fully return to pre-COVID-19 levels upon lifting these restrictions, or whether future variants of the virus may have an adverse impact on demand in affected markets.
•During 2021, the Company has experienced supply chain constraints, which has impacted its ability to timely produce and deliver certain products, and has also resulted in increases in shipping rates. To address these issues, the Company has taken steps to mitigate the impact of these trends, including continued emphasis on cost reduction and supply chain efficiencies. The Company continues to monitor the impact of global supply chain issues, including shipping disruption and inflation of material inputs, as well as labor shortages.
•The Company's COVID-19 infection crisis management process implemented in 2020 remains in effect during 2021. During the pandemic, the Company has utilized this process to manage several incidents of exposure at facilities. All potential and actual cases have been reviewed to ensure that the Company managed exposed employees appropriately, consistently and safely. None of these incidents have resulted in a material loss of production or adverse impact to the Company’s operating results. The Company has continued to prioritize employee safety, and preventing the possible spread of COVID-19 by encouraging ongoing work-from-home where possible and maintaining travel restrictions.
As an ongoing consequence of the public's response to the global pandemic, including the restrictive measures imposed to contain its spread, it is noted that dental practices have adapted to potentially long-term conventions of social distancing and remote working. It is expected that the new conditions will continue to increase demand in dental care markets for the efficiencies and benefits that come from digital solutions. In response to this trend which began before the pandemic, the Company has continued to make investments to promote the transformation of dentistry with advancements in digital workflows, software upgrades, 3D printing and other offerings such as clinical education that are allowing the Company to quickly respond to increased demand for digital dentistry. As uncertainty surrounding the pandemic continues, as part of the strategic response to its longer-term implications including the increase in demand for digital solutions, the Company intends to continue targeting investments in this area including the related R&D and sales and marketing investments that will bring these innovations to customers.
The impact of recent developments in Ukraine
In February 2022, as a result of the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, economic sanctions were imposed by the U.S., the European Union, and certain other countries on Russian financial institutions and businesses. While it is difficult to estimate the impact of current or future sanctions on the Company’s business and financial position, these sanctions could adversely impact the Company’s sales, cost of procuring raw materials, or distribution costs in future periods. Refer to Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" - Risks Related to Our International Operations.
As of December 31, 2021, the net assets of the Company’s subsidiaries in Russia and Ukraine were $63 million, and for the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s net sales in Russia and Ukraine were approximately 3% of its consolidated net sales.
Key Performance Measurements
The principal measurements used by the Company in evaluating its business performance are: (1) organic sales by segment and geographic region; and (2) adjusted operating income and margins of each reportable segment, which excludes the impacts of purchase accounting, corporate expenses, and certain other items to enhance the comparability of results period to period.
The Company defines "organic sales" as the reported net sales adjusted for: (1) net sales from acquired and divested businesses recorded prior to the first anniversary of the acquisition or divestiture; (2) net sales attributable to discontinued product lines in both the current and prior year periods; and (3) the impact of foreign currency changes, which is calculated by translating current-period net sales using the comparable prior period’s currency exchange rates.
The "organic sales" measure is not calculated in accordance with US GAAP; therefore, this item represents a Non-GAAP measure. This Non-GAAP measure may differ from those used by other companies and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with US GAAP. Organic sales is an important internal measure for the Company, and its senior management who receive a monthly analysis of operating results that includes organic sales. The performance of the Company is measured on this metric along with other performance metrics.
The Company discloses organic sales to allow investors to evaluate the performance of the Company’s operations exclusive of certain items that impact the comparability of results from period to period and may not be indicative of past or future performance of the normal operations of the Company. The Company believes that this information is helpful in understanding underlying net sales trends.
Business Drivers
The primary drivers of organic sales include macroeconomic factors, global dental market demand, innovation and new product launches by the Company, as well as continued investments in sales and marketing resources to drive demand creation, including clinical education. Management believes that the Company’s ability to execute its strategies should allow it to grow faster than the underlying dental market over time. On a short-term basis, sudden changes in the macroeconomic environment such as those caused by the impacts of COVID-19, supply chain challenges, changes in strategy, or distributor inventory levels can and have impacted the Company's sales.
The Company has a focus on maximizing operational efficiencies on a global basis. The Company has expanded the use of technology as well as process improvement initiatives to enhance global efficiency. In addition, management continues to evaluate the worldwide consolidation of operations and functions to further reduce costs. While the Company continues consolidation initiatives which can have an adverse impact on reported results in the short term, the Company expects that the continued benefits from these global efficiency efforts will improve its cost structure.
Subject to the pace of the post-pandemic recovery, the Company intends to continue pursuing opportunities to expand the Company’s product offerings, technologies, and sales and service infrastructure through partnerships and acquisitions. Although the professional dental market has experienced consolidation, it remains fragmented. Management believes that there will continue to be adequate opportunities to participate as a consolidator in the industry for the foreseeable future.
The Company’s business is subject to quarterly fluctuations in net sales and operating income. Price increases, promotional activities, as well as changes in inventory levels at distributors contribute to this fluctuation. The Company typically implements most of its price increases in January or October of a given year across most of its businesses. Distributor inventory levels tend to increase in the period leading up to a price increase and decline in the period following the implementation of a price increase. Required minimum purchase commitments under agreements with key distributors may increase inventory levels in excess of retail demand. Changes in dealer inventory levels have impacted the Company’s consolidated net sales in the past, and may continue to do so in the future. In addition, the Company may from time to time, engage in new distributor relationships that could cause fluctuations of consolidated net sales and operating income. Distributor inventory levels may fluctuate, and may differ from the Company’s projections, resulting in the Company’s forecast of future results being different than expected.
There can be no assurance that the Company’s dealers and customers will maintain levels of inventory or patterns of build and liquidation timing in accordance with the Company’s predictions or past history. As of December 31, 2021, certain dealers’ inventory of the Company’s CAD/CAM products was higher than at the end of the prior year, by approximately $50 million. These higher levels of dealer inventory are due to lower-than-expected retail sales in the fourth quarter and may pose headwinds to the Company’s net sales for these products in 2022.
The Company anticipates that inventory levels may continue to fluctuate as dealers and customers manage the effects of COVID-19 and supply chain constraints on their businesses. Any of these fluctuations could be material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. For more information about the drivers of our business and related risks, see Part I, Item 1, "Business" and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors."
Restructuring Programs
In 2018, the Board of Directors approved a plan to restructure and simplify the Company’s business, which was expanded in 2020 for certain portfolio optimization objectives including the exit of the Company’s traditional orthodontics business as well as portions of its laboratory business. A primary goal of the restructuring has been to drive annualized net sales growth of 4% to 5% and adjusted operating income margins of 22% by the fourth quarter of 2022. The operating expense reductions have come as a result of additional leverage from continued integration and simplification of the business. The expanded program is expected to result in total charges of approximately $345 million and annual cost savings of approximately $250 million. Since 2018, the Company has incurred expenditures of approximately $321 million under these programs, of which approximately $123 million were non-cash charges. The Company expects most of the remaining charges will be recorded during the first quarter of 2022. The Company has not seen and does not expect a significant impact to net sales as a result of these actions. The businesses being exited as part of the portfolio optimization have been experiencing declining sales and were dilutive to the Company’s operating income margin. The Company’s traditional orthodontics business, which includes brackets, bands, tubes and wires, had net sales of $92 million in 2020 and $132 million in 2019. The portion of the laboratory business the Company is exiting manufactures removable dentures and related products and had net sales of $30 million in 2020 and $44 million in 2019. The net income of these businesses is not material to the Company’s consolidated results.
Impact of Foreign Currencies
Due to the Company’s global footprint, movements in foreign currency exchange rates may have a material impact on its reported net sales and pre-tax income. With approximately two-thirds of the Company’s net sales originating from regions outside the United States, the Company’s net sales and results from operation are negatively impacted by the strengthening, or positively impacted by the weakening of the U.S. dollar, compared to the primary currencies in which the Company operates.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
A reconciliation of net sales to organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in organic sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and Consumables segments and was primarily due to a recovery in demand from the prior year impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on volumes. In addition to the overall increases due to more normalized demand across the product lines, the Company achieved additional topline growth as a result of successful product launches during 2021 and geographic expansion in the Implants, Orthodontics, and Endodontic & Restorative Consumables businesses.
Net Sales by Segment
Technologies & Equipment
A reconciliation of net sales to organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in organic sales occurred across all product categories and was primarily due to the easing of the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as new product launches and geographic expansion of existing products. These increases in organic sales were partly offset by supply chain issues that delayed shipments of certain products to customers until the following year.
Consumables
A reconciliation of net sales to organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in organic sales occurred across all regions and was the result of overall higher volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to demand recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The segment also benefited from successful launches of new Endodontic and Restorative products, and favorable price increases.
Net Sales by Region
United States
A reconciliation of net sales to organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in organic sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and the Consumables segments and was primarily due to overall higher volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021, following periods of lower demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to the overall increases due to more normalized demand across the product lines, the Company achieved additional topline growth domestically as a result of successful product launches in the Implants, Orthodontics, and Endodontic & Restorative Consumables businesses, partly offset by delays in shipments of some products late in the year due to supply chain constraints.
Europe
A reconciliation of net sales to organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in organic sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and Consumables segments and was primarily due to overall higher volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021, following periods of lower demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to the overall increases due to more normalized demand across the product lines, the Company achieved additional topline growth in Europe as a result of increased sales volumes of CAD/CAM units, as well as successful product launches and geographic expansion in the Implants, Orthodontics, and Restorative Consumables businesses, partly offset by delays in shipments of some Equipment & Instruments products late in the year due to supply chain constraints.
Rest of World
A reconciliation of net sales to organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in organic sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and the Consumables segments and was primarily due to overall higher volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021, following periods of lower demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in Asia-Pacific markets. In addition to the overall increases due to more normalized demand across the product lines, the Company achieved additional topline growth in the Rest of World markets as a result of increased sales volumes of Implants, CAD/CAM units and the Company's Orthodontics products.
Gross Profit
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
The increase in the gross profit rate as a percentage of net sales was primarily driven by the increase in net sales for higher margin products, including those related to new product launches. Mix relative to prior year has benefited from portfolio optimization including the discontinuation of certain lower margin products associated with the traditional orthodontic and laboratory businesses, and the strategic investments in higher margin products such as specialized implants solutions and clear aligners. These favorable increases to gross profit as a percentage of sales were offset by pricing incentives for certain products and increased supply chain related expenses including distribution costs in the current year.
Operating Expenses
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
NM - Not meaningful
SG&A Expenses
SG&A expenses increased primarily due to strategic investments in sales and marketing resources in key growth areas, as well as a decrease in COVID-19 related relief from foreign governments. The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales was primarily driven by greater absorption of expenses due to higher sales, as well as expense discipline.
R&D Expenses
The increase in R&D expenses was primarily due to an increase in spend within the T&E segment driven by increased investments in digital workflow solutions, product development initiatives, software development including clinical application suite and cloud deployment. Additionally, the Company made investments in a new Consumables innovation center in Charlotte, North Carolina. The Company expects to continue to maintain an expanded level of investment in research and development that is at least 4% of annual net sales.
Goodwill Impairment
There were no impairments recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company determined that the goodwill associated with the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit within the Technologies & Equipment segment was impaired. As a result, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $157 million. For further details see Item 8, Note 12, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, in the Notes to the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K.
Restructuring and Other Costs
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded net expense of $17 million of restructuring costs in connection with the various restructuring initiatives. For further details see Item 8, Note 19, Restructuring and Other Costs, in the Notes to the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $26 million of restructuring costs primarily related to the expansion of the restructuring plan announced in August 2020. The Company also recorded $51 million of other costs, which consist primarily of impairment charges of $39 million related to indefinite-lived intangible assets and other impairments of $8 million.
The Company announced on August 6, 2020 that it will exit its traditional orthodontics business as well as both exit and restructure certain portions of its laboratory business. The traditional orthodontics business has been part of the Technologies & Equipment segment and the laboratory business has been part of the Consumables segment. The Company expects to record total ending restructuring charges in a range of $60 million to $70 million for inventory write-downs, severance costs, fixed asset write-offs, and other facility closure costs. The Company estimates that $45 million to $55 million of the total final restructuring charges will be non-cash charges related to inventory write-downs and fixed asset write-offs. To date through December 31, 2021, the Company recorded expenses of approximately $58 million related to these actions, of which approximately $46 million were non-cash charges.
Segment Adjusted Operating Income
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
(a) See Note 7, Segment and Geographic Information, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a reconciliation from segment adjusted operating income to consolidated US GAAP income.
The increase in adjusted operating income for both Technologies & Equipment and Consumables was primarily driven by the increase in net sales, favorable mix including increased volumes for higher margin products, and continued expense discipline during 2021, offset by higher supply chain related expenses, including distribution costs.
Other Income and Expenses
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
NM - Not meaningful
Interest expense, net
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $8 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by higher average debt levels in 2021 relative to the prior year period.
Other expense (income), net
Other expense (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was as follows:
(a) Foreign exchange gains are primarily related to the revaluation of intercompany payables and loans.
Income Taxes and Net Income (Loss)
* Percentages are based on actual values and may not recalculate due to rounding.
(a) For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's net loss per share was calculated on a non-diluted basis.
Provision for income taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, income taxes were a net expense of $138 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded discrete tax expense items of $10 million related to statutory rate changes and $4 million for other discrete tax matters. The Company also recorded $5 million of tax expense as a discrete item related to business divestitures.
The increase in the effective tax rate is due to the overall improvement in the Company’s performance and its corresponding mix of higher-taxed foreign income. The Company continues to reassess the realizability of its deferred tax assets and, after weighing all positive and negative evidence, continues to maintain a valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, income taxes were a net expense of $23 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $9 million of tax expense for other discrete tax matters. The Company also recorded an $11 million tax benefit as a discrete item related to the indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge and $2 million related to the asset impairment charge.
Further information regarding the details of income taxes is presented in Note 17, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the consolidated financial statements. The process of determining significant estimates is fact specific and takes into account factors such as historical experience, current and expected economic conditions, product mix and in some cases, actuarial techniques. The Company evaluates these significant factors as facts and circumstances dictate. Some events as described below could cause results to differ significantly from those determined using estimates. The Company has identified the following accounting estimates as those which are critical to its business and results of operations.
Business Acquisitions
The Company acquires businesses as well as partial interests in businesses. Acquired businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires the Company to record assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their respective fair values with the excess of the purchase price over estimated fair values recorded as goodwill. The assumptions made in determining the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities as well as asset lives can materially impact the results of operations.
The Company obtains information during due diligence and through other sources to get respective fair values. Examples of factors and information that the Company uses to determine the fair values include: tangible and intangible asset evaluations and appraisals, and evaluations of existing contingencies, liabilities, and product line integration information. If the initial valuation for an acquisition is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the acquisition occurred, the Company will record a provisional estimate in the financial statements. The provisional estimate will be finalized as soon as information becomes available but will only occur up to one year from the acquisition date. More information on the assumptions used to estimate the fair values of acquired intangible assets is included in Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
The Company follows the accounting standards for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles, which require an annual test for impairment to goodwill using a fair value approach. In addition to minimum annual impairment tests, the Company also performs impairment assessments more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the goodwill or indefinite-lived assets might be impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit with goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that reporting unit, an impairment charge is recognized for the excess amount. Similarly, if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized on the intangible.
Impairment Assessment
Assessment of the potential impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets is an integral part of the Company’s normal ongoing review of operations. Testing for potential impairment of these assets is dependent on significant assumptions and reflects management’s best estimates at a particular point in time. The dynamic economic environments in which the Company’s businesses operate and key economic and business assumptions with respect to projected selling prices, increased competition and introductions of new technologies can significantly affect the outcome of impairment tests. Estimates based on these assumptions may differ significantly from actual results. Changes in factors and assumptions used in assessing potential impairments can have a significant impact on the existence and magnitude of impairments, as well as the time at which such impairments are recognized. If there are unfavorable changes in these assumptions, particularly changes in the Company’s discount rates, revenue growth rates, and operating margins, the Company may be required to recognize impairment charges.
In particular, the determination of fair value involves uncertainties around the forecasted cash flows as it requires management to make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate future business expectations. Those future expectations include, but are not limited to, the current and ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and new product developments. The Company also considers the current and projected market and economic conditions amid the ongoing pandemic for the dental industry, both in the U.S. and globally, when determining its assumptions.
A change in any of these estimates and assumptions used in the annual test, as well as unfavorable changes in the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, or in the overall markets served by these reporting units, among other factors, could have a negative material impact to the fair value of the reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets and could result in a future impairment charge. There can be no assurance that the Company's future goodwill and indefinite-lived impairment testing will not result in a material adverse impact to the Company's results of operations.
Information with respect to the Company’s significant accounting policies on goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are included in Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Goodwill Impairment
Goodwill represents the excess cost over the fair value of the identifiable net assets of business acquired. Goodwill is not amortized; instead, it is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may be impaired, or if a decision is made to sell a business. Judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred during the course of the year. Such indicators may include a decline in expected cash flows, unanticipated competition or slower growth rates, among others. When testing goodwill for impairment, the Company may assess qualitative factors for its reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount including goodwill. Alternatively, the Company may bypass this qualitative assessment and perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. It is important to note that fair values which could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from those used to evaluate the impairment of goodwill.
Goodwill is allocated among reporting units and evaluated for impairment at that level. The Company’s reporting units are either an operating segment or one level below its operating segments, as determined in accordance with ASC 350.
Effective 2021 and prospectively, the Company is performing its required annual goodwill impairment test as of April 1 rather than as of April 30 which was the Company's previous practice. The Company believes this change is preferable as it more closely aligns with the timing of the Company's strategic business planning process. This change did not result in any delay, acceleration or avoidance of impairment. Furthermore, a retrospective application to prior periods is impracticable as the Company is unable to objectively determine, without the use of hindsight, the assumptions which would be used in earlier periods.
The quantitative evaluation of impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to its net book value, including goodwill. The Company uses a discounted cash flow model (“DCF model”) as its valuation technique to measure the fair value for its reporting units when testing for impairment, as management believes forecasted operating cash flows are the best indicator of such fair value. The discounted cash flow model uses five- to ten- year forecasted cash flows plus a terminal value based on capitalizing the last period’s cash flows using a perpetual growth rate. The significant assumptions and estimates involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows include, but are not limited to the discount rates, revenue growth rates (including perpetual growth rates), and future operating margin percentages of the reporting unit’s business. These assumptions may vary significantly among the reporting units. Operating cash flow forecasts are based on approved business-unit operating plans for the early years and historical relationships and projections in later years. In the development of the forecasted cash flows, the Company applies revenue, gross profit, and operating expense assumptions taking into consideration historical trends as well as future expectations. The revenue growth rate assumptions were developed in consideration of future expectations which included, but were not limited to, the current and ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, distribution channel changes, impact from competition, and new product developments for these reporting units. The Company also considers the current and projected market conditions for dental and medical device industries, both in the U.S. and globally, when determining its assumptions. Operating cash flow assumptions may also be impacted by assumptions regarding benefits from restructuring initiatives, tax rates, capital spending and working capital changes. Discount rates are estimated for geographic regions and applied to the reporting units located within the regions. These rates are developed based on market participant data, which included assumptions regarding the Company’s weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected cash flows. The Company reconciled the aggregate fair values of its reporting units to its market capitalization, which included a reasonable control premium based on market conditions. The Company has not materially changed its methodology for goodwill impairment testing for the years presented.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Asset Impairment
Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of tradenames, trademarks and in-process research and development and are not subject to amortization; instead, they are tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of indefinite-lived intangible assets may be impaired or if a decision is made to sell a business. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred during the course of the year. Such indicators may include a decline in expected cash flow, unanticipated competition or slower growth rates, among others. It is important to note that fair values that could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from those used to evaluate the impairment of indefinite-lived assets. The Company performed this annual impairment test as of April 1, 2021, in conjunction with the goodwill impairment annual test.
The fair value of acquired tradenames and trademarks is estimated by the use of a relief from royalty method, which values an indefinite-lived intangible asset by estimating the royalties saved through the ownership of an asset. Under this method, an owner of an indefinite-lived intangible asset determines the arm’s length royalty that likely would have been charged if the owner had to license the asset from a third party. The royalty rate, which is based on the estimated rate applied against forecasted sales, is tax-effected and discounted at present value using a discount rate commensurate with the relative risk of achieving the cash flow attributable to the asset. Management judgment is necessary to determine key assumptions, including revenue growth rates, perpetual revenue growth rates, royalty rates, and discount rates. Other assumptions are consistent with those applied to goodwill impairment testing.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Asset Impairment Results
No goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible impairment was identified at April 1, 2021 in conjunction with the annual test and no subsequent triggering events were identified. For further information, see Note 12, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
During the three months ended March 31, 2020, prior to performance of the annual impairment test, the Company concluded that due to the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on revenue and profitability, a triggering event existed for four of the Company's five reporting units containing a goodwill balance and all but two of the Company's indefinite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2020. The first quarter goodwill impairment test resulted in an impairment charge of $157 million in the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit, and an impairment charge of $39 million related to certain tradenames and trademarks related to the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit. The intangible asset impairment charge was recorded in Restructuring and other costs in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The Company further performed the required annual impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets at April 30, 2020, which did not result in any additional impairment in 2020.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, the Company impaired $5 million of product tradenames and trademarks within the Technologies & Equipment segment. The impaired indefinite-lived intangible assets are tradenames and trademarks held within the Equipment and Instrument reporting unit. The impairment was the result of a change in forecasted sales related to divestitures of non-strategic product lines.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are determined using the liability method of accounting for income taxes. The Company’s tax expense includes U.S. and international income taxes plus the provision for U.S. taxes on undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries not deemed to be permanently invested.
The Company applies a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The Company recognizes in the consolidated financial statements the impact of a tax position if that position is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position.
Certain items of income and expense are not reported in tax returns and financial statements in the same year. The tax effect of such temporary differences is reported as deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets are recognized if it is more likely than not that the assets will be realized in future years. The Company establishes a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets for which realization is not likely. At December 31, 2021, the Company has a valuation allowance of $267 million against the benefit of certain deferred tax assets of foreign and domestic subsidiaries.
The Company’s tax positions are subject to ongoing examinations by the tax authorities. The Company operates within multiple taxing jurisdictions throughout the world and in the normal course of business is examined by taxing authorities in those jurisdictions. Adjustments to the uncertain tax positions are recorded when taxing authority examinations are completed, statutes of limitation are closed, changes in tax laws occur or as new information comes to light with regard to the technical merits of the tax position.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The increase in cash provided by operating activities was driven primarily by higher sales in the current period, partially offset by unfavorable changes in working capital including a slower trend in collections relative to the prior year, timing of payments to vendors, and a build-up in inventory during the current period to meet recovered demand for the Company's products. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of days for sales outstanding in accounts receivable increased by 7 days to 61 days as compared to 54 days at December 31, 2020, and the number of days of sales in inventory increased by 6 days to 108 days at December 31, 2021 as compared to 102 days at December 31, 2020.
The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to lower cash paid for acquisitions by $830 million, partially offset by higher capital expenditures of $55 million, and less cash proceeds from liquidation of net investment hedges of $56 million. The Company estimates capital expenditures to be in the range of approximately $150 million to $170 million for the full year 2022 and expects these investments to include expansion of facilities to provide incremental space for growth and to consolidate operations for enhanced efficiencies.
The increase in cash used in financing activities was primarily driven by lower net borrowings of $851 million during 2021 compared to prior year, higher stock repurchases of $60 million, partially offset by greater proceeds from exercises of stock options of $40 million. Primarily as a result of this activity, combined with a decrease of $76 million due to exchange rate fluctuations on debt denominated in foreign currencies, the Company's total borrowings decreased by a net $182 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased approximately 3.5 million shares under its open market share repurchase plan for a cost of $200 million at a volume-weighted average price of $57.47. On July 28, 2021, the Board of Directors of the Company approved an increase in the value of shares of common stock that may be repurchased under the share repurchase program to $1 billion. At December 31, 2021, $890 million of authorization remains available for future share repurchases. Additional share repurchases, if any, may be made through open market purchases, Rule 10b5-1 plans, accelerated share repurchases, privately negotiated transactions, or other transactions in such amounts and at such times as the Company deems appropriate based upon prevailing market and business conditions and other factors. At December 31, 2021, the Company held 47.1 million shares of treasury stock.
The Company's ratio of total net debt to total capitalization was as follows:
At December 31, 2021, the Company had a total remaining borrowing capacity of $560 million under lines of credit, including lines available under its short-term arrangements and revolving credit facility. The Company's borrowing capacity includes a $700 million credit facility from 2018 available through July 28, 2024. The Company also has available an aggregate $500 million under a U.S. dollar commercial paper facility. The $700 million revolver serves as a back-up to the commercial paper facility, thus the total available credit under the commercial paper facility and the multi-currency revolving credit facility in the aggregate is $700 million. The Company had $170 million outstanding borrowings under the commercial paper facility at December 31, 2021 resulting in $530 million remaining available under the revolving credit and commercial paper facilities. The Company also has access to $41 million in uncommitted short-term financing under lines of credit from various financial institutions. The lines of credit have no major restrictions and are provided under demand notes between the Company and the lending institutions. At December 31, 2021, the Company has $11 million outstanding under short-term borrowing arrangements.
The Company’s revolving credit facility, term loans and senior notes contain certain covenants relating to the Company's operations and financial condition. The most restrictive of these covenants are: a ratio of total debt outstanding to total capital not to exceed 0.6, and a ratio of operating income excluding depreciation and amortization to interest expense of not less than 3.0 times, in each case, as such terms are defined in the relevant agreement. Any breach of any such covenants would result in a default under the existing debt agreements that would permit the lenders to declare all borrowings under such debt agreements to be immediately due and payable and, through cross default provisions, would entitle the Company's other lenders to accelerate their loans. At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with these covenants.
The Company expects on an ongoing basis to be able to finance operating cash requirements, capital expenditures, and debt service from the current cash, cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and amounts available under its existing borrowing facilities. The Company's credit facilities are further discussed in Note 15, Financing Arrangements, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The cash held by foreign subsidiaries for permanent reinvestment is generally used to finance the subsidiaries' operating activities and future foreign investments. The Company has the ability to repatriate cash to the U.S., which could result in an adjustment to the tax liability for foreign withholding taxes, foreign and/or U.S. state income taxes, and the impact of foreign currency movements. At December 31, 2021, management believed that sufficient liquidity was available in the United States and expects this to remain for the next twelve months. The Company has repatriated and expects to continue repatriating certain funds from its non-U.S. subsidiaries that are not needed to finance local operations, however, these particular repatriation activities have not and are not expected to result in a significant incremental tax liability to the Company.
The Company continues to review its debt portfolio and may refinance additional debt or add debt in the near-term as interest rates remain at historically low levels. The Company believes there is sufficient liquidity available for the next twelve months.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2021, the Company held $43 million of precious metals on consignment from several financial institutions. Under these consignment arrangements, the financial institutions own the precious metal, and, accordingly, the Company does not report this consigned inventory as part of its inventory on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These consignment agreements allow the Company to acquire the precious metal at market rates at a point in time, which is approximately the same time, and for the same price as alloys are sold to the Company's customers. In the event that the financial institutions would discontinue offering these consignment arrangements, and if the Company could not obtain other comparable arrangements, the Company may be required to obtain third party financing to fund an ownership position to maintain precious metal inventory at operational levels. For additional details, see