Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides material historical and prospective disclosures intended to enable investors and other users to assess our financial condition and results of operations. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in the “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and under the heading “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Business Overview
We develop, manufacture and market regenerative medicine products and medical devices for domestic and international markets. Our products serve the specialized needs of orthopedic and neurological surgeons, including orthobiologics for the promotion of bone healing, implants and instrumentation for the treatment of spinal disease. We promote our products in the United States through independent distributors and stocking agents, supported by direct employees.
We have an extensive sales channel of independent commissioned agents and stocking distributors in the United States representing some or all of our products. We also maintain a national accounts program to enable our agents to gain access to integrated delivery network hospitals (“IDNs”) and through group purchasing organizations (“GPOs”). We have biologics contracts with major GPOs, as well as extensive access to IDNs across the United States for both biologics and spine hardware systems. While our focus is the United States market, we promote and sell our products internationally through stocking distribution partners in Canada, Mexico, South America, Australia, and certain Pacific region countries.
We have focused and intend to continue to focus primarily on four key growth initiatives: (1) introduce new products; (2) expand our distribution network; (3) penetrate adjacent markets; and (4) leverage our growth platform with technology and strategic acquisitions. During 2021, we launched four new products, including most recently, a bone marrow aspirate concentrate offering, which was introduced in November 2021. We expanded our distribution network by bringing on over 40 new agents during 2021. In furtherance of our goal to penetrate adjacent markets, we added new sales personnel to leverage certain adjacent non-spine markets, such as the foot and ankle, cranio-maxilofacial, oncology, joint reconstruction and trauma markets and we made progress towards this goal during 2021 by expanding our private label and original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) sales into these adjacent markets. Finally, one of our key growth initiatives is to add depth to our product offering through targeted strategic acquisitions. While the intent of these four key growth initiatives is to increase our future revenues, no assurance can be provided that we will be successful in implementing these growth initiatives or increasing our future revenues.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Since March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused business closures, severe travel restrictions and implementation of social distancing measures. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and more recently as a result of the surge in cases and hospitalizations caused primarily by the Delta and Omicron variants, hospitals and other medical facilities have cancelled or deferred elective procedures, diverted resources to patients suffering from infections, and limited access for non-patients, including our direct and indirect sales representatives. Because of these circumstances, surgeons and their patients have, and may continue to, defer procedures in which our products otherwise would be used. In addition, many facilities that specialize in procedures in which our products are used have experienced staffing shortages, temporary closures, and/or reduced operating hours. These circumstances have negatively impacted, and may continue to negatively impact, the number of elective procedures being conducted and the ability of our employees, independent sales representatives and distributors to effectively market and sell our products, which has had and will likely continue to have a material adverse effect on our revenues.
While eased COVID-19 restrictions caused our revenues to improve in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year, the resurgence in cases and hospitalizations during the third and fourth quarters of 2021 caused our revenues to decline during the third and fourth quarters of 2021 as compared to the respective prior year periods and the second quarter of 2021. Throughout the third and fourth quarter of 2021, and most acutely starting in August 2021, spine and other surgery procedure volumes were negatively impacted in many of our key markets, due to cancellations and/or postponements of procedures as a result of increased hospitalizations, restrictions on elective procedures and staffing shortages, which negatively impacted our 2021 revenues. This reduction in elective procedures and staffing issues have continued into the beginning of first quarter 2022 and could continue to persist or worsen, which would continue to adversely impact our revenues. Additionally, it is possible that additional restrictions could be reinstated if there is another sustained resurgence of COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations.
The COVID-19 pandemic also has caused adverse effects on general commercial activity and the global economy and supply chain, disrupting our ability to obtain raw materials, components and products. The pandemic has also adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, our distributors, independent sales representatives, customers, contract manufacturers and suppliers and their respective businesses, which in turn, have adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, our business and operations.
Although we continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial results, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business during 2022 will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 variants, the actions to contain it or treat its impact, the availability, acceptance and effectiveness of vaccines, future resurgences of the virus and its variants, the speed at which government restrictions are lifted, patient capacity at hospitals and healthcare systems, and the willingness and ability of patients to seek care and treatment due to safety concerns or financial hardship. If our revenues continue to decline and do not recover to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels, we may be required to incur impairment charges to our long-lived assets and goodwill and write-off excess inventory, which would likely adversely affect our future operating results.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 3.6% to $55.3 million compared to $53.3 million for the prior year. The increase of $1.9 million is largely attributed to additional private label and OEM orthobiologics sales of $2.4 million, bringing total private label and OEM sales to $4.9 million, compared to $2.6 million for the prior year. This increase was partially offset by reduced implant sales of $1.0 million versus the prior year.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists primarily of manufacturing cost, product purchase costs and depreciation of surgical instruments. Cost of sales also includes reserves for estimated excess inventory, inventory on consignment that may be missing and not returned, and reserves for estimated missing and damaged consigned surgical instruments. Cost of sales increased by 20.2%, or $3.8 million, to $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is primarily due to increased under-absorption of labor and overhead of $1.0 million driven by initiatives to reduce inventory, with the remaining increase resulting primarily from sales mix and sell through of product subject to greater production costs during prior periods.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased to 58.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 64.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Of the 5.7% decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021, 1.9% was due to increased under-absorption of labor and overhead, 1.3% was due to sales mix including greater sales of lower margin private label and OEM sales, and 2.6% was due to sell through of product subject to greater production costs during prior periods. We expect higher product costs to continue in future periods but otherwise expect gross profit to improve as the effect of COVID-19 on surgical procedures diminishes.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for corporate employees, cash-based and stock-based compensation related costs and corporate expenses for legal, accounting and other professional fees, as well as occupancy costs. General and administrative expenses increased 7.0%, or $0.9 million, to $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to additional stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million, additional legal settlement expenses of $0.5 million and increased salaries and wages of $0.5 million. These increases were partially offset by reduced expense of $0.8 million related to various employee compensation plans and reduced severance expense of $0.3 million.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of sales commissions, personnel costs for sales and marketing employees, costs for trade shows, sales conventions and meetings, travel expenses, advertising and other sales and marketing related costs. Sales and marketing expenses totaled $21.0 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The year-over-year comparison included reduced commissions expense of $0.3 million resulting from a greater mix of private label and OEM sales versus 2020, which offset additional expense of $0.3 million associated with tradeshows and related travel.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of internal costs for the development of new product technologies. Research and development expenses increased $0.2 million, or 32.4%, to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to an increase in research and development headcount in 2021 compared to 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $5.0 million to $1.0 million as compared to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease resulted from our October 1, 2020 debt restructuring which, among other things, reduced our outstanding principal and paid-in-kind interest by $61.7 million.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $0.3 million to $0 as compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was due to certain states suspending the utilization of net operating losses as offsets to taxable income in the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
Since our inception, we have financed our operations through primarily operating cash flows, private placements of equity securities and convertible debt, debt facilities, common stock rights offerings, and other debt transactions. The following table summarizes our working capital as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Our increase in cash and cash equivalents is due primarily to the completion of a private placement of shares of common stock and warrants in February 2021. On February 24, 2021, we issued in a private placement to a single healthcare-focused institutional accredited investor 8,888,890 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $2.25 per share, and a warrant to purchase up to 6,666,668 shares of our common stock. The warrant has an exercise price of $2.25 per share, subject to customary anti-dilution, but not price protection, adjustments, was immediately exercisable and expires on the five-year anniversary of the date of issuance. We received net proceeds of approximately $18.4 million, after deducting fees and other estimated offering expenses, from the private placement. We expect to use these net proceeds for working capital and other general corporate purposes. On May 6, 2021, we refinanced our outstanding debt due December 31, 2021 with a line of credit and $12.0 million term loan.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.4 million compared to $0.7 million used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to greater generation of cash from initiatives to reduce inventory levels in response to reduced lead times, which was partially offset by the effect of collection of accounts receivable for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.9 million, primarily representing purchases of property and equipment of $2.1 million, partially offset by proceeds from sale of fixed assets of $0.2 million. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 million, primarily representing purchases of property and equipment of $1.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from sale of fixed assets of $0.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to $18.4 million of proceeds from our February 2021 private placement, net of issuance costs. Net cash used in financing activities was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting primarily of $1.0 million of costs associated with our debt restructuring.
Current and Prior Credit Facilities
On May 6, 2021, the Company, as guarantor, and our subsidiaries, as borrowers (collectively, the “Borrowers”), entered into a Credit, Security and Guaranty Agreement (Term Loan) (the “Term Credit Agreement”) and Credit, Security and Guaranty Agreement (Revolving Loan) (the “Revolving Credit Agreement” and, together with the Term Credit Agreement, the “Credit Agreements”) with MidCap Financial Trust, in its capacity as agent (“MidCap”).
The Term Credit Agreement provides for a secured term loan facility (the “Term Facility”) in an aggregate principal amount of $12.0 million (the “Term Loan Commitment”), which was funded to the Borrowers immediately, and an additional $5.0 million tranche available solely at the discretion of MidCap and the lenders, for the purposes agreed to between the Company, the Borrowers and the lenders in advance of the making of loans under such additional tranche. The Revolving Credit Agreement provides for a secured revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility,” and, together with the Term Facility, the “Facilities”) under which the Borrowers may borrow up to $8.0 million (such amount, the “Revolving Loan Commitment”) at any one time, the availability of which is determined based on a borrowing base equal to percentages of certain accounts receivable and inventory of the Borrowers in accordance with a formula set forth in the Revolving Credit Agreement. All borrowings under the Revolving Facility are subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions, including the absence of default, the accuracy of representations and warranties in all material respects and the delivery of an updated borrowing base certificate.
The Facilities have a maturity date of May 1, 2026. Each of the Borrowers, and the Company, as guarantor, are jointly and severally liable for all of the obligations under the Facilities on the terms set forth in the Credit Agreements. The Borrowers’ obligations, and the Company’s obligations as a guarantor, under the Credit Agreements are secured by first-priority liens on substantially all of their assets, including, without limitation, all inventory, equipment, accounts, intellectual property and other assets of the Company and the Borrowers.
The proceeds of the Term Facility were used to pay transaction fees in connection with the Facilities and to pay in full all outstanding indebtedness and accrued interest under the Company’s prior credit facility, which is described below. The proceeds of the Revolving Facility may be used to pay transaction fees in connection with the Facilities, to pay in full all outstanding indebtedness and accrued interest under the Company’s prior credit facility, and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
The loans and other obligations pursuant to the Credit Agreements bear interest at a per annum rate equal to the sum of the LIBOR rate, as such term is defined in the Credit Agreements, plus the applicable margin of 7.00% in the case of the Term Credit Agreement, and 4.50% in the case of the Revolving Credit Agreement, subject in each case to a LIBOR floor of 1.00%.
The Credit Agreements contain affirmative and negative covenants customarily applicable to senior secured credit facilities, including covenants that, among other things, limit or restrict the ability of the Borrowers, subject to negotiated exceptions, to incur additional indebtedness and additional liens on their assets, engage in mergers or acquisitions or dispose of assets, pay dividends or make other distributions, voluntarily prepay other indebtedness, enter into transactions with affiliated persons, make investments, and change the nature of their businesses. In addition, the Credit Agreements require the Borrowers and the Company to maintain net product revenue at or above minimum levels and to maintain a minimum adjusted EBITDA and a minimum liquidity, in each case at levels specified in the Credit Agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreements.
On March 7, 2022, the Credit Agreements were amended to, among other things, (i) provide for a waiver of compliance with respect to the Company’s minimum adjusted EBITDA requirement if and so long as the Company’s liquidity (as specifically defined in the Credit Agreements) is in excess of $14 million and there is not otherwise an event of default under the Credit Agreements, commencing with the next delivery of the compliance certificate required under the Credit Agreements, and (ii) re-set the date certain fees payable in connection with optional prepayments are determined to the date the amendment was executed and consequently extend such fees’ original expiration. In addition, the exit fees were increased by 25 basis points.
On May 6, 2021, contemporaneously with the execution and delivery of the Credit Agreements, that certain Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated March 29, 2019, among the Company, the Borrowers, OrbiMed Royalty Opportunities II, LP and ROS Acquisition Offshore LP, as subsequently amended (the “Second A&R Credit Agreement”), which was scheduled to mature on December 31, 2021, was terminated in accordance with the terms thereof and all outstanding amounts were repaid by the Borrowers to Royalty Opportunities in its role as sole lender thereunder.
Cash Requirements
We believe that our $18.2 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, together with amounts available under the Facilities, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements through at least March 2023. However, we may require or seek additional capital to fund our future operations and business strategy prior to March 2023. Accordingly, there is no assurance that we will not need or seek additional financing prior to such time.
We may elect to raise additional financing even before we need it if market conditions for raising additional capital are favorable. We may seek to raise additional financing through various sources, such as equity and debt financings, additional debt restructurings or refinancings, or through strategic collaborations and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure additional sources of funds to support our operations, or if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs or on terms acceptable to us. This is particularly true if economic and market conditions deteriorate.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities or the restructuring or refinancing of our debt, the interests of our current stockholders may be diluted, and the terms may include discounted equity purchase prices, warrant coverage, liquidation or other preferences that would adversely affect the rights of our current stockholders. If we issue common stock, we may do so at purchase prices that represent a discount to our trading price and/or we may issue warrants to the purchasers, which could dilute our current stockholders. If we issue preferred stock, it could adversely affect the rights of our stockholders or reduce the value of our common stock. In particular, specific rights granted to future holders of preferred stock may include voting rights, preferences as to dividends and liquidation, conversion and redemption rights, sinking fund provisions, and restrictions on our ability to merge with or sell our assets to a third party. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Prior to raising additional equity or debt financing, we may be required to obtain the consent of the Agent under our Credit Agreements and/or ROS and Royalty Opportunities under our Investor Rights Agreement with them, and no assurance can be provided that they would provide such consent, which could limit our ability to raise additional financing and the terms thereof.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Critical Accounting Estimates
All of our significant accounting policies and estimates are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Certain of our more critical accounting estimates require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions in determining the estimate. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We develop these judgments based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumption conditions.
We believe that the following financial estimates are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require subjective or complex judgments. Further, we believe that the items discussed below are properly recorded in our consolidated financial statements for all periods presented. Our management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of our most critical financial estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and with our independent registered public accounting firm. The judgments about those financial estimates are based on information available as of the date of our financial statements. Those financial estimates include:
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of costs over fair value of assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill and intangible assets acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have indefinite useful lives are not amortized, instead they are tested for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We conduct our impairment test on an annual basis and review the analysis assumptions on a quarterly basis. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, referred to as a component. A component of an operating segment is a reporting unit if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component.
We chose December 31 to assess our annual goodwill for any impairment in order to closely align with the timing of our annual planning process. In testing goodwill for impairment we perform a quantitative impairment test, including computing the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing that value to its carrying value. If the fair value is less than its carrying value, then the goodwill is determined to be impaired. In the event that goodwill is impaired, an impairment charge to earnings would become necessary. There was no impairment of goodwill recorded in 2021 or 2020.
We evaluate other intangible assets whenever current events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability for assets to be held and used is based on our projection of the undiscounted future operating cash flows of the underlying assets. To the extent such projections indicate that future undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover the carrying amounts of related assets, a charge might be required to reduce the carrying amount to equal estimated fair value. We did not have a triggering event in 2021 or 2020.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the specific identification method and includes materials, labor and overhead. We calculate an inventory reserve for estimated obsolescence and excess inventory based on historical usage and sales, as well as assumptions about anticipated future demand for products. A significant sustained decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory quantities on hand. Additionally, our industry is characterized by regular new product development and introductions that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on hand due to cannibalization of existing products. Our estimates for excess and obsolete inventory are reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis. Our estimates of anticipated future product demand may prove to be inaccurate in which case we may be required to incur charges for excess and obsolete inventory. Increases in our inventory reserves result in a corresponding expense, which is recorded to cost of sales. We believe the total reserve at December 31, 2021 of $10.3 million is adequate.
Accounts Receivable and Allowances
Accounts receivable represents amounts due from customers for which revenue has been recognized. Normal terms on trade accounts receivable are net 30 days, and some customers are offered discounts for early pay. We perform credit evaluations when considered necessary, but generally do not require collateral to extend credit.
The allowance for doubtful accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing receivables. We determine the allowance based on factors such as historical collection experience, customers’ current creditworthiness, customer concentration, age of accounts receivable balance, general economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay, and management judgment. In addition, we include provision for current expected credit loss based on historical collection experience adjusted for current economic conditions affecting collectability. Actual customer collections could differ from our estimates. Account balances are charged to the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote. Provisions to the allowance for doubtful accounts are charged to expense. We do not have any off-balance sheet credit exposure related to our customers.
Deterioration in the financial condition of any key customer or a significant slowdown in the economy could have a material negative impact on our ability to collect a portion or all of our accounts receivable. We believe that an analysis of historical trends and our current knowledge of potential collection issues provide us with sufficient information to establish a reasonable estimate for an allowance for doubtful accounts. However, since we cannot predict with certainty future changes in the financial stability of our customers, our actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates. In the event we determined that a smaller or larger uncollectible accounts reserve is appropriate, we would record a credit or charge, as applicable, to bad debt expense in the period that we made such a determination. We believe our allowance for doubtful accounts at December 31, 2021 of $0.6 million is adequate.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business and do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability or classification of assets or the amounts of liabilities that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties. Our ability to continue as a going concern, realize the carrying value of our assets and discharge our liabilities in the ordinary course of business is dependent upon a number of factors, including, the level and timing of future revenues and expenditures; development, commercialization and market acceptance of our products; competing technologies and market developments; regulatory requirements and delays; and ability to attract and retain key personnel.
Management’s evaluation of going concern was conducted as part of its discussions with and the review by the Board of Directors of our 2022 Annual Operating Plan. Management believes that our $18.4 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, together with amounts available under the Facilities, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements through at least March 2023.