ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless otherwise stated, dollar amounts are provided in thousands, except share and per share data.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, our consolidated financial statements (including notes to the consolidated financial statements) and the other consolidated financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and timing of events could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
XpresSpa Group, Inc. is one of the leading global travel health and wellness services holding companies. XpresSpa Group currently has three reportable operating segments: XpresSpa, XpresTest, and Treat.
XpresSpa has been a global airport retailer of spa services through its XpresSpa spa locations, offering travelers premium spa services, including massage, nail and skin care, as well as spa and travel products (“XpresSpa”).
Through XpresSpa Group’s subsidiary XpresTest, we launched XpresCheck Wellness Centers, also in airports. XpresCheck offers COVID-19 and other medical diagnostic testing services to the traveling public, as well as airline, airport and concessionaire employees, and TSA and U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents. XpresTest has entered into MSAs with professional medical services companies or professional limited liability companies (“PLLC”) that provide health care services to patients. The PLLCs pay XpresTest a monthly fee to operate in the XpresCheck Wellness Centers. Under the terms of MSAs, we provide office space, equipment, supplies, non-licensed staff, and management services in return for a management fee. Effective July 1, 2021, we determined that the PLLCs are VIEs due to their equity holders having insufficient capital at risk, and the Company having a variable interest and a primary beneficiary in these PLLCs.
Furthermore, XpresSpa Group continues to develop Treat, a travel health and wellness brand that is positioned for a post-pandemic world. Treat’s on-site centers (currently located in JFK International Airport and opening in April 2022 in Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport and later this year in Salt Lake City International Airport) provide access to health and wellness services for travelers. Our teams provide travel-related diagnostic testing for virus, cold, flu and other illnesses as well as hydration therapy, IV Drips, and vitamin injections. Travelers can purchase time blocks to use our wellness rooms to engage in interactive services like self-guided yoga, meditation and low impact weight exercises or to relax and unplug from the hectic pace of the airport and renew themselves before or after their trip.
Although we recognize three segments of business, our strategy for the future, is to create and leverage a fully integrated set of products and services that are both profitable and scalable across our portfolio of brands. Additionally, we will expand our retail strategy, not only adding more products for sale but aligning those products more efficiently to our service offerings. For example, adding fortified water and hydration packets to the delivery of an onsite hydration IV or adding muscle relaxation patches to a neck or back massage to continue treatment after the delivery of the service.
We also plan to build our capability for delivering health and wellness services outside the airport. We believe operating outside of the airport complements our offering and allows us to scale growth faster.
We will be looking to further expand internationally. While international travel has not picked back up to pre-pandemic levels, we want to be opportunistic in our approach, taking advantage of the current market to grow in preparation for a full return of travel, We believe a strategy for international expansion further advances our overall biosurveillance efforts.
These strategic imperatives will be accomplished through development of an infrastructure specifically focused on enabling scalable and efficient growth.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Treat offers a website (www.treat.com) and mobile app to complement the offering with relevant health and wellness content designed to help people on the go with information that could impact their travel. The platform provides travelers access to a comprehensive online marketplace of services including global illness tracker tools such as the COVID-19 Requirements Map, on-demand chat care by licensed providers, a health wallet to store personal and family health records (including COVID-19 testing results), and a scheduler to arrange for direct care at one of our on-site locations.
In March 2020, we temporarily closed all global XpresSpa locations due to the categorization by local jurisdictions of the spa locations as “non-essential services.” A significant number of our XpresSpa locations remain closed, although several have reopened as described under "Recent Developments -­XpresSpa Premium Spa Services" below. We intend to assess the reopening of remaining XpresSpa®™ spa locations on a location-by-location basis.
Since the beginning of the temporary closure of our XpresSpa locations, we successfully launched our XpresCheck Wellness Centers, offering such testing services, as described above. Also, we continue to evaluate alternative testing protocols and work in partnership with airlines and others for safe travels.
While management has used all currently available information in assessing our business prospects, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our XpresCheck Wellness Centers and on our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows remains uncertain and could have a material effect on our business.
Recent Developments
XpresCheck Wellness Centers
XpresCheck’s business has management services agreements with state licensed physicians and nurse practitioners, under which we administer COVID-19 testing options, including a Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test and a rapid PCR test. As of the date of this report, there are 15 operating XpresCheck locations operating in 12 airports, including the following locations opened since December 31, 2020:
● On January 12, 2021, we opened our second XpresCheck Wellness Center at Boston’s Logan International Airport. It contains seven separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● On January 20, 2021, we announced the opening of an XpresCheck Wellness Center at Salt Lake City International Airport. It contains four separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● On February 16, 2021, we announced the opening of our second XpresCheck testing facility at Newark Liberty International Airport. It contains four separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● On March 8, 2021, we announced the opening of an XpresCheck Wellness Center at Houston George Bush Intercontinental Airport. It contains four separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● On March 15, 2021, we announced the opening of XpresCheck Wellness Centers at Dulles International and Reagan National Airports in Virginia, containing nine and four separate testing rooms, respectively, to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● On April 8, 2021, we announced the opening of an XpresCheck Wellness Center at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. It contains eight separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● On April 21, 2021, we announced the opening of an XpresCheck Wellness Center at San Francisco International Airport. It contains nine separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
● On October 13, 2021, we opened an XpresCheck Wellness Center at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport (ATL) Concourse E, converting a legacy XpresSpa located in Concourse E. It contains six separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● In February 2022, a second XpresCheck opened at Denver International Airport, pre-security in the Great Hall. It contains six separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
● In March 2022, we opened an XpresCheck in Orlando International Airport, pre-security, in the South Walk area of the Main Terminal. It contains five separate testing rooms to provide diagnostic COVID-19 testing.
During 2021, XpresCheck initiated a $2,001, eight-week pilot program with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in collaboration with Concentric by Ginkgo. Under this program, XpresCheck is conducting biosurveillance monitoring at four major U.S. airports (JFK International Airport, Newark Liberty International Airport, San Francisco International Airport, and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport) aimed at identifying existing and new SARS-CoV-2 variants. On January 31, 2022, we announced the extension of the program, bringing the total contract to $5,534. Approximately $1,557 of the original $2,001 in revenue was recognized during the fourth quarter of 2021. We anticipate the remaining $3,977 of the full $5,534 amount will be realized in the first and second quarters of 2022.
XpresSpa Premium Spa Services
There are currently sixteen operating XpresSpa domestic locations (including one franchise location in Austin-Bergstrom International Airport) and we expect to re-open four additional domestic locations in the near-term. A majority of the domestic XpresSpa locations are operating approximately eight hours per day during the busiest hours (compared to up to sixteen hours per day pre-pandemic) improving labor productivity. Additionally, XpresSpa implemented a price increase in mid-October 2021 which further improved profitability. And as airport volumes improve, we will continue to review our operating hours to optimize revenue opportunity.
During the fourth quarter, we began testing several new services to take advantage of a growing interest in non-traditional spa services and expansion of our retail offering to align more closely with the services we provide. We are evaluating the success of these new initiatives at each airport on an on-going basis and will incorporate changes to our approach as more of the portfolio is reactivated.
There are also six international locations operating, including three XpresSpa locations in Dubai International Airport in the United Arab Emirates and three XpresSpa locations in Schiphol Amsterdam Airport in the Netherlands. We have also signed for five locations at Istanbul Airport and expect to open the first store this summer.
Treat
Treat is our new travel, health and wellness brand transforming the way we access care through a suite of health and wellness services supported by an integrated digital platform and a relevant retail offering to the traveling public.
Treat’s on-site centers (currently located in JFK International Airport and opening soon in Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport and later this year in Salt Lake City International Airport) provide access to health and wellness services for travelers. Our teams provide travel-related diagnostic testing for virus, cold, flu and other illnesses as well as hydration therapy, IV Drips, and vitamin injections. Travelers can purchase time blocks to use our wellness rooms to engage in interactive services like self-guided yoga, meditation and low impact weight exercises or to relax and unplug from the hectic pace of the airport and renew themselves before or after their trip.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Treat offers a website (www.treat.com) and mobile app to complement the offering with relevant health and wellness content designed to help people on the go with information that could impact their travel. The platform provides travelers access to a comprehensive online marketplace of services including global illness tracker tools such as the COVID-19 Requirements Map, on-demand chat care by licensed providers, a health wallet to store personal and family health records (including COVID-19 testing results), and a scheduler to arrange for direct care at one of our on-site locations.
HyperPointe Acquisition
In January 2022, we announced and closed on the acquisition of GCG Connect, LLC d/b/a HyperPointe. HyperPointe is a leading digital healthcare and data analytics relationship marketing agency servicing the global healthcare and pharmaceutical industry. HyperPointe has significant experience in patient and healthcare professional marketing and deep technological experience with CXM (customer experience management) and data analytics. Since June 2020, HyperPointe’s management team and suite of services and technology have been used to develop and deploy the technological infrastructure needed to scale the growth of our XpresCheck® business HyperPointe’s experience in this space continues to serve the XpresCheck business and will play a critical role in the expansion of on-going biosurveillance efforts.
Terms of the transaction were $5,612 in cash, and $1,000 in common stock, as well as potential additional earn-out payments of up to $7,500 over a three-year timeframe based upon future performance; these earn-out payments may be satisfied in cash or common stock or a combination thereof subject to various terms and conditions.
HyperPointe currently operates as a stand-alone entity within XpresSpa Group. Ezra Ernst, who is the current CEO of HyperPointe, also serves as CEO of XpresCheck, reporting to Scott Milford, XpresSpa Group CEO. Mr. Ernst is spearheading efforts to further integrate XpresCheck’s biosurveillance screening and testing business with HyperPointe’s customer experience management technology and data management know how in the healthcare and pharmaceutical verticals to further drive new revenue opportunities.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $105,506 of cash and cash equivalents, total current assets of approximately $108,979. Our total current liabilities balance, which includes primarily accounts payable, accrued expenses, deferred revenue, the current portion or promissory note, and the current portion of operating lease liabilities was $19,827 as of December 31, 2021. The working capital was $89,152 as of December 31, 2021, compared to a working capital of $78,302 as of December 31, 2020.
During 2021, holders of the Company’s December 2020 Investor Warrants, December 2020 Placement Agent Warrants and December 2020 Placement Agent Tail Fee Warrants exercised a total of 11,273,529 warrants for common shares. The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $19,245. In accordance with the placement agent agreements with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC and Palladium, the Company paid cash fees of $2,162 and issued 846,588 warrants to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC at an exercise price of $2.125 per share and 325,500 warrants to Palladium at an exercise price of $1.70 per share.
While we have aggressively reduced operating and overhead expenses, and we continue to focus on our overall profitability, we have been able to generate positive cash flows from operations, and Net Income. We expect to achieve future profitability, in the light of various growth initiatives that we have implemented.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
B3D Senior Secured Loan
On January 9, 2020, as compensation for the consent of B3D to the CC Agreement, we entered into the Fifth Credit Agreement Amendment with B3D in order to (i) increase the principal amount owed to B3D from $7,000 to $7,150, which additional $150 in principal and any interest accrued thereon will become convertible, at B3D’s option, into shares of our common stock upon receipt of the approval of our stockholders, which was obtained on May 28, 2020 and (ii) provide for the advance payment of 97,223 shares of common stock in satisfaction of the interest payable pursuant to the B3D Note for the months of October, November and December 2020. The common stock was issued to B3D on January 14, 2020. We capitalized a $150 fee charged by the lender to consent to the CC Agreement.
The total of fees paid to the lender as consideration for entering into the Fourth and Fifth Credit Agreement Amendments of $650 was capitalized and was being amortized over the remaining term of the B3D Note. We recorded amortization expense of $62 related to these capitalized costs, which is included in Interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
On March 6, 2020, XpresSpa Holdings entered into the Sixth Credit Agreement Amendment with B3D in order to, among other provisions, (i) increase the principal amount owed to B3D from $7,150 to $7,900, which additional $750 in principal, comprised of $500 in new funding and $250 in debt issuance costs, and any interest accrued thereon will be convertible, at B3D’s option, into shares of our common stock subject to receipt of the approval of our stockholders which was obtained on May 28, 2020 and (ii) decrease the conversion rate under the B3D Note from $6.00 per share to $1.68 per share. On March 19, 2020, the conversion rate was further reduced to $0.525 per share after giving effect to certain anti-dilution adjustments.
The Sixth Credit Agreement Amendment was accounted for as an extinguishment of debt in our consolidated financial statements. In March 2020, we extinguished debt with a carrying value of $4,829, net of unamortized debt discount of $1,845 and unamortized debt issuance costs of $476. In addition, we extinguished $2,048 of derivative liability, which represented the estimated fair value of the conversion option based upon provisions included in the Fifth Credit Agreement Amendment. We determined that the conversion option in the Sixth Credit Agreement Amendment should be bifurcated from the host instrument and engaged a third party to assess the fair value of the conversion option. As a result, we recorded debt with a carrying value of $3,994, net of a debt discount of $3,656 and debt issuance costs of $250, and a derivative liability of $3,656. We recognized a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $273 during the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents the difference between the carrying amount of the debt recorded under the Fourth and Fifth Credit Agreement Amendments and the debt recorded under the Sixth Credit Agreement Amendment and is included in Other non-operating income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Subsequent to the Sixth Credit Agreement Amendment and during the year ended December 31, 2020, B3D elected to convert a total of $7,900 of principal into shares of common stock at conversion prices of $1.68 and $0.525. As a result, approximately $15,395 of derivative liability was settled and reclassified to equity, we wrote off $3,156 of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs, and 13,934,525 shares of common stock were issued. We recognized a revaluation loss related to the derivative liability of $11,990 during the year ended December 31, 2020, which is included in “Loss on revaluation of warrants and conversion options” in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
A total of $884 of accretion expense on the debt discount was recorded in the years ended December 31, 2020, which is included in “Interest expense” in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss and increased the carrying value of the B3D Note. Total amortization expense related to the B3D Note debt issuance costs was $98 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is included in “Interest expense” in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The B3D Note was guaranteed on a full, unconditional, joint, and several basis, by the parent Company, XpresSpa Group, Inc., and all wholly owned subsidiaries of Holdings (the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”). Under the terms of a security and guarantee agreement dated July 8, 2019, XpresSpa Group, Inc. (the parent company) and the Guarantor Subsidiaries each
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
fully and unconditionally, jointly and severally, guaranteed the payment of interest and principal on the B3D Note. Holdings pledged and granted to B3D a first priority security interest in, among other things, all of its equity interests in Holdings and all of its rights to receive distributions, cash or other property in connection with Holdings. We have not presented separate consolidating financial statements of XpresSpa Group, Inc., Holdings and Holdings’ wholly owned subsidiaries, as each entity has guaranteed the B3D Note, so each entity is responsible for the payment.
Paycheck Protection Program
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“the PPP”) promissory note in the principal amount of $5,653 payable to Bank of America, NA (“Bank of America”) evidencing a PPP loan (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum. No payments were due on the PPP Loan during a six-month deferral period commencing on May 2, 2020. Commencing one month after the expiration of the deferral period and continuing on the same day of each month thereafter until the maturity date of the PPP Loan, the Company is obligated to make monthly payments of principal and interest, each in such equal amount required to fully amortize the principal amount outstanding on the PPP Loan by the maturity date. The maturity date is May 2, 2022. The principal amount of the PPP Loan was subject to forgiveness under the PPP upon the Company’s request to the extent that the PPP Loan proceeds are used to pay expenses permitted by the PPP. Bank of America may have forgiven interest accrued on any principal forgiven if the SBA pays the interest. Currently, the Company is paying its monthly principal and interest related to the PPP Loan when due. The PPP Loan contains customary borrower default provisions and lender remedies, including the right of Bank of America to require immediate repayment in full the outstanding principal balance of the PPP Loan with accrued interest. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, $4 and $37 of interest has been accrued, respectively, and is included in Accounts payable, accrued expenses and other in the consolidated balance sheets.
Our Strategy and Outlook
We believe that our company is well positioned to benefit from consumers’ growing interest in travel health and wellness and increasing demand for health and wellness related services and products.
XpresSpa was created for travelers to address the stress and idle time spent at the airport, allowing travelers to spend this time relaxing and focusing on personal care and wellness. It is a well-recognized and popular airport spa brand with a dominant market share in the United States, with nearly three times the number of domestic locations as its closest competitor.
Travel needs are changing based on new health and passenger safety concerns resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, in 2020 we created a companion company, XpresCheck, which is also in airports and which offers COVID-19 testing and other medical diagnostic testing services to airport employees and the traveling public.
Further, the Company continues developing Treat, a travel health and wellness brand that is positioned for a post-pandemic world and that leverages its historic travel wellness experience and newly acquired healthcare expertise. The Company sees this concept evolution as a significant opportunity to be a category innovator in a new niche industry where it can leverage technology in addition to its existing real estate and airport experience in providing travelers with peace of mind and access to integrated care.
While COVID-19 testing will be available under this new brand, the broader suite of services may include: pre-travel health and wellness planning. Treat’s on-site centers (currently located in JFK International Airport and opening soon in Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport and later this year in Salt Lake City International Airport) provide access to health and wellness services for travelers. Our teams provide travel-related diagnostic testing for virus, cold, flu and other illnesses as well as hydration therapy, IV Drips, and vitamin injections. Travelers can purchase time blocks to use our wellness rooms to engage in interactive services like self-guided yoga, meditation and low impact weight exercises or to relax and unplug from the hectic pace of the airport and renew themselves before or after their trip.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Airport Rent Concessions
We have received rent concessions from landlords on a majority of our leases, allowing for the relief of minimum guaranteed payments in exchange for percentage-of-revenue rent or providing relief from rent through payment deferrals. Currently, the period of relief from these payments range from three- to twenty eight-months and began in March 2020. We received minimum guaranteed payment concession of approximately $2,078 and $2,107, respectively, in years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Reconciliation of Full-Year 2021 and 2020 Net Income (Loss) to Adjusted EBITDA or Loss (Non-GAAP Measure)
We use GAAP and non-GAAP measurements to assess the trends in our business. We review its Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, which we define as earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization expense, excluding merger and acquisition, integration and one-time costs and stock-based compensation.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of financial performance that is not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP but is a measurement used by management to assess the trends in our business. In evaluating our performance as measured by Adjusted EBITDA, we recognize and consider the limitations of this measurement. Reconciliations of operating loss from continuing operations for the Company for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 to Adjusted EBITDA loss are presented in the tables above.
We have included this non-GAAP financial measure because management utilizes this information for assessing our performance and liquidity, and as an indicator of our ability to make capital expenditures and finance working capital requirements. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a measurement that is commonly used by analysts and some investors in evaluating the performance and liquidity of growth companies such as ours.
In particular, we believe that it is useful for analysts and investors to understand that Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain transactions not related to our core cash operating activities, which are primarily related to our XpresCheck Wellness Centers. We believe that excluding these transactions allows investors to meaningfully analyze the performance of our core cash operations.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities or as an alternative to operating income or as an indicator of operating performance or any other measure of performance derived in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our obligations for the payment of income taxes, interest expense, or other obligations such as capital expenditures.
Results of Operations
Revenue
We recognize revenue from the sale of XpresSpa services when they are rendered at our stores and from the sale of products at the time goods are purchased at our stores or online (usually by credit card), net of discounts and applicable sales taxes. Significant number of our spa locations remain closed and therefore generate little revenue. Other revenue primarily represents fees earned through strategic partnerships and product placement arrangement in our spas.
Through our XpresCheck Wellness Centers and under the terms of the Managed Services Agreement (“MSA”) with PLLCs that in turn contract with physicians and nurse practitioners, we offer testing services to airline employees, contractors, concessionaire employees, TSA officers and U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents, as well as the traveling public. We have entered into MSAs with PLLCs that provide healthcare services to patients. Under the terms of the MSAs which may be modified according for commercial reasonableness and fair market value, XpresTest provides office space, equipment, supplies, non-licensed staff, and management services to be used for the purpose of COVID-19 and other medical diagnostic testing in return for a management fee. However, as a result of uncertainties around the cash flows of the XpresCheck Wellness Centers, we concluded in 2020 that the collectability criteria to qualify as a contract under ASC 606 was not met, and therefore, revenue associated with the monthly management fee would not be recognized until a subsequent reassessment resulted in the MSAs meeting the collectability criteria. XpresTest recognized revenue of $16,843 (including catch-up revenue of $3,186 for 2020) during the six months ended June 30, 2021, under the MSAs, pursuant to reassessments in 2021, of the MSAs executed in 2020 and amended in 2021, and assessments and reassessments of MSAs executed and amended in 2021 until June 30, 2021 resulting in management’s conclusion that they met the collectability criteria. Any revenue collected not meeting the collectability criteria was recorded as deferred revenue. Effective, July 1, 2021 (see Note 4), we determined that the PLLCs are variable interest entities due to its equity holder having insufficient capital at risk, and we have a variable interest in the PLLCs. In pursuance, the total revenue of $50,689 for the PLLCs for the six months ended December 31, 2021 were designated as a revenue for us.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Cost of sales
Cost of sales consists of costs at the spa-level and wellness center-level. These costs include all costs that are directly attributable to the location’s operations and include:
● payroll and related benefits for the location’s operations and management;
● rent, percentage rent and occupancy costs;
● the cost of merchandise, including testing kits;
● freight, shipping and handling costs;
● production costs;
● inventory shortage and valuation adjustments, including purchase price allocation increase in fair values which was recorded as part of acquisition; and
● costs associated with sourcing operations.
Depreciation and amortization
Property and equipment are stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is calculated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. The useful lives of our property and equipment are based on estimates of the period over which we expect the assets to be of economic benefit to us. Our property and equipment assets primarily consist of leasehold improvements to our stores and are amortized over the shorter of the useful life of the asset or the term of the lease.
Amortization of our intangible assets is recognized on a straight-line basis over the remaining useful life of the intangible assets.
Impairment/disposal of assets
We test our long-lived assets (which primarily includes property and equipment and right of use lease asset) for impairment on at least an annual basis or whenever circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets are tested for impairment at the lowest level at which there are identifiable operating cash flows. An impairment loss is recognized if the carrying amount of a fixed asset (asset group) is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value.
Impairment charges related to our amortized, intangible assets are recorded when an impairment indicator exists and the carrying amount of the related asset exceeds its fair value.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses include management and administrative personnel, public and investor relations, overhead/office costs, insurance legal fees, accounting fees and various other professional fees, as well as sales and marketing costs and stock-based compensation for management and administrative personnel.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Loss on revaluation of warrants and conversion option
(Loss) gain on revaluation of warrants and conversion options is primarily comprised of adjustments to the fair value of the derivative conversion option of the debt instruments and the fair value of the warrants.
Non-operating income (expense)
Non-operating income (expense) primarily includes gain on equity investments and bank charges.
Income taxes
As of December 31, 2021, deferred tax assets generated from our activities in the United States were offset by a valuation allowance because realization depends on generating future taxable income, which, in our estimation, is not more likely than not to be generated before such net operating loss carryforwards expire.
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenues increased $65,344, or 779%. The increase in revenue was primarily due to patient service revenue of $50,689 during the second half of 2021 and MSA fees of $16,843 for the six months ended June 30, 2021, respectively through managed services agreements with professional medical services companies that provide healthcare services to patients in our XpresCheck Wellness Centers (while the majority of XpresSpa locations remain closed). In addition, the Company saw a slight increase in revenue associated with the XpresSpa locations that opened during 2021.
Cost of sales
The increase in cost of sales of $29,402, or 245%, was due to the increase in revenues resulting in increased costs to operate the XpresCheck locations due to the COVID-19 Pandemic; and the reopening of certain XpresSpa locations that were temporarily closed during 2020. We had 22 open Spa locations as of December 31, 2021, and 2 open Spa locations as of December 31, 2020. The largest component in the cost of sales are costs of testing kits and labor costs at the location-level, Cost of sales also includes rent and related occupancy costs, which can primarily include rent based on percentage of sales, as well as other product costs directly associated with the procurement of retail inventory, and other operating costs.
Depreciation and amortization
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
During the year ended December 31, 2021, depreciation and amortization expense decreased $2,009, or 38.6%, compared to the depreciation and amortization expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the write-off of the stores that were permanently closed during the year ended December 31, 2020. Fewer locations resulted in lower amortization of leasehold improvements.
Impairment/disposal of assets
We completed an assessment of our property and equipment and right of use lease assets for impairment as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Based upon the results of the impairment test, we recorded an impairment of property and equipment and right of use lease assets of approximately $90 and $747, respectively, in the year ended December 31, 2021. The expense was primarily related to the impairment of leasehold improvements made to certain XpresSpa locations and right of use lease assets where as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, management determined that the location’s discounted future cash flow was not enough to support the carrying value of the leasehold improvements and right of use lease assets over the remaining lease term.
Loss on revaluation of warrants and conversion option
Loss on revaluation of warrants and conversion option in 2020 is primarily comprised of adjustments to the fair value of the derivative conversion option of the debt instruments and the fair value of the warrants, including losses of $11,990, $8,985, $15,480 and $14,692 related to the B3D Note, the Calm Note, the Calm Warrants and the Class A Warrants, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative
During the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased by $8,259, or 51.8%, primarily due to start-up costs associated with the XpresCheck brand, development of the Treat brand and additional legal fees related to the resolution of certain legal matters, offset by reduced variable costs related to the closed XpresSpa locations.
Interest (income) expense
Interest expense decreased by $1,875, or 102%, primarily due to conversions to Common Stock of the Calm Note and B3D Note during 2020.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Non-operating (expense) income, net
The following is a summary of the transactions included in non-operating income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
As of December 31, 2021, the equity investment in Route1 had a readily determinable fair value of $722. We recorded an unrealized loss of $1,045 in connection with the remeasurement of the shares of our common stock and warrants of Route 1 it obtained in the 2018 sale of Group Mobile to Route 1.
Non-operating income (expense) will be affected by the adjustments to the fair value of our equity investment, which could fluctuate materially from period to period. Fair value of these instruments depends on a variety of assumptions.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, our estimated aggregate total NOLs were $150,926 for U.S. federal purposes, expiring 20 years from the respective tax years to which they relate, and $56,336 for U.S. federal purposes with an indefinite life due to new regulations in the Tax Act of 2017. The NOL amounts are presented before Internal Revenue Code, Section 382 limitations. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 imposed substantial restrictions on the utilization of NOL and tax credits in the event of an ownership change of a corporation. Thus, our ability to utilize all such NOL and credit carryforwards may be limited. The CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020 and provides favorable changes to tax law for businesses impacted by COVID-19. However, we do not anticipate the income tax law changes will materially benefit us.
We did not have any material unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021. We do not expect to record any additional material provisions for unrecognized tax benefits within the next year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In March 2020, we temporarily closed all global XpresSpa locations due to the categorization by local jurisdictions of the spa locations as “non-essential services.” XpresSpa reopened 22 locations as of December 31, 2021 as described under "Recent Developments -­XpresSpa Premium Spa Services" below. We intend to reopen the remaining XpresSpa spa locations on a location-by-location basis and resume normal operations at such selected locations once airport traffic returns to sufficient levels to support operations at a unit level.
Furthermore, XpresSpa Group continues to develop Treat, a travel health and wellness brand that is positioned for a post-pandemic world. Treat’s on-site centers (currently located in JFK International Airport and opening soon in Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport and later this year in Salt Lake City International Airport) provide access to health and wellness services for travelers. Our teams provide travel-related diagnostic testing for virus, cold, flu and other illnesses as well as hydration therapy, IV Drips, and vitamin injections. Travelers can purchase time blocks to use our wellness
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
rooms to engage in interactive services like self-guided yoga, meditation and low impact weight exercises or to relax and unplug from the hectic pace of the airport and renew themselves before or after their trip.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $105,506 of cash and cash equivalents and total current assets of $108,979. Our total current liabilities balance, which primarily includes accounts payable, accrued expenses, the current portion of promissory note and the current portion of operating lease liabilities was $19,827 as of December 31, 2021. The working capital surplus was $89,152 as of December 31, 2021, compared to a working capital of $78,302 as of December 31, 2020.
During 2021, holders of our December 2020 Investor Warrants, December 2020 Placement Agent Warrants and December 2020 Placement Agent Tail Fee Warrants exercised a total of 11,273,529 warrants for common shares. We received gross proceeds of approximately $19,245. In accordance with the placement agent agreements with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC and Palladium, we paid cash fees of $2,162 and issued 846,588 warrants to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC at an exercise price of $2.125 per share and 325,500 warrants to Palladium at an exercise price of $1.70 per share.
Also, during 2021, we executed on our share repurchase program, repurchasing and redeeming 4,702,072 shares at average cost of $1.66 per share, for a total of $7,825.
Also, during March 2022, the Company continuing to execute on its share repurchase program, repurchased 7,142,446 shares at average cost of $1.55 per share, for a total of $11,095.
Our primary liquidity and capital requirements are for the maintenance of our current XpresSpa locations and brand, as well as the expansion of the Treat Centers and XpresCheck Wellness Centers. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $14,561 from operations.
Cash flows
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash generated in operating activities was $14,561 as compared to net cash used in operating activities in 2020 of $25,012. The increase in net cash generated by operating activities was primarily due to the operations of our new XpresCheck Wellness Centers brand.
Investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities totaled $5.156, compared to net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $4,349. Cash in 2021 was used primarily to acquire leasehold improvements for new openings of XpresCheck and Treat locations and the development of a new website for the Treat brand.
We expect that net cash used in investing activities will increase as we intend to continue to open new XpresCheck and Treat locations and develop supporting infrastructure and systems.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities decreased $110,875 primarily due to lower equity based financing transactions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities that would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We believe the following accounting estimates to be the most critical estimates we used in preparing our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company evaluates its ownership, contractual, pecuniary, and other interests in entities to determine if it has any variable interest in a variable interest entity (“VIE”). These evaluations are complex and involve judgment. If the Company determines that an entity in which it holds a contractual or ownership interest is a VIE and that the Company is the primary beneficiary, the Company consolidates such entity in its consolidated financial statements. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is the party that meets both of the following criteria: (i) has the power to make decisions that most significantly affect the economic performance of the VIE; and (ii) has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that in either case could potentially be significant to the VIE. Management performs ongoing reassessments of whether changes in the facts and circumstances regarding the Company’s involvement with a VIE will cause the consolidation conclusion to change. Changes in consolidation status are applied prospectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are tested for impairment at the lowest level at which there are identifiable operating cash flows, which is at the individual spa or clinic location for the XpresSpa and XpresCheck businesses. The Company’s long-lived assets consist primarily of leasehold improvements and right to use lease assets for each of its locations (considered the asset group). The Company reviews its long-lived assets for recoverability yearly or sooner if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable. If indicators are present, the Company performs a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the asset group in question to its carrying amount. An impairment loss is recognized if it is determined that the long-lived asset group is not recoverable and is calculated based on the excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group over the long-lived asset groups fair value. The Company estimates the fair value of long-lived assets using present value income approach. Future cash flow was calculated based on forecasts over the estimated remaining useful life of the asset group, which for each of the Company’s locations, is the remaining term of the operating lease. The Company estimates it weighted average cost of capital as the discount rate since it expects that this rate incorporates not only the time value of money but also the expectations regarding future cash flows and an appropriate risk premium.
The estimates used to calculate future cash flows are subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgments and therefore cannot be determined with precision. Changes in assumptions could significantly affect the estimated fair value of each asset group. The Company will calculate the future cash flow using what it believes to be the most predictable of several scenarios. Typically, the changes in assumptions run under different business scenarios would not result in a material change in the assessment of the potential impairment or the impairment amount of a locations long-lived asset group. But if these estimates or related assumptions were to change materially, the Company may be required to record an impairment charge.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Intangible assets
Intangible assets include trade names, and technology, which were primarily acquired as part of the acquisition of XpresSpa in December 2016 and were recorded based on the estimated fair value in purchase price allocation. In addition, intangible assets include software and website development costs that were capitalized as part of the Company’s development of a mobile application and website for the treat brand. The Company accounts for these costs in accordance with ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software. The intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which are periodically evaluated for reasonableness.
The Company’s intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The fair value is than compared to the carrying value and an impairment charge is recognized by the amount in which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset. In assessing the recoverability of the Company’s intangible assets, the Company must make estimates and assumptions regarding future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of the respective assets. These estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on whether an impairment charge is recognized and also the magnitude of any such charge. Fair value estimates are made at a specific point in time, based on relevant information. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized impairment of $0 and $3,934.
Fair value measurements
The Company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, debt, equity investments, and derivative liabilities. The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received in an asset sale or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between unaffiliated market participants. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value are categorized based on whether the inputs are observable in the market and the degree that the inputs are observable. The categorization of financial instruments within the valuation hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The hierarchy is prioritized into three levels (with Level 3 being the lowest) defined as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the entity has the ability to access.
Level 2: Observable inputs other than prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated with observable market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities. This includes certain pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, and similar techniques that use significant unobservable inputs.
There have been no changes in Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 and no changes in valuation techniques for these assets or liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Investments in public companies are carried at fair value based on quoted market prices. Investments in equity securities of nonpublic entities without readily determinable fair values are carried at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer. The Company reviews its equity securities without readily determinable fair values on a regular basis to determine if the investment is impaired. For purposes of this assessment, the Company considers the investee’s cash position, earnings and revenue outlook, liquidity and management ownership, among other factors, in its review. If management’s assessment indicates that an impairment exists, the Company estimates the fair value of the equity investment and recognizes in current earnings an impairment loss that is equal to the difference between the fair value of the equity investment and its carrying amount. Equity investments are recorded in other assets on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
Please refer Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
Please refer Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.