Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws, and should be read in conjunction with the disclosures we make concerning risks and other factors that may affect our business and operating results, including those set forth in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Report. The information contained in this section should also be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and the information contained elsewhere in this Report. See also “Forward-Looking Statements” immediately prior to Part I, Item 1, “Business” in this Report.
Business Overview
Headquartered in Austin, Texas, YETI is a global designer, retailer, and distributor of innovative outdoor products. From coolers and drinkware to bags and apparel, YETI products are built to meet the unique and varying needs of diverse outdoor pursuits, whether in the remote wilderness, at the beach, or anywhere life takes you. By consistently delivering high-performing, exceptional products, we have built a strong following of brand loyalists throughout the world, ranging from serious outdoor enthusiasts to individuals who simply value products of uncompromising quality and design. We have an unwavering commitment to outdoor and recreation communities, and we are relentless in our pursuit of building superior products for people to confidently enjoy life outdoors and beyond.
We distribute our products through a balanced omni-channel platform, consisting of our wholesale and direct-to-consumer (“DTC”) channels. In our wholesale channel, we sell our products through select national and regional accounts and an assemblage of independent retail partners throughout the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Europe, and Japan. We carefully evaluate and select retail partners that have an image and approach that are consistent with our premium brand and pricing. Our domestic national and regional specialty retailers include Dick’s Sporting Goods, REI, Academy Sports + Outdoors, Bass Pro Shops, Ace Hardware, and Scheels. We sell our products in our DTC channel to customers on YETI.com, country and region specific YETI websites, and YETI Authorized on the Amazon Marketplace, as well as customized products with licensed marks and original artwork through our corporate sales program and at YETI.com. Our corporate sales program offers customized products to corporate customers for a wide-range of related events and activities, and in certain instances may also offer products to re-sell. Additionally, we sell our full line of products in our retail stores.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Operational Update
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to significantly impact the global economy and cause disruption and volatility. We continue to monitor the situation and our focus remains to prioritize the health and safety of our employees and our consumers.
In the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020, our sales were adversely impacted due to the decrease in consumer spending and temporary store closures attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic, which particularly impacted the performance of our wholesale channel. However, in the second quarter of 2020, we began to see increased demand for outdoor recreation and leisure lifestyle products and, to date, consumer demand for our products has remained robust.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted some of our manufacturing partners and logistics providers. During 2021, we began experiencing extended inventory transit times, primarily due to port congestion and transportation delays as well as labor and container shortages, which has had, and may continue to have, a negative impact on product availability, most prominently in our wholesale channel. As a result, we remain inventory constrained and continue to work to replenish our distribution channels to meet customer demand.
The resurgence of COVID-19 lockdowns in key sourcing countries, particularly Vietnam, where one of our manufacturing partners experienced an extended shutdown during the third quarter of 2021, has also resulted in additional supply disruptions. Additionally, we have experienced higher inbound freight cost and product input cost inflation as a result of this dynamic environment, which negatively impacted gross margin beginning in the second quarter of 2021. We expect inbound freight costs and certain product input costs will continue to be elevated through 2022.
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects have not had a material adverse impact on our net sales or operations. We recognize that we are operating in a challenging and highly uncertain landscape and we believe we may continue to experience varying degrees of disruption and volatility. We are continuing to monitor and navigate these conditions, including disruptions to our supply chain and product availability, as well as costs, and potentially take additional actions to address and manage them. While we intend to focus on disciplined investments for future, long-term growth, in certain circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, including resurgences of COVID-19 and, in particular, new and more contagious or vaccine resistant variants, as well as uncertainties about the magnitude and duration of global supply chain constraints, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts that these conditions may have on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future. For additional information, see Part I-Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Market and Global Economic Conditions,” included herein for updates to our risk factors regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recent Developments
New Distribution Facility
To support the continued growth of our business, we entered into a service agreement with a third-party logistics provider to operate a new distribution facility in Memphis, Tennessee with approximately 970,000 square feet. The service agreement commenced at the end of the second quarter of 2021. The initial term of the agreement is 5 years. We began distributing from this facility in the third quarter of 2021, and we exited our distribution facility in Dallas, Texas in the fourth quarter of 2021.
General
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Sales. Net sales are comprised of wholesale channel sales to our retail partners and sales through our DTC channel. Net sales in both channels reflect the impact of product returns as well as discounts for certain sales programs or promotions.
We discuss the net sales of our products in our two primary categories: Coolers & Equipment and Drinkware. Our Coolers & Equipment category includes hard coolers, soft coolers, outdoor equipment and other products, as well as accessories and replacement parts for these products. In 2019, we began reporting Boomer Dog Bowl net sales in our Coolers & Equipment instead of in our Other category. Our Drinkware category includes our stainless-steel drinkware products and related accessories. Our Other category is primarily comprised of ice substitutes, and YETI-branded gear, such as shirts, hats, and other miscellaneous products.
Gross profit. Gross profit reflects net sales less cost of goods sold, which primarily includes the purchase cost of our products from our third-party contract manufacturers, inbound freight and duties, product quality testing and inspection costs, depreciation expense of our molds and equipment, and the cost of customizing Drinkware products. We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by net sales. Our DTC channel generally generates higher gross margin than our wholesale channel due to differentiated pricing between these channels.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of marketing costs, employee compensation and benefits costs, costs of our outsourced warehousing and logistics operations, costs of operating on third-party DTC marketplaces, professional fees and services, non-cash stock-based compensation, cost of product shipment to our customers, depreciation and amortization expense, and general corporate infrastructure expenses. Our variable expenses, including outbound freight, online marketplace fees, third-party logistics fees, and credit card processing fees, will vary as they are dependent on our sales volume and our channel mix. Our DTC channel SG&A costs are generally higher as a percentage of net sales than our wholesale channel distribution costs.
Fiscal Year. We have a 52- or 53-week fiscal year that ends on the Saturday closest in proximity to December 31, such that each quarterly period will be 13 weeks in length, except during a 53-week year when the fourth quarter will be 14 weeks. Our fiscal years 2021 and 2019 ended on January 1, 2022 and December 28, 2019, respectively, spanned 52 weeks each, whereas our fiscal year 2020 ended January 2, 2021 included 53 weeks. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months and periods refer to our fiscal years ended in December and the associated quarters, months, and periods of those fiscal years.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected statement of operations data, and their corresponding percentage of net sales, for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Year Ended January 1, 2022 Compared to Year Ended January 2, 2021
Net Sales
Net sales increased $319.3 million, or 29%, to $1,411.0 million in 2021 from $1,091.7 million in 2020. The increase in net sales was driven by our faster growing DTC channel as well as growth in our wholesale channel. DTC channel net sales increased $203.9 million, or 35%, to $784.7 million in 2021 from $580.9 million in 2020, driven by both Drinkware and Coolers & Equipment categories. Net sales in our DTC channel continue to be favorably impacted by strong demand for outdoor recreation and leisure lifestyle products as well as a favorable shift to online shopping, resulting in an increase in sales volume during the period. As a result, our channel mix continued to shift towards our DTC channel from 53% in 2020 to 56% in 2021. Net sales in our wholesale channel increased $115.4 million, or 23%, to $626.3 million in 2021 from $510.9 million in 2020, primarily driven by both Drinkware and Coolers & Equipment. In the second quarter of 2020, wholesale channel net sales were adversely impacted by the temporary store closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net sales in our two primary product categories were as follows:
•Drinkware net sales increased $203.9 million, or 32%, to $832.4 million in 2021 from $628.6 million in 2020, primarily driven by the continued expansion of our Drinkware product offerings, including the introduction of new colorways and sizes, and strong demand for customization.
•Coolers & Equipment net sales increased $105.3 million, or 24%, to $551.9 million in 2021 from $446.6 million in 2020, primarily driven by the strong performance in bags, outdoor living products, soft coolers, and hard coolers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $187.3 million, or 30%, to $816.1 million in 2021 from $628.8 million in 2020. Gross margin increased 20 basis points to 57.8% in 2021 from 57.6% in 2020. The increase in gross margin was primarily driven by:
•lower inventory reserves, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 100 basis points;
•an increase in the mix of higher margin DTC channel net sales, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 60 basis points;
•product cost improvements across our product portfolio, net of the impact of product input cost inflation, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 40 basis points; and
•fewer promotions in our DTC channel, which favorably impacted gross margin by 10 basis points.
These gains were mostly offset by 90 basis points from higher inbound freight, 80 basis points from the unfavorable impact of the non-renewal of the Global System of Preferences (“GSP”), which impacted import duties primarily on our hard coolers, as well as other impacts, which unfavorably impacted gross margin by 20 basis points.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased by $126.6 million, or 31%, to $541.2 million in 2021 from $414.6 million in 2020. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses increased 40 basis points to 38.4% in 2021 from 38.0% in 2020. The increase in SG&A expenses resulted from:
•an increase in variable expenses of $41.9 million, resulting in a 20 basis point increase as a percent of net sales, driven by the increased mix of our faster growing and higher gross margin DTC channel, which grew to 56% of net sales for the year comprised of:
-higher distribution costs including outbound freight, third-party logistics fees, credit card processing fees, and online marketplace fees; and
•an increase in non-variable expenses of $84.7 million, resulting in a 20 basis point increase as a percent of net sales, comprised of:
-an increase in marketing expenses; employee costs, including higher incentive compensation; non-variable distribution costs, including third-party logistics fees; non-cash stock-based compensation expense; facility costs and other operating expenses; information technology expenses; depreciation and amortization expense; and business optimization expenses associated with our new distribution facility in Memphis, Tennessee.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense was $3.3 million in 2021, compared to $9.2 million in 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to decreased outstanding long-term debt under our Credit Facility.
Income tax expense was $55.8 million in 2021, compared to $49.4 million in 2020. Our effective tax rate for 2021 was 21% compared to 24% for 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to a higher tax benefit related to stock-based compensation in 2021 compared to 2020.
Year Ended January 2, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 28, 2019
Net Sales
Net sales increased $178.0 million, or 19%, to $1,091.7 million in 2020 from $913.7 million in 2019. The increase in net sales was driven by growth in our faster growing DTC channel. DTC channel net sales increased $194.8 million, or 50%, to $580.9 million in 2020 from $386.1 million in 2019, driven by both Drinkware and Coolers & Equipment categories. Net sales in our DTC channel were favorably impacted by increased demand for outdoor recreation and leisure lifestyle products as the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted consumers’ views towards how they spend their time experiencing nature and the outdoors as well as more consumers shopping online while sheltering-in-place, resulting in increased sales volume during the period. As a result, our channel mix significantly shifted towards our DTC channel from 42% in 2019 to 53% in 2020. Net sales in our wholesale channel decreased $16.8 million, or 3%, to $510.9 million in 2020 from $527.6 million in 2019, primarily driven by Coolers & Equipment. While wholesale net sales trends returned to positive growth at the end of the second quarter of 2020 and continued during the second half of the year, the sharp decline of net sales during March and April 2020, as a result of COVID-19 related temporary store closures, adversely impacted the performance of the wholesale channel.
Net sales in our two primary product categories were as follows:
•Drinkware net sales increased $102.3 million, or 19%, to $628.6 million in 2020 from $526.2 million in 2019, primarily driven by the continued expansion of our Drinkware product offerings, including the introduction of new colorways and sizes, and strong demand for customization.
•Coolers & Equipment net sales increased $77.7 million, or 21%, to $446.6 million in 2020 from $368.9 million in 2019, primarily driven by the strong performance of hard coolers, soft coolers, outdoor living products, and cargo.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $153.5 million, or 32%, to $628.8 million in 2020 from $475.3 million in 2019. Gross margin increased 560 basis points to 57.6% in 2020 from 52.0% in 2019. The increase in gross margin was primarily driven by the following:
•an increase in the mix of higher margin DTC channel net sales, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 280 basis points;
•product cost improvements across our product portfolio, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 150 basis points;
•decreased tariffs, which favorably impacted gross margin by 60 basis points;
•lower inbound freight, which favorably impacted gross margin by 50 basis points; and
•other impacts, which favorably impacted gross margin by 40 basis points.
These gains were partially offset by 20 basis points from higher inventory reserves related to new product transitions and other impacts.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased by $29.0 million, or 8%, to $414.6 million in 2020 from $385.5 million in 2019. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses decreased 420 basis points to 38.0% in 2020 from 42.2% in 2019. The increase in SG&A expenses resulted from:
•an increase in variable expenses of $41.1 million, or a 210 basis point increase, driven by our faster growing and higher margin DTC channel, which grew to 53% of net sales, comprised of:
-higher distribution costs including outbound freight, online marketplace fees, credit card processing fees, and third-party logistics fees; and
•a decrease in non-variable expenses of $12.1 million, or a 630 basis point decrease, comprised of:
-lower non-cash stock-based compensation expense, primarily driven by the $40.7 million expense associated with the pre-IPO performance-based restricted stock units (“RSUs”) that vested and were fully recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019; and
-decreased professional fees.
These decreases were partially offset by:
-increased marketing expenses;
-increased personnel expenses primarily due to higher incentive compensation, partially offset by lower travel expense and the effect of COVID-19 related cost saving initiatives;
-increased non-variable distribution costs, including third-party logistics fees;
-increased depreciation and amortization expense;
-increased insurance expenses; and
-increased facilities costs and other operating expenses.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense was $9.2 million in 2020, compared to $21.8 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower interest rates and decreased outstanding long-term debt under our Credit Facility.
Income tax expense was $49.4 million in 2020, compared to $16.8 million in 2019. Our effective tax rate for 2020 was 24% compared to 25% for 2019. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to a lower state tax rate and higher tax benefit related to stock-based compensation in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by a decrease in our research and development tax credit in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our cash requirements have principally been for working capital purposes, long-term debt repayments, and capital expenditures. We fund our working capital, primarily inventory and accounts receivable, and capital investments from cash flows from operating activities, cash on hand, and borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below). As discussed under “-COVID-19 and Operational Update” above, although the potential magnitude and economic impacts of COVID-19 and its effects are highly uncertain, we believe that our current operating performance, operating plan, our strong cash position, including cash generated from operations and borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to satisfy our foreseeable liquidity needs and capital expenditure requirements, including for at least the next twelve months.
Current Liquidity
As of January 1, 2022, we had a cash balance of $312.2 million, $54.3 million of working capital (excluding cash), and $150.0 million of borrowings available under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Credit Facility
We are party to a senior secured credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”) that provides for a $150.0 million Revolving Credit Facility maturing on December 17, 2024 (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) and a $300.0 million Term Loan A maturing on December 17, 2024 (the “Term Loan A”). At January 1, 2022, we had $112.5 million principal amount of indebtedness outstanding under the Term Loan A and no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. The weighted average interest rate for borrowings under Term Loan A was 1.85%, as of January 1, 2022.
The Credit Facility requires us to comply with certain covenants, including financial covenants regarding our total net leverage ratio and interest coverage ratio. Fluctuations in these ratios may increase our interest expense. Failure to comply with these covenants and certain other provisions of the Credit Facility, or the occurrence of a change of control, could result in an event of default and an acceleration of our obligations under the Credit Facility or other indebtedness that we may incur in the future. At January 1, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants and expect to remain in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility.
Share Repurchase Plan
On February 27, 2022, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of the Company’s common stock over the next year. The common stock may be repurchased from time to time at prevailing prices in the open market, through plans designed to comply with Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, via private purchases through forward, derivative, accelerated share repurchase transactions or otherwise, subject to applicable regulatory restrictions on volume, pricing and timing. The timing, manner, price, and actual amount of share repurchases will be determined, at management’s discretion, based on various factors, including, but not limited to, stock price, economic and market conditions, other capital management needs and opportunities, and corporate and regulatory considerations. YETI has no obligation to repurchase any amount of its common stock, and such repurchases, if any, may be suspended or discontinued at any time.
Material Cash Requirements
For 2022, we expect capital expenditures for property and equipment to be approximately $60 million, primarily to support investments in technology and new product innovation and launches.
The following table summarizes current and long-term material cash requirements for contractual and other obligations as of January 1, 2022 (in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)We have entered into commitments for service and maintenance agreements related to our management information systems, distribution contracts, advertising, sponsorships, and licensing agreements.
The table of our material cash requirements above excludes unrecognized tax benefits as we are unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of liabilities, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits. As of January 1, 2022, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $12.9 million.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flows related to operating activities are dependent on net income, non-cash adjustments to net income, and changes in working capital.
The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2021 compared to cash provided by operating activities in 2020 is primarily due to an increase in cash used for working capital, partially offset by an increase in net income, adjusted for non-cash items, for the periods compared. The increase in working capital was primarily due to an increase in inventory, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to cash provided by operating activities in 2019 is primarily due to an increase in cash provided by working capital and an increase in net income, adjusted for non-cash items, for the periods compared. The increase in working capital was primarily due to a decrease in inventory and an increase in accounts payable.
Investing Activities
The increase in cash used in investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily related to increased purchases for technology upgrades and enhancements, including the phased upgrade of our SAP enterprise resource planning (“ERP”) system and investment in data analytics, as well as production molds, tooling and equipment, and facilities.
The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily related to lower purchases of property and equipment for technology systems infrastructure, production molds, tooling, and equipment, and facilities, and decreased additions of intangibles such as trademarks, patents, and trade dress assets.
Financing Activities
The decrease in cash used in financing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by lower repayments of long-term debt in 2021.
The increase in cash used in financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by higher repayments of long-term debt in 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates and could differ based upon other assumptions or conditions.
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for our significant accounting policies. The following describes significant judgments and estimates used in the application of these policies. Within the context of these critical accounting policies, we are not currently aware of any reasonably likely events or circumstances that would result in materially different amounts being reported.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue transactions associated with the sale of YETI branded coolers, equipment, drinkware, apparel and accessories comprise a single performance obligation, which consists of the sale of products to customers either through our wholesale or DTC channels. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied through the transfer of control of promised goods to the customers, based on the terms of sale. The transfer of control typically occurs at a point in time based on consideration of when the customer has an obligation to pay for the goods, and physical possession of, legal title to, and the risks and rewards of ownership of the goods has been transferred, and the customer has accepted the goods. Revenue from wholesale transactions is generally recognized at the time products are shipped based on contractual terms with the customer. Revenue from our DTC channel is generally recognized at the point of sale in our retail stores and at the time products are shipped for e-commerce transactions and corporate sales based on contractual terms with the customer.
Revenue is recognized net of estimates of variable consideration, including product returns, customer discounts and allowances, sales incentive programs, and miscellaneous claims from customers. We determine these estimates based on contract terms, evaluations of historical experience, anticipated trends, and other factors. The actual amount of customer returns and customer allowances, which is inherently uncertain, may differ from our estimates.
The duration of contractual arrangements with our customers is typically less than 1 year. Payment terms with wholesale customers vary depending on creditworthiness and other considerations, with the most common being net 30 days. Payment is due at the time of sale for retail store transactions and at the time of shipment for e-commerce transactions.
Certain products that we sell include a limited warranty which does not meet the definition of a performance obligation within the context of the contract. Product warranty costs are estimated based on historical and anticipated trends and are recorded as cost of goods sold at the time revenue is recognized.
We elected to account for shipping and handling as fulfillment activities, and not as separate performance obligations. Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included in net sales. All shipping and handling activity costs are recognized as selling, general and administrative expenses at the time the related revenue is recognized. Sales taxes collected from customers and remitted directly to government authorities are excluded from net sales and cost of goods sold.
Our terms of sale provide limited return rights. We may accept, and have at times accepted, returns outside our terms of sale at our sole discretion. We may also, at our sole discretion, provide our retail partners with sales discounts and allowances. We record estimated sales returns, discounts, and miscellaneous customer claims as reductions to net sales at the time revenues are recorded. We base our estimates upon historical experience and trends, and upon approval of specific returns or discounts. Actual returns and discounts in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus may differ from our estimates. If actual or expected future returns and discounts were significantly greater or lower than the reserves we had established, we would record a reduction or increase to net sales in the period in which we made such determination. A 10% change in our estimated reserve for sales returns, discounts, and miscellaneous claims for 2021 would have impacted net sales by $1.2 million.
Inventory
Inventories are comprised primarily of finished goods and are carried at the lower of cost (weighted-average cost method) or market (net realizable value). We make ongoing estimates relating to the net realizable value of inventories based upon our assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If the estimated net realizable value is less than cost, we reflect the lower value of that inventory. This methodology recognizes inventory exposures at the time such losses are identified rather than at the time the inventory is actually sold. Due to customer demand and inventory constraints, we have not historically taken material adjustments to the carrying value of our inventory.
Our inventory valuation reflects adjustments for anticipated inventory losses that have occurred since the last physical inventory. We estimate inventory shrinkage based on historical trends from physical inventory counts and cycle counts. We perform physical inventory counts and cycle counts throughout the year and adjust the shrink provision accordingly. Historically, physical inventory shrinkage has not been significant.
Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets are recorded at cost, or at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. We review goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. In conducting our annual impairment test, we first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset, or reporting units, is less than its carrying amount. If factors indicate that the fair value is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative assessment, analyzing the expected present value of future cash flows to quantify the amount of impairment, if any. Based on our qualitative assessment performed during the fourth quarter of 2021, we determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit is lower than its carrying value; therefore, the quantitative impairment test was not required. We did not record any goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment charges during the years ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021, and December 28, 2019.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use-assets, and definite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. An impairment loss on our long-lived assets exists when the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or estimated fair value less costs to sell.
Income Taxes
We are subject to taxation in the United States, as well as various state and foreign jurisdictions. The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. On an interim basis, we estimate our effective tax rate for the full fiscal year. This estimated annual effective tax rate is then applied to the year-to-date income before income taxes, excluding infrequently occurring or unusual items, to determine the year-to-date income tax expense. The income tax effects of infrequent or unusual items are recognized in the interim period in which they occur. As the fiscal year progresses, we continually refine our estimate based upon actual events and earnings by jurisdiction during the year. This continual estimation process periodically results in a change to our expected effective tax rate for the fiscal year. When this occurs, we adjust the income tax provision during the quarter in which the change in estimate occurs.
Tax filing positions are evaluated, and we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the tax position. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the probability that a tax position will be effectively sustained and the appropriateness of the amount recognized for uncertain tax positions based on factors including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, and audit activity. Changes in our assessment may result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision in the period our assessment changes. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in the provision for income taxes in the consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, see “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Recent Accounting Guidance Not Yet Adopted” in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.