Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-looking statements
Statements made in this Form 10-K that are not historical or current facts are "forward-looking statements" made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 (the "Act") and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These statements often can be identified by the use of terms such as "may," "will," "expect," "believe," "anticipate," "estimate," "approximate" or "continue," or the negative thereof. We intend that such forward-looking statements be subject to the safe harbors for such statements. We wish to caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made. Any forward-looking statements represent management's best judgment as to what may occur in the future. However, forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and important factors beyond our control that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from historical results of operations and events and those presently anticipated or projected. We disclaim any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statement or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
Financial information contained in this report and in our financial statements is stated in United States dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this annual report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to: have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; provide an auditor attestation with respect to management’s report on the effectiveness of our internal controls over financial reporting; comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis); submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholders advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency” and disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards. We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period. Even if we no longer qualify for the exemptions for an emerging growth company, we may still be, in certain circumstances, subject to scaled disclosure requirements as a smaller reporting company. For example, smaller reporting companies, like emerging growth companies, are not required to provide a compensation discussion and analysis under Item 402(b) of Regulation S-K or auditor attestation of internal controls over financial reporting.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company currently has no operations and as of April 30, 2022 had the stockholders deficit of $34,988. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of operations
Currently, we commenced our operation in the rendering of business consulting service to domestic and international customers. On July 30, 2021, we entered into two consulting agreements with non-affiliates to provide business consulting services. Under the consulting agreements, we receive consulting fees of $5,000 and $10,000 per month, respectively. The initial term of the consulting agreements was for an initial three month period. Unless terminated in writing prior to the end of the period, the consulting agreements automatically renew every three month. As of April 30, 2022, the consulting agreements have not been terminated.
Prior to these consulting agreements, we were a “shell company” (as such term is defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act). As of July 31, 2021, the Company was no longer a shell company, as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Since the date of these consulting agreements, the Company is reporting more than nominal revenue in its periodic reports.
We expect we will require additional capital to meet our long-term operating requirements. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity or debt securities.
Results of operation for the years ended April 30, 2022 and April 30, 2021:
Revenue
We generated revenues of $120,000 and $0 for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The Company commenced operations on July 30, 2021.
Operating expenses
We incurred operating expenses of $133,367 and $52,094 for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. These operating expenses consisted primarily of costs relating to the registration of the Company’s common stock with the Securities and Exchange Commission and ongoing reporting costs,
Net Income (Loss)
We reported a net income of $139,682 for the year ended April 30, 2022, while we incurred a net loss of $52,094 for the year ended April 30, 2021.
Liquidity and capital resources
As of April 30, 2022 and 2021, our total assets were $23,103 and $0 accordingly.
As of April 30, 2022, our current liabilities were $58,091 ($174,670 as of April 30, 2021) and stockholders’ deficit was $58,091 ($174,670 as of April 30, 2021).
As of April 30, 2022 and April 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $23,103 and $0, respectively.
We have never paid dividends on our Common Stock. Our present policy is to apply cash to investments in product development, acquisitions or expansion; consequently, we do not expect to pay dividends on Common Stock in the foreseeable future.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended April 30, 2022, net cash flows provided by operating activities was $4,061, which primarily consisted of a net income of $139,682 and an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables of $17,428, offset by a gain from forgiveness of related party debts of $153,049.
For the year ended April 30, 2021, we have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities. Net cash flow used in operating activities was $42,286, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $52,094 and an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables of $9,808.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended April 30, 2022, net cash flow provided by financing activities was $19,042 from the proceeds from a related party.
For the year ended April 30, 2021, net cash flow provided by financing activities was $42,286 from the proceeds from a related party.
Our cash balance is $23,103 as of April 30, 2022. We believe our cash balance is insufficient to fund our operations for any period of time. Management anticipates that the Company will be dependent, in the near future, on additional investment capital to fund operating expenses. The Company intends to position itself so that it will be able to raise additional funds through the capital markets. In light of management’s efforts, there are no assurances that the Company will be successful.
Limited operating history; need for additional capital
There is no historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We are in a start-up stage of operations and have generated limited revenues since inception. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible cost overruns due to price and cost increases in services and products.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company's financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.