ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery and development of innovative, disease-modifying therapies for neurodegenerative diseases. Neurodegenerative diseases cause a progressive loss of structure and function in the brain, leaving patients with devastating damage to their nervous system and widespread functional impairment. Although treatments may help relieve some of the physical or mental symptoms associated with neurodegenerative diseases, few of the currently available therapies slow or stop the continued loss of neurons, resulting in a critical unmet need. We are specifically focused on developing novel therapies to treat devastating conditions, either with large or orphan disease markets, including Parkinson’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, multiple system atrophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS (also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease), frontotemporal lobar degeneration, or FTLD, and Alzheimer’s disease.
Exploration of Strategic Alternatives and Restructuring
In February 2022, we announced that we are exploring strategic alternatives to enhance shareholder value and engaged H.C. Wainwright as our exclusive financial advisor to assist in this process. No timetable has been established for the completion of this process, and the we do not expect to disclose developments unless and until the Board of Directors has concluded that disclosure is appropriate or required.
In February we also began implementation of a strategic restructuring with the objective of preserving capital. In the first quarter of 2022, our board of directors approved a restructuring plan following a review of our operations, cost structure and growth opportunities. The restructuring included a reduction in headcount of approximately 60% across the Company. We recorded a charge of $0.4 million in the first quarter of 2022 as a result of the restructuring, which consisted of one-time termination benefits for employee severance, benefits and related costs, all of which are expected to result in cash expenditures and substantially all of which will be paid out by the end of 2022.
Clinical and Regulatory Update
Our lead program, YTX-7739, is in development for the potential treatment and disease modification of Parkinson’s disease. YTX-7739 targets an enzyme known as stearoyl-CoA desaturase, or SCD. Inhibition of SCD in multiple cellular systems, including patient-derived neurons, as well as in a novel mouse model of Parkinson’s disease, has been demonstrated to overcome the toxicity of misfolded alpha-synuclein or α-synuclein, a protein strongly associated with Parkinson’s disease.
In January 2022, the U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) placed a partial clinical hold on our multidose clinical trials of YTX-7739. The partial clinical hold suspends initiation of multiple dose clinical trials in the U.S. until the FDA’s questions have been addressed. The FDA has not halted all clinical programming and is permitting our planned single dose formulation clinical trial to proceed. We anticipate working closely with the FDA to adequately address their concerns. While we work to address the FDA’s concerns, we have paused our planned window-of-opportunity clinical study of YTX-7739 in glioblastoma multiforme patients and exploration of YTX-7739 in additional indications.
On November 10, 2021, we announced the top-line results of a Phase 1b clinical trial of YTX-7739 in patients with mild-to-moderate Parkinson’s disease. The Phase 1b clinical trial was a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind multi dose study to investigate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of YTX-7739. Data were reported from 20 patients with mild-to-moderate Parkinson’s disease. Patients received once-daily oral doses of YTX-7739 (20 mg or placebo) for 28 days. YTX-7739 was shown to inhibit its primary target, SCD, an enzyme whose inhibition has been closely linked to neuronal survival and improved motor function in a Parkinson’s disease model.
After 28 days of treatment, the 20 mg dose given once-daily reduced the fatty acid desaturation index (FA-DI), a biomarker of SCD inhibition, by approximately 20%-40%, the range expected to be clinically relevant based on preclinical studies. Target engagement in the cerebrospinal fluid suggested that YTX-7739 effectively crossed the blood-brain barrier. Additionally, the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profile of YTX-7739 was consistent with previous studies and we believe informs dose selection for future studies.
YTX-7739 was generally well tolerated with all treatment emergent adverse events being mild to moderate in severity. There were no serious adverse events. Moderate adverse events (AEs) in the active treatment group consisted of 2 patients with increased Parkinson’s symptoms, 2 patients with lower back pain, 1 patient with headache, 1 patient with myalgia, 1 patient with insomnia, 1 patient with ligament strain, and 1 patient with vaccination complication. One patient on placebo had moderate worsening of tremors and Parkinsonism, which led to discontinuation. AEs occurring at a higher percentage in 2 or more patients administered YTX-7739 compared to placebo were procedural pain, myalgia, dry eye, hyperbilirubinemia, hypesthesia, lower back pain, and constipation. AEs occurring at a higher percentage with placebo included orthostatic hypotension, headache, tremor, fatigue and dizziness.
As expected, after only 28 days of dosing, there were no statistically significant differences in clinical assessments (Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale Part III (UPDRS III), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)) or most exploratory biomarkers.
Quantitative electroencephalogram (qEEG) assessments of the effect of YTX-7739 on brain activity were completed in a subset of 8 patients and demonstrated a statistically significant change compared to baseline, suggestive of a potential improvement in synaptic function.
Research and Discovery
At the center of our scientific foundation is our drug discovery engine, which is based on technology licensed from the Whitehead Institute, an affiliate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This core technology, combined with investments and advancements by us, is designed to enable rapid screening to identify drugs with the potential to modify disease by overcoming toxicity in disease-causing gene networks. Toxicity in many neurodegenerative diseases results from an aberrant accumulation of misfolded proteins in the brain. We leverage our proprietary discovery engine to identify and screen novel drug targets and drug molecules for their ability to protect nerve cells from toxicity arising from misfolded proteins. To date, we have identified over 20 targets, most of which have not previously been linked to neurodegenerative diseases.
Financial Update
We have incurred significant operating losses since inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $39.5 million and $57.5 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $187.3 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and do not enter into a commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution activities. We also expect to incur ongoing costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations. Potential strategic alternatives that may be considered as part of this process include an acquisition, merger, reverse merger, other business combination, sales of assets, licensing or other strategic transactions involving the Company. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we could have to further delay, reduce or eliminate development of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Biopharmaceutical product development is a highly speculative undertaking and involves a substantial degree of risk. Typically, it takes many years to develop one new product from the time it is discovered to when it is available for treating patients, and development may cease for a number of reasons. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, including any impact from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $36.5 million. We don't believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for a period of twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report and we and our independent registered public accounting firm have expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. See “- Liquidity and Capital Resources.” Our future viability beyond that point is dependent on our ability to raise additional capital to finance our operations.
COVID-19
In March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization and to date, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to present a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world. The length of time and full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, subject to change and difficult to predict. While we continue to conduct our
research and development activities, the COVID-19 pandemic may cause disruptions that affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies and clinical trials or to procure items that are essential for our research and development activities. The pandemic has already caused significant disruptions in the financial markets, and may continue to cause such disruptions, which could impact our ability to raise additional funds to support our operations. Moreover, the pandemic has significantly impacted economies worldwide and could result in adverse effects on our business and operations. Clinical trial sites in many countries, including those in which we operate, have incurred delays due to COVID-19. Certain of the sites in the YTX-7739 Phase 1b clinical trial incurred delays due to COVID-19, resulting in a delay of early results from that study.
We plan to continue to closely monitor the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business operations. In an effort to provide a safe work environment for our employees, we have, among other things, implemented measures to enable remote work whenever possible. We expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other business partners in light of the pandemic.
Merger with Proteostasis
On August 22, 2020, Proteostasis Therapeutics, Inc, a Delaware corporation (“Proteostasis”), Pangolin Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), Yumanity, Inc. (formerly Yumanity Therapeutics, Inc.), and Yumanity Holdings, LLC (“Holdings”), entered into the Merger Agreement, as amended on November 6, 2020, pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into Yumanity, Inc. Immediately prior to the closing of the transaction, Holdings merged with and into Yumanity, Inc. with Yumanity, Inc. surviving the Merger (the “Yumanity Reorganization”) and, upon the closing of the Merger, Yumanity, Inc. became a wholly owned subsidiary of Proteostasis. The Merger was completed on December 22, 2020 pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement. In connection with the completion of the Merger, Proteostasis changed its name to Yumanity Therapeutics, Inc., and the trading symbol changed from “PTI” to “YMTX.” We refer to the historical operations of Holdings and Yumanity, Inc. as Yumanity and following the Merger, the business conducted by Yumanity became our primary business.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, upon closing of the Merger, all of Yumanity, Inc.’s outstanding common stock was exchanged for common stock of Proteostasis and all outstanding options and warrants to purchase common stock of Yumanity, Inc. were exchanged for options and warrants to purchase common stock of Proteostasis.
The transaction was accounted for as a reverse merger and as an asset acquisition in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States, or GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Yumanity was deemed to be the accounting acquirer for financial reporting purposes. This determination was primarily based on the facts that, immediately following the Merger: (i) Yumanity’s equity holders owned a substantial majority of the voting rights in the combined organization, (ii) Yumanity designated a majority of the members (7 of 9) of the initial board of directors of the combined organization and (iii) Yumanity’s senior management held all key positions in the senior management of the combined organization. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the transaction was treated as the equivalent of Yumanity issuing stock to acquire the net assets of Proteostasis. As a result, as of the closing date of the Merger, the net assets of Proteostasis were recorded at their acquisition-date fair values in the financial statements of the Company and the reported operating results prior to the Merger are those of Yumanity.
Private Placement
On December 14, 2020, we entered into a subscription agreement with certain accredited investors for the sale by us in a private placement of 1,460,861 shares of our common stock for a price of $23.00 per share. We refer to this sale herein as the Private Placement. The Private Placement closed on December 22, 2020. The aggregate gross proceeds for the issuance and sale of the common stock were $33.6 million and, after deducting certain of our expenses, the net proceeds we received in the Private Placement were $31.6 million.
At-the-Market Offering Program
In April 2021, we entered into a sales agreement (the "Prior Sales Agreement") with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”) with respect to an at-the-market (“ATM”) offering program under which we issued and sold, from time-to-time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock, in an aggregate offering amount of up to $60.0 million. In December 2021, we terminated the Prior Sales Agreement and entered into a new sales agreement with Jefferies with respect to an ATM offering under which we may issue and sell, from time-to-time and at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock, in an aggregate offering amount of up to $60.0 million (the “New Sales Agreement”). Jefferies acts as our sales agent and will use commercially reasonable efforts to sell shares of common stock from time-to-time, based upon instruction us.
We will pay Jefferies up to 3% of the gross proceeds from any common stock sold through the New Sales Agreement. We sold 112,833 shares of common stock under the Prior Sales Agreement during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 for gross proceeds of $1.5 million for aggregate net proceeds to us of approximately $1.4 million, after deducting sales commissions. As of
December 31, 2021, $60.0 million of common stock remained available for future issuance under the New Sales Agreement, although these amounts may be limited as we will be subject to the general instructions of Form S-3 known as the "baby shelf rules." Under these instructions, the amount of funds we can raise through primary public offerings of securities in any twelve-month period using our registration statement on Form S-3 is limited to one-third of the aggregate market value of the shares of our common stock held by non-affiliates of the Company. Therefore, we will be limited in the amount of proceeds it is able to raise by selling shares of our common stock using its Form S-3 until such time as our public float exceeds $75 million.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or licenses with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, milestone payments under our existing collaboration agreement or payments from other license agreements that we may enter into with third parties.
In June 2020, we entered into a research collaboration and license agreement (the “Collaboration Agreement”) with Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. (“Merck”), focused on accelerating the development of new treatments for neurodegenerative diseases. Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Merck will gain exclusive rights to two novel pipeline programs for the treatment of ALS and FTLD. We and Merck will collaborate to advance the two preclinical programs during the research term, after which Merck has the right to continue clinical development and commercialization. Under the Collaboration Agreement, we received an upfront payment totaling $15.0 million and are eligible to receive future milestone payments of up to $530.0 million associated with the successful research, development and sales of marketed products for pipeline programs, of which $5 million was paid to us in February, 2022 as discussed below, as well as royalties on net sales. We will perform certain research and development activities over the research term pursuant to the Collaboration Agreement and will participate on a Joint Steering Committee to oversee research and development activities.
On December 17, 2021, Merck notified us that the first data package that we submitted for one program has met the requirements to progress to the next stage of the research collaboration. Achievement of this milestone triggered a $5.0 million milestone payment from Merck, which was received in February 2022. We cannot provide assurance as to the timing of future milestones or royalty payments or that we will receive any of the future payments at all.
We will record revenue over the research term as we satisfy our performance obligations under the Collaboration Agreement. Accordingly, the upfront payment of $15.0 million as well as the $5.0 million milestone payment will be recognized as revenue using the cost-to-cost method, which we believe best depicts the transfer of control to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of actual costs incurred to the total estimated costs expected upon satisfying the identified performance obligation. We recorded $8.0 million of collaboration revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 related to the Collaboration Agreement.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the discovery, preclinical and clinical development and manufacture of our product candidates, which will decrease substantially as a result of our recent restructuring, but historically have included:
•salaries, benefits, stock/equity-based compensation, consultants and other related costs for individuals involved in research and development activities;
•external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations (“CROs”), investigative sites and other scientific development services;
•costs incurred under agreements with contract development and manufacturing organizations (“CDMOs”) for developing and manufacturing material for preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•licensing agreements and associated milestones;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements;
•lab supplies and other lab related expenses; and
•facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, insurance and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred and recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized in prepaid expenses and other current assets. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed. Upfront payments, milestone payments and annual maintenance fees under license agreements are expensed in the period in which they are incurred.
Our external direct research and development expenses are tracked by product candidate and consist primarily of costs that include fees and other expenses paid to outside consultants, CROs, CDMOs and research laboratories in connection with our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. Our direct research and development expenses by product candidate also include fees incurred under third-party license agreements. We do not allocate employee costs and costs associated with our platform technology, early stage discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and our platform and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We cannot accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of product candidates including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot yet be determined with accuracy based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development program and plans.
The successful development and commercialization of YTX-7739 and any other product candidates we may develop in the future is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, including the following:
•the partial clinical hold that has been placed on our IND for YTX-7739 by the FDA;
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
•the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•the ability to maintain current research and development programs and to establish new ones;
•establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling or foreign equivalent studies;
•successful patient enrollment in, and the initiation and completion of, clinical trials;
•the successful completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority;
•the receipt of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements;
•the performance of our future collaborators, if any;
•establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•development and timely delivery of commercial-grade drug formulations that can be used in our planned clinical trials and for commercial launch;
•obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•launching commercial sales of product candidates, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the product candidates following approval.
Any changes in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates in preclinical and clinical development could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of these product candidates. For example, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time to complete clinical
development of YTX-7739 due to the partial clinical hold that the FDA placed on our multidose clinical trials of YTX-7739 in the U.S. We may never obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. Drug commercialization will take several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock/equity-based compensation expenses for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, human resources and other administrative functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include legal fees relating to patent, intellectual property and corporate matters, and fees paid for accounting, audit, consulting and other professional services, as well as facilities, and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, insurance and other operating costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase slightly in the near future as we explore our strategic alternatives. These increases will likely include legal fees and fees to outside consultants, among other expenses.
In-Process Research and Development Assets Acquired
We acquired in-process research and development assets in connection with the Merger. As the acquired in-process research and development assets were deemed to have no current or alternative future use, the entire amount was recognized as expense in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
In connection with our loan and security arrangements, we issued warrants to purchase preferred units. These warrants were liability classified and remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our statement of operations.
Immediately prior to the Merger, all of our outstanding warrants to purchase preferred units were exchanged and became warrants to purchase shares of common stock. As a result, the fair value of the warrants was reclassified to additional paid-in capital and there is no longer a warrant liability to remeasure for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest charged on outstanding borrowings associated with our loan and security agreements, as well as amortization of debt issuance costs and accretion of a final payment payable upon the maturity or the repayment in full of all obligations under such loans. Interest expense also consists of interest related to finance leases.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash balances. Other income (expense), net includes a gain on the extinguishment of debt upon forgiveness of the PPP loan (see Paycheck Protection Loan section of the Description of Indebtedness below).
Income Taxes
Prior to the Yumanity Reorganization, Holdings was treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and, therefore, its owners, and not Holdings, were subject to U.S. federal or state income taxation. Holdings’ directly held subsidiary was treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes and subject to taxation in the United States. After the Yumanity Reorganization, the Company and its subsidiary are both taxpaying entities. In each reporting period, our tax provision included the effects of consolidating our subsidiary’s results of operations. Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we incurred in each year or for our earned research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. Utilization of U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and corresponding provisions of state law, due to ownership changes that be occurred previously or that could occur in the future. These ownership changes may limit the amount of carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income. The Company has not conducted a study to assess whether a change of control has occurred or whether there have been multiple changes of control since inception due to the significant complexity and cost associated with such a study. As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal and state net operating
loss carryforwards of $486.6 million and $497.2 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, $228.1 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2026, and $258.5 million can be carried forward indefinitely. State net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2030. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $0.1 million of foreign net operating loss carryforwards that do not expire. As of December 31, 2021, we also had U.S. federal, state, and foreign research and development tax credit carryforwards of $15.4 million, $6.2 million, and $0.1 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future tax liabilities and each begin to expire in 2027 for domestic credits, and foreign credits do not expire. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $8.0 million was related to our Collaboration Agreement with Merck. The upfront payment of $15.0 million received in July 2020 was initially recorded as deferred revenue and is being recognized as revenue under the cost-to-cost method as research and development is being performed. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of the initial $15.0 million upfront payment has been recognized as revenue. We expect to recognize this remaining deferred revenue of $.1 million and amounts deferred at December 31, 2021 totaling $5 million, as revenue in 2022 as research and development services are provided.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $4.1 million from $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Direct expenses of our YTX-7739 program increased by $2.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was due primarily to an increase in clinical and consultant costs as YTX-7739 progressed from a SAD study in 2020 to MAD clinical studies starting in the first quarter of 2021. Direct expenses of our YTX-9184 program in 2021 increased by less than $0.1 million primarily due to preclinical and manufacturing
costs. Platform and other early stage research external costs increased by $0.6 million due to the resumption of a more normal level of spend after the second quarter of 2020 saw decreased laboratory activities as a result of COVID-19 and the move to new office and laboratory space. Personnel related costs increased by $0.5 million primarily due to the impact of a $0.5 million R&D tax credit that was recorded as a reduction of personnel expense in the third quarter of 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $8.5 million from $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $2.9 million in personnel related costs was primarily due to $2.3 million in stock/equity-based compensation and $0.7 million due to additional hiring in the general and administrative function. Personnel-related costs for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included stock/equity-based compensation of $3.9 million and $1.6 million, respectively. Professional and consultant fees increased by $1.2 million primarily due to higher audit expenses and legal and Board fees related to operating as a public company. Facility and other related costs increased by $4.4 million primarily due to incremental public company insurance premiums of $2.1 million and $1.4 million of lease expense in excess of sublease income.
In-Process Research and Development Assets Acquired
In connection with the Merger, we recognized a charge of $28.3 million of acquired in-process research and development expenses for assets with no alternative use for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) net increased by $1.1 million resulting primarily from a $1.1 million gain on the extinguishment of debt upon forgiveness of the PPP loan (see Paycheck Protection Loan section of the Description of Indebtedness below). This loan was obtained in April 2020, prior to entering into the Merger Agreement with Proteostasis in August 2020.
Interest income and other income (expense) remained relatively flat from the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have not generated revenue from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have funded our operations to date primarily with proceeds from sales of preferred units and an upfront payment from our collaboration agreement with Merck received in July 2020. In December 2020, we completed the Merger with Proteostasis and acquired its $35.9 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash. Immediately following the Merger, we also completed a private placement of an aggregate of 1,460,861 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of approximately $31.6 million. We have also funded operations using borrowings under loan and security agreements.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will not enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for a period of twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These conditions give rise to a substantial doubt over our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $48.9 million, resulting from our net loss of $39.5 million, as well as by net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $20.0 million and partially offset by non-cash charges of $10.6 million, which includes $5.1 million of non-cash lease expense and $5.3 million of stock/equity-based compensation expense. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of decreases of $8.5 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, $5.0 million in accounts receivable, $4.5 million in operating lease liabilities, and $2.9 million in deferred revenue, partially offset by a $1.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $17.9 million, resulting from our net loss of $57.5 million partially, offset by net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.2 million and non-cash charges of $34.3 million, including the non-cash charge of $28.3 million for in-process research and development acquired as well as $2.5 million of non-cash lease expense and $2.3 million of stock/equity-based compensation expense. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of an $8.1 million increase in deferred revenue and a $0.6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by a $1.7 million decrease in operating lease liabilities and a $1.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and prepaid expenses in all periods were generally due to growth in our business and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Net Cash Provided by Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $3.1 million, primarily related to $3.1 million for net purchases of marketable securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $31.0 million, primarily related to $35.9 million of cash and restricted cash acquired from our merger with Proteostasis, partially offset by the net cash used of $3.1 million for net purchases of marketable securities and $1.5 million of transaction costs paid associated with the Merger.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.0 million, consisting primarily of payments of debt principal of $2.3 million and finance lease obligations of $0.3 million, offset by $1.4 million of net proceeds from our ATM offering.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $55.5 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the sale of common stock of $33.6 million, net proceeds from the issuance of Class C preferred units of $21.2 million and proceeds from a government loan (Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan) of $1.1 million, partially offset by payments of finance lease obligations of $0.3 million.
Description of Indebtedness
Loan and Security Agreement
We entered into a loan and security agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc. (the “Lender”) in December 2019 (the “Term Loan”), pursuant to which had $12.7 million in outstanding principal borrowings as of December 31, 2021. Another $5.0 million became available upon the occurrence of a developmental milestone and an equity event defined in the agreement, but we elected not to draw it. An additional $10.0 million could have become available to be drawn upon lender approval. On February 25, 2022, we repaid to
Hercules a payoff amount of $12.8 million and terminated the Term Loan, provided that we continue to be bound by certain indemnification obligations under Section 6.3 of the Term Loan. The payoff amount included payment of approximately $0.9 million consisting of the final and additional final payment fees outlined above, as well as an interest/non-use fee of less than $0.1 million.
Borrowings under the Term Loan were repayable in monthly interest-only payments until August 1, 2021. The interest-only period was followed by monthly payments of equal principal plus interest until the loan maturity date of January 1, 2024. Outstanding borrowings bore interest at the greater of (i) 8.75% and (ii) the prime rate as reported in the Wall Street Journal plus 4.00%. A final payment fee of 5.25% of the amounts drawn under the Term Loan was due upon the earlier of the maturity date or the repayment date if paid early, whether voluntary or upon acceleration due to default. We were permitted to repay the Term Loan at any time by paying the outstanding principal balance in full, along with any unpaid accrued interest, the final payment fees of 5.25% of the amounts drawn and a prepayment fee calculated on amounts being prepaid. The prepayment fee was 3.0% if the Term Loan is repaid within the one-year anniversary of the draw date, 2.0% if paid between the first and second-year anniversary of the draw date and 1.0% if paid after the second anniversary of the draw date but before the maturity date.
In April 2020, the Term Loan was amended to permit indebtedness consisting of a loan under the PPP of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), provided that such loan shall be unsecured, shall not contain any terms or conditions that are adverse to the lender’s rights under the loan and that we will not prepay such loan. In June 2020, the Term Loan was amended and an additional final payment fee of $0.3 million became due upon repayment of the loan.
On December 22, 2020, we entered into an Unconditional Secured Guaranty and Pledge Agreement (the “Guaranty”) with the Lender as a condition to the Lender’s consent to the Merger under the Term Loan between us as borrower and the Lender. Immediately prior to the Merger, we entered into a Fourth Amendment and Consent to Loan and Security Agreement dated as of December 22, 2020 with the Lender (the “Loan Amendment”). The Guaranty provided for our guaranty of our obligations under the Loan Agreement and provided the Lender a security interest in all of our assets other than intellectual property as collateral. The Loan Amendment provided for the Lender’s consent to the Merger and to the creation and funding of a Silicon Valley Bank Paycheck Protection Program escrow account to hold funds in connection with our outstanding Paycheck Protection Program loan amounts for which we have submitted a forgiveness application. The Loan Amendment also amended the definition of “Change in Control” to include the situations in which we no longer control Yumanity, Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary. The remaining terms and conditions of the Loan Agreement generally continued in the form existing prior to the Loan Amendment.
On March 29, 2021, the Term Loan was amended again to allow for the creation of a new foreign subsidiary, as well as changing certain covenants related to the financial operations of said subsidiary. The subsidiary was formed on April 23, 2021.
On April 13, 2021, the Term Loan was amended to reduce the additional final payment fee from $0.3 million to $0.1 million and to extend the availability of Tranche 2 from March 31, 2021 to June 30, 2021.
Borrowings under the Term Loan were collateralized by substantially all of our personal property, other than our intellectual property. There were no financial covenants associated with the Term Loan; however, we are subject to certain affirmative and negative covenants restricting our activities, including limitations on dispositions, mergers or acquisitions; encumbering our intellectual property; incurring indebtedness or liens; paying dividends; making certain investments; and engaging in certain other business transactions. The obligations under the Term Loan were subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of specified events of default, including a material adverse change to our business, operations or financial or other condition. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has assessed that the risk of subjective acceleration under the material adverse events clause is not probable and therefore have classified the outstanding principal on the consolidated balance sheet based on the contractually scheduled principal payments. Upon the occurrence of an event of default and until such event of default is no longer continuing, the annual interest rate would have been 5.0% above the otherwise applicable rate.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In April 2020, prior to entering into the Merger Agreement with Proteostasis in August 2020, we issued a Promissory Note to Silicon Valley Bank, pursuant to which we received loan proceeds of $1.1 million (the “PPP Loan”), provided under the PPP established under the CARES Act and guaranteed by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The PPP Loan was unsecured, was scheduled to mature on April 24, 2022, and had a fixed interest rate of 1.0% per annum. Equal monthly payments of principal and interest were to begin commencing in August 2021 until the maturity date. Interest would have accrued on the unpaid principal balance from the inception date of the loan. Forgiveness of the PPP Loan was only available for principal that is used for the limited purposes that expressly qualify for forgiveness under U.S. Small Business Administration requirements. On April 3, 2021, we were notified by Silicon Valley Bank that our forgiveness application was accepted by the Small Business Association as of March 30,
2021. Accordingly, we have recognized $1.1 million in income for debt extinguishment in our consolidated statement of operations during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Funding requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we explore our strategic alternatives and operate as a public company.
Our future funding requirements, both near- and long-term, will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•professional services and other fees associated with exploring our strategic alternatives;
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the outcome, timing and cost of the regulatory approval process for our product candidates by the FDA;
•the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us;
•the costs of operating as a public company; and
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products, product candidates or technologies.
After our recent restructuring, we believe that the existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to fund our operations for a period of twelve months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. Substantial additional financing will be needed to fund our operations thereafter and to commercially develop any current or future product candidates. We currently do not have any commitments to obtain additional funds and may be unable to obtain sufficient funding in the future on acceptable terms, if at all. However, our management is currently evaluating strategic alternatives including an acquisition, merger, reverse merger, other business combination, sales of assets, licensing or other strategic transactions involving the Company. There can be no assurance that these future funding efforts will be successful. If we cannot obtain the necessary funding, we will need to eliminate research and development programs; consider other various strategic alternatives, including a merger or sale; or initiate steps to cease operations. If we cannot raise adequate financing, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies require the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for our one collaboration arrangement, entered into in June 2020, under Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
We assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations. Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance
obligations. The identification of material rights requires judgments related to the determination of the value of the underlying license relative to the option exercise price, including assumptions about technical feasibility and the probability of developing a candidate that would be subject to the option rights. The exercise of a material right is accounted for as a contract modification for accounting purposes.
We assess whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the performance obligations in the contract. This assessment involves subjective determinations and requires management to make judgments about the individual promised goods or services and whether such are separable from the other aspects of the contractual relationship. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (that is, the good or service is capable of being distinct) and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (that is, the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract). In assessing whether a promised good or service is distinct, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. We also consider the intended benefit of the contract in assessing whether a promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. If a promised good or service is not distinct, an entity is required to combine that good or service with other promised goods or services until it identifies a bundle of goods or services that is distinct.
The transaction price is then determined and allocated to the identified performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices (“SSP”) on a relative SSP basis. SSP is determined at contract inception and is not updated to reflect changes between contract inception and when the performance obligations are satisfied. Determining the SSP for performance obligations requires significant judgment. In developing the SSP for a performance obligation, we consider applicable market conditions and relevant entity-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated costs. We validate the SSP for performance obligations by evaluating whether changes in the key assumptions used to determine the SSP will have a significant effect on the allocation of arrangement consideration between multiple performance obligations.
If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We determine the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. We include the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment.
If an arrangement includes development and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received.
For arrangements with licenses of intellectual property that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize royalty revenue and sales-based milestones at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied.
We record amounts as accounts receivable when the right to consideration is deemed unconditional. When consideration is received, or such consideration is unconditionally due, from a customer prior to transferring goods or services to the customer under the terms of a contract, a contract liability is recorded for deferred revenue.
In determining the transaction price, we adjust consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the timing of payments provides us with a significant benefit of financing. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied, either at a point in time or over time, and if over time, recognition is based on the use of an output or input method.
We assessed the promised goods and services within the Collaboration Agreement with Merck to determine if they are distinct. Based on this assessment, we determined that Merck cannot benefit from the promised goods and services separately from the others as they are highly interrelated and therefore not distinct. Accordingly, the promised goods and services related to the initial upfront
payment represent one combined performance obligation and the entire transaction price was allocated to that single combined performance obligation. That performance obligation is being satisfied over the research term as we perform the research and development activities through the first substantive option period and participate in a Joint Steering Committee to oversee research and development activities. We recognize revenue using the cost-to-cost method, which we believe best depicts the transfer of control to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of actual costs incurred to the total estimated costs expected upon satisfying the identified performance obligation. Under this method, revenue is recorded as a percentage of the estimated transaction price based on the extent of progress towards completion. At contract inception, the potential milestone payments that we are eligible to receive were excluded from the transaction price as they were fully constrained. At the end of each reporting period, we reevaluate the transaction price and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur, and if necessary, we will adjust our estimate of the transaction price. Any additions to the transaction price would be reflected in the period as a cumulative revenue catch-up. At the inception of the arrangement, we evaluated the options held by Merck to either advance or terminate the applicable research program to determine if they provided Merck with any material rights. We concluded that the options were not issued at a significant and incremental discount, and therefore do not provide Merck with a material right. As such, these options were excluded as performance obligations and will be accounted for if and when they occur. Upon Merck electing to advance the research program into the second phase (the "Second Phase"), we assessed whether the promised goods and services for the Second Phase are distinct. Based on the facts and circumstances, we determined that the Second Phase represents a separate contract with its own performance obligation.
We assessed the Collaboration Agreement to determine whether a significant financing component exists and concluded that a significant financing component does not exist.
Research and Development
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and makes adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with clinical and preclinical development activities;
•CROs and investigative sites in connection with clinical trials; and
•CDMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials.
We base the expense recorded related to external research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CDMOs, CROs and other vendors that supply, conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Stock/Equity-Based Compensation
We measure stock/equity-based awards based on the fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period for employees and directors and as services are delivered for non-employees, both of which are generally the vesting period of the respective award. We have issued stock/equity-based awards with only service-based and performance-based vesting conditions. We record the expense for awards with only service-based vesting conditions using the straight-line method. We record the expense for awards with both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions using the graded vesting method, commencing once achievement of the performance condition becomes probable. Prior to the Yumanity Reorganization, Holdings had granted restricted incentive units, which were accounted for as equity-classified awards. Holdings determined the fair value of restricted unit awards using the fair value of its common units less any applicable purchase price.
The fair value of each option grant was estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which used as assumption inputs: the fair value of our common stock/units, calculation of volatility of our common stock/units using historical benchmarking to peer companies, the expected term of the options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of the options and our expected dividend yield.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.