Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“Business Combination”). We have reviewed, and continue to review, a number of opportunities to enter into a Business Combination with an operating business, but we are not able to determine at this time whether we will complete a Business Combination with any of the target businesses that we have reviewed or with any other target business.
We intend to consummate a Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on April 16, 2021 (the “Close Date”) and the private placement of our Class A ordinary shares (“Private Placement Shares”) that occurred at the Close Date, and from additional issuances of, if any, our capital stock and our debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
At December 31, 2021, we held cash of $2,141,060 and current liabilities of $2,303,288. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
For the period from January 4, 2021 (“Inception”) to December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $1,005,179. Our business activities from Inception to the Close Date consisted primarily of costs associated with our formation. Our business activities since our Public Offering have consisted solely of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for a Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the closing of the Public Offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial sale of Class F ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”), par value $0.0001 per share, to our sponsor, TPG Pace Beneficial II Sponsor, Series LLC, a Delaware series limited liability company (the “Sponsor”), and the proceeds of an unsecured non-interest bearing promissory note from our Sponsor, in the amount of $750,000, which was repaid on the Close Date.
The registration statement for our Public Offering was declared effective by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on April 13, 2021. In our Public Offering, we sold 40,000,000 Class A ordinary shares at a price of $10.00 per share, generating proceeds of $400,000,000, including the issuance of 5,000,000 Class A ordinary shares as a result of the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option. Simultaneously with the effectiveness of our Public Offering, we closed the private placement of an aggregate of 1,000,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Private Placement Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per share, to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $10,000,000.
On December 8, 2021, our Sponsor loaned us $2,000,000 under an unsecured non-interest bearing promissory note to fund ongoing operational needs.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $2,141,060 and working capital of $219,892.
Starting January 2022, the funds in the Trust Account may be invested only in specified U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less and in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations (collectively “Permitted Investments”).
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our Business Combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Class A ordinary shares at
the completion of our Initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination (including from our affiliates or affiliates of our Sponsor).
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. On the Close Date, we entered into an administrative support agreement pursuant to which we have agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $50,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of the Initial Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Redeemable Ordinary Shares
All of the 40,000,000 Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to our second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A, “Expenses of Offering.” We incurred offering costs of $799,929 in connection with our Public Offering primarily consisting of accounting and legal services, securities registration expenses and exchange listing fees. These costs, along with paid and deferred underwriter discounts totaling $22,000,000, were charged to temporary equity at the Close Date.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss applicable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period as calculated using the treasury stock method. At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding forward purchase contracts to purchase up to 17,500,000 Class A ordinary shares. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per ordinary share since the exercise of the forward purchase contracts is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
As of December 31, 2021, we had two participating classes of ordinary shares, Class A ordinary shares and Class F ordinary shares. The Company’s Class G ordinary shares convert to Class A ordinary shares at a certain point in time after a Business Combination and then, only if the Company’s Class A ordinary shares are trading at certain levels. As such, our Class G ordinary shares are determined to be non-participating for the purposes of computations of basic earnings per share. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per ordinary share because its inclusion would have been anti-dilutive.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.