ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information and Factors That May Affect Future Results
This annual report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements regarding our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. The Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) encourages companies to disclose forward-looking information so that investors can better understand a company’s future prospects and make informed investment decisions. This annual report on Form 10-K and other written and oral statements that we make from time to time contain such forward-looking statements that set out anticipated results based on management’s plans and assumptions regarding future events or performance. We have tried, wherever possible, to identify such statements by using words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “will” and similar expressions in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. In particular, these include statements relating to future actions, future performance or results of current and anticipated sales efforts, expenses, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, and financial results. Factors that could cause our actual results of operations and financial condition to differ materially are set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this annual report on Form 10-K.
We caution that these factors could cause our actual results of operations and financial condition to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements we make and that investors should not place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements. Further, any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events or circumstances. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all of such factors. Further, we cannot assess the impact of each such factor on our results of operations or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Zoned Properties, Inc. (“Zoned Properties” or the “Company”), was incorporated in the State of Nevada on August 25, 2003. The Company is a real estate development firm for emerging and highly regulated industries, including regulated cannabis. The Company is redefining the approach to commercial real estate investment through its integrated growth services. Headquartered in Scottsdale, Arizona, Zoned Properties has developed a full spectrum of integrated growth services to support its real estate development and investment model; Advisory Services, Brokerage Services, Franchise Services, and Property Technology (“PropTech”) Data Services each cross-pollinate within the model to drive project value associated with complex real estate projects. With national experience and a team of experts devoted to the emerging cannabis industry, Zoned Properties is addressing the specific needs of a modern market in highly regulated industries. Zoned Properties is an accredited member of the Better Business Bureau, the U.S. Green Building Council, and the Forbes Real Estate Council. The Company does not grow, harvest, sell or distribute cannabis or any substances regulated under United States law such as the Controlled Substance Act of 1970, as amended (the “CSA”).
We are in the process of developing and expanding multiple business divisions; including an advisory services division, a licensed commercial real estate brokerage division, a real estate division focused on franchise services, a real estate division focused on property technology data for real estate, and a nonprofit charitable organization to focus on community prosperity. Each of these operating divisions are important elements of the overall business development strategy for long-term growth. We believe in the value of building relationships with clients and local communities in order to position the Company for long-term portfolio and revenue growth backed by sophisticated, safe, and sustainable assets and clients.
The core of our business involves identifying and developing commercial properties that intend to operate within highly regulated industries, including the regulated cannabis industry. Within highly regulated industries, local municipalities typically develop strict regulations, including zoning and permitting requirements related to commercial real estate, that dictate the specific locations and parameters under which regulated properties can operate. These regulations often include complex permitting processes and can include non-standard codes governing each location; for example, restricting a regulated property or facility from operating within a certain distance of any parks, schools, churches, or residential districts, or restricting a regulated property from operating outside a defined set of hours of operation. When an organization can collaborate with local representatives, a proactive set of rules and regulations can be established and followed to meet the needs of both the regulated operators and the local community.
On April 22, 2021, ZP Data Platform 1 LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“ZP Data”), entered into a Limited Liability Company Operating Agreement (the “Beakon Operating Agreement”) with a non-affiliated joint venture partner in connection with the formation of Beakon, LLC (“Beakon”), a Delaware limited liability company formed on April 16, 2021. Beakon signed a licensing agreement for the licensing of a consumer data/marketing software platform that Beakon will white-label for the cannabis industry. Beakon’s goal is to develop and leverage the platform to help drive foot traffic to brick and mortar retail (i.e. dispensaries), and thus enhance the value of the real estate and mitigate risk. Pursuant to the Beakon Operating Agreement, ZP Data purchased 50 units of Beakon for $50, which represent 50% of the membership interests of Beakon. Each unit represents, with respect to any member, such member’s: (i) interest in Beakon’s capital, (ii) share of Beakon’s net profits and net losses (and specially allocated items of income, gain, and deduction), and the right to receive distributions of net cash flow from Beakon, (iii) right to inspect Beakon’s books and records, and (iv) right to participate in the management of and vote on matters coming before the members as provided in the Beakon Operating Agreement. The transactions discussed above resulted in a joint venture, in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 323-10 - Investments- Equity and Joint Ventures, between ZP Data and the non-affiliated party. Each of the entities has 50% equity ownership and voting rights, and joint control in Beakon. ZP Data will account for its investment in Beakon under the equity method of accounting in accordance with ASC 323. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we contributed $86,000 to Beakon. On December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an other-than-temporary impairment loss of $73,970 because it was determined that the fair value of its equity method investment in Beakon was less than its carrying value. Based on management’s evaluation, it was determined that due to market conditions and lack of committed funding, the Company’s ability to recover the carrying amount of the investment in Beakon was impaired. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the $73,970 impairment loss is included in other expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
On May 1, 2021, we entered into a Limited Liability Company Operating Agreement (the “Zoneomics Green Operating Agreement”) with a non-affiliated joint venture partner in connection with the formation of Zoneomics Green, LLC (“Zoneomics Green”), a Delaware limited liability company formed on May 1, 2021. Zoneomics Green’s goal is to utilize advanced property technology to provide solutions for property identification in regulated industries such as regulated cannabis. Pursuant to the Zoneomics Green Operating Agreement, the Company purchased 50 units of Zoneomics Green for a capital contribution of $90,000, which represent 50% of the membership interests of Zoneomics Green. Each unit represents, with respect to any member, such member’s: (i) interest in Zoneomics Green’s capital, (ii) share of Zoneomics Green’s net profits and net losses (and specially allocated items of income, gain, and deduction), and the right to receive distributions of net cash flow from Zoneomics Green, (iii) right to inspect Zoneomics Green’s books and records, and (iv) right to participate in the management of and vote on matters coming before the members as provided in the Zoneomics Green Operating Agreement. The transactions discussed above resulted in a joint venture, in accordance with ASC 323-10 - Investments- Equity and Joint Ventures, between the Company and the non-affiliated party. Each of the entities has 50% equity ownership and voting rights, and joint control in Zoneomics Green. In June 2021, we contributed $90,000 to Zoneomics Green.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, substantially all of our revenues were generated from triple-net leases to tenants that are controlled by one entity (each, a “Significant Tenant” and collectively, the “Significant Tenants”), which is located in the State of Arizona.
On June 1, 2021, we closed on the sale of our Gilbert, AZ property with a third party (the “Purchaser”) pursuant to which we agreed to sell, and the Purchaser agreed to purchase, the property located in Gilbert, Arizona, for an aggregate purchase price of $335,000. In connection with the sale, we received net proceeds of $322,332 and recorded a gain on sale of rental property of $51,944.
The Company currently maintains a portfolio of properties that we own, develop, and lease. We currently lease land and/or building space at all five of the properties in our portfolio. Four of the properties are leased to licensed and regulated cannabis tenants and are located in areas with established zoning and permitting procedures. Two of the leased properties are zoned and permitted as licensed and regulated cannabis dispensaries, and two of the leased properties are zoned and permitted as licensed and regulated cannabis cultivation facilities. Each regulated property may undergo a non-standard development process. Various development requirements in this process may include initial property identification, zoning authorization, and permitting guidance in order to qualify a commercial property for subsequent architectural design, utility installation, construction and development, property management, facilities management systems, and security system installation.
As of December 31, 2021, a summary of rental properties owned by us consisted of the following:
* Annual base rent represents amount of cash payments due from tenants. Future annual base rent does not include the Fourth Chino Valley Amendment, effective March 1, 2022 which increased the monthly base rent to $87,581, or an annual base rent to $1,050,972.
** For Tempe, AZ, table includes rental income generated from the lease of parking lot space used by a third party as an antenna location.
Annualized $ per Rented Sq. Ft. (Base Rent)
Government Regulation
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that it is the federal government that has the right to regulate and criminalize cannabis, even for medical purposes. Therefore, federal law criminalizing the use of marijuana preempts state laws that legalize its use for medicinal purposes.
The U.S. federal government regulates drugs through the CSA, which places controlled substances, including cannabis, in a schedule. Cannabis is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. A Schedule I controlled substance is defined as a substance that has no currently accepted medical use in the United States, a lack of safety for use under medical supervision and a high potential for abuse. The DOJ defines Schedule I drugs, substances or chemicals as “drugs with no currently accepted medical use and a high potential for abuse.” However, the FDA has approved Epidiolex, which contains a purified form of the drug CBD, a non-psychoactive ingredient in the cannabis plant, for the treatment of seizures associated with two epilepsy conditions. The FDA has not approved cannabis or cannabis compounds as a safe and effective drug for any other condition. Moreover, pursuant to the Farm Bill, CBD remains a Schedule I controlled substance under the CSA, with a narrow exception for CBD derived from hemp with a THC concentration of less than 0.3%.
The Company maintains its operations so as to remain in compliance with the CSA. Even in those jurisdictions in which the manufacture and use of medical marijuana has been legalized at the state level, the possession, use and cultivation all remain violations of federal law that are punishable by imprisonment and substantial fines, and the prescription of marijuana is a violation of federal law. Moreover, individuals and entities may violate federal law if they intentionally aid and abet another in violating these federal controlled substance laws, or conspire with another to violate them.
The inconsistencies between federal and state regulation of cannabis were addressed in the Cole Memo, which then-Deputy Attorney General James Cole sent to all U.S. District Attorneys in 2013 outlining certain priorities for the DOJ relating to the prosecution of cannabis offenses. The Cole Memo acknowledged that, notwithstanding the designation of cannabis as a Schedule I controlled substance at the federal level, several states had enacted laws authorizing the use of cannabis for medical purposes. The Cole Memo noted that jurisdictions that have enacted laws legalizing cannabis in some form have also implemented strong and effective regulatory and enforcement systems to control the cultivation, processing, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis. As such, conduct in compliance with those laws and regulations is less likely to implicate the Cole Memo’s enforcement priorities. The DOJ did not provide (and has not provided since) specific guidelines for what regulatory and enforcement systems would be deemed sufficient under the Cole Memo. In light of limited investigative and prosecutorial resources, the Cole Memo concluded that the DOJ should be focused on addressing only the most significant threats related to cannabis, such as distribution of cannabis from states where cannabis is legal to those where cannabis is illegal, the diversion of cannabis revenues to illicit drug cartels and sales of cannabis to minors.
On January 4, 2018, former U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions issued the Sessions Memo, which rescinded the Cole Memo. The Sessions Memo stated, in part, that current law reflects “Congress’ determination that cannabis is a dangerous drug and cannabis activity is a serious crime,” and Mr. Sessions directed all U.S. Attorneys to enforce the laws enacted by Congress by following well-established principles when pursuing prosecutions related to cannabis activities. The Company is not aware of any prosecutions of investment companies doing routine business with licensed marijuana related businesses in light of the DOJ position following issuance of the Sessions Memo. However, there can be no assurance that the federal government will not enforce federal laws relating to cannabis in the future. As a result of the Sessions Memo, federal prosecutors are now free to utilize their prosecutorial discretion to decide whether to prosecute cannabis activities, despite the existence of state-level laws that may be inconsistent with federal prohibitions. No direction was given to federal prosecutors in the Sessions Memo as to the priority they should ascribe to such cannabis activities, and thus it is uncertain how active U.S. federal prosecutors will be in relation to such activities.
Federal prosecutors appear to continue to use the Cole Memo’s priorities as an enforcement guide. Merrick Garland, who became Attorney General on March 10, 2021 has indicated that he would deprioritize enforcement of low-level cannabis crimes such as possession, and has shared his view that the government should focus on large-scale criminal enterprises that circumvent state legalization laws instead of going after people who abide by local cannabis policies. The Company believes it is too soon to determine what prosecutorial effects will be created by the rescission of the Cole Memo or any replacement thereof and when or if the Sessions Memo will be rescinded. President Joseph R. Biden, who assumed office in January 2021, has not yet indicated whether and when he will decriminalize or legalize cannabis and has previously stated that he is opposed to legalization. The sheer size of the cannabis industry, in addition to participation by state and local governments and investors, suggests that a large-scale federal enforcement operation would more than likely create unwanted political backlash for the DOJ and the current administration. Regardless, at this time, cannabis remains a Schedule I controlled substance at the federal level. The U.S. federal government has always reserved the right to enforce federal law in regard to the sale and disbursement of medical or adult use cannabis, even if state law authorizes such sale and disbursement. It is unclear whether the risk of enforcement has been altered.
One legislative safeguard for the medical cannabis industry, appended to the federal budget bill, remains in place following the rescission of the Cole Memo. For several years, Congress has adopted the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment to prevent the federal government from using congressionally appropriated funds to enforce federal cannabis laws against regulated medical cannabis actors operating in compliance with state and local law. Despite the rescission of the Cole Memo, the DOJ appears to continue to adhere to the enforcement priorities set forth in the Cole Memo.
The Cole Memo and the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment gave licensed cannabis operators (particularly medical cannabis operators) and investors in states with legal regimes greater certainty regarding the DOJ’s enforcement priorities and the risk of operating cannabis businesses. While the Sessions Memo has introduced some uncertainty regarding federal enforcement, the cannabis industry continues to experience growth in legal medical and adult use markets across the United States. Vice President Kamala Harris is the lead sponsor of the Marijuana Opportunity, Reinvestment, and Expungement (MORE) Act, which seeks to end the federal prohibition of marijuana, among other things, but in March 2020, it was reported that Vice President Harris has adopted the same position as President Biden, who opposes legalization. Currently, there is no guarantee that state laws legalizing and regulating the sale and use of cannabis will remain in place or that local governmental authorities will not limit the applicability of state laws within their respective jurisdictions. Unless and until the U.S. Congress amends the CSA with respect to cannabis (and as to the timing or scope of any such potential amendments there can be no assurance), there is a risk that federal authorities may enforce current U.S. federal law criminalizing cannabis.
Although the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that it is the federal government that has the right to regulate and criminalize cannabis, and federal law criminalizing the use of marijuana preempts state laws that legalize its use, cannabis is largely regulated at the state level.
State laws that permit and regulate the production, distribution and use of cannabis for adult use or medical purposes are in direct conflict with the CSA, which makes cannabis use and possession federally illegal. Although certain states and territories of the U.S. authorize medical and/or adult use cannabis production and distribution by licensed or registered entities, under U.S. federal law, the possession, use, cultivation and transfer of cannabis and any related drug paraphernalia is illegal and any such acts are criminal acts under federal law under any and all circumstances under the CSA. Although the Company’s activities are believed to be compliant with applicable state and local laws, strict compliance with state and local laws with respect to cannabis may neither absolve the Company of liability under U.S. federal law, nor may it provide a defense to any federal proceeding which may be brought against the Company.
As of December 31, 2020, 35 states, plus the District of Columbia (and the territories of Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Northern Mariana Islands), have legalized the cultivation and sale of cannabis for medical purposes. In 15 of those states, the sale and possession of cannabis is legal for both medical and adult use, and the District of Columbia has legalized adult use but not commercial sale. In November 2020, voters in Arizona, Montana, New Jersey and South Dakota voted by referendum to legalize cannabis for adult use, and voters in Mississippi and South Dakota voted to legalized cannabis for medical use, and in February 2021, the Virginia legislature approved a bill that would legalize cannabis for adult use beginning in 2024. The Virginia bill is awaiting signature by the governor, and if signed, Virginia will be the first southern state to legalize cannabis for adult use. Also in February 2021, New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy signed three bills into law that legalize cannabis for adult use.
The Company will focus heavily on the growth of a diversified revenue stream in 2021. We intend to accomplish this by prospecting new advisory services across the country for private, public, and municipal clients. We believe that strategic real estate and sustainability services are likely to emerge as the growth engine for Zoned Properties. We are moving to take advantage of new opportunities.
Pursuant to the terms of the several lease amendments our Significant Tenants, among other things, base rent base rent was abated from June 1, 2020 to July 31, 2020 on all of our Significant Tenant leases which decreased our cash flow from operation during the year ended December 31, 2020 by $179,000. In addition, the parties agreed that from the period from May 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022, our Significant Tenants will invest a combined total of at least $8,000,000 improvements in and to the properties in Chino Valley and Tempe prior to June 30, 2022. Any increase in the rentable area of the leased premises will result in an increase in all amounts calculated based on the same, including, without limitation, base rent.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. We are monitoring this closely, and although operations have not been materially affected by the COVID-19 outbreak to date, the ultimate duration and severity of the outbreak and its impact on the economic environment and our business is uncertain. Currently, all of the properties in our portfolio are open to our Significant Tenants and their customers and will remain open pursuant to state and local government requirements. We did not experience in 2020 or 2021, and we do not foresee in 2022, any material changes to our operations from COVID-19. Our tenants are continuing to generate revenue at these properties and they have continued to make rental payments in full and on time and we believe the tenants’ liquidity position is sufficient to cover its expected rental obligations. Accordingly, while we do not anticipate an impact on our operations, we cannot estimate the duration of the pandemic and potential impact on our business if the properties must close or if the tenants are otherwise unable or unwilling to make rental payments. In addition, a severe or prolonged economic downturn could result in a variety of risks to our business, including weakened demand for our properties and a decreased ability to raise additional capital when needed on acceptable terms, if at all.
Results of Operations
The following comparative analysis on results of operations was based primarily on the comparative financial statements, footnotes and related information for the periods identified below and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, which are included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. The results discussed below are for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenues consisted of the following:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenues amounted to $1,820,485, including Significant Tenants revenues of $1,255,130, as compared to $1,125,442, including Significant Tenant revenues of $1,176,666, for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $605,403, or 49.8%. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase in revenues was attributable to an increase in rental revenue from our Significant Tenant of $135,713, an increase in brokerage revenue of $413,395 related to commission earned on real estate listings, and an increase in advisory revenues of $55,935. Substantially all of the Company’s real estate properties are leased under triple-net leases to the Significant Tenants.
Operating expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses amounted to $1,775,785 as compared to $1,177,709 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $598,076, or 50.8%. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, operating expenses consisted of the following:
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, compensation and benefit expense increased by $145,915, or 42.6%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to an increase in stock-based compensation of $59,749 and increase in compensation and benefits of $86,167. The increase in stock-based compensation related to an increase in stock-based compensation from the accretion of stock option expense and an increase in the value of shares issued for services. Additionally, during 2021, we hired additional staff related to the diversification of our services into brokerage services and the expansion of our advisory services.
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, professional fees increased by $202,193, or 103.3%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase in consulting fees of $122,484 related to an increase in consultants used in our brokerage business, an increase in public relations fees of $58,035, and an increase in legal fees of $21,857.
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded brokerage fees amounting to $265,208. We did not record brokerage fees during the year ended December 31, 2020.
● General and administrative expenses consist of expenses such as rent expense, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, travel expenses, office expenses, telephone and internet expenses and other general operating expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased by $10,819, or 5.7%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, depreciation expense increased by $23,810, or 6.6%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, real estate taxes increased by $2,075, or 2.4%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain from the sale of our Gilbert property of $51,944. We did not record any gain or loss from the sale of rental property during the 2020 period.
Income from operations
As a result of the factors described above, for the year ended December 31, 2021, income from operations amounted to $44,700 as compared to $37,733 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6,967, or 18.5%.
Other (expenses) income
Other (expense) income primarily includes interest expense incurred on debt with third parties and a related party and also includes other income (expense). For the year ended December 31, 2021, total other expenses, net amounted to $210,519 as compared to total other expenses, net of $116,071, respectively, representing an increase of $94,448, or 81.4%. This increase was attributable to an increase in loss from unconsolidated joint ventures of $27,476 and an impairment loss from unconsolidated joint venture of $73,970, offset by an increase in interest income of $6,998 attributable to interest earned on the convertible note receivable.
Net loss
As a result of the foregoing, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net loss amounted to $165,819, or $0.01 per common share (basic and diluted), and $78,338, or $0.01 per common share (basic and diluted), respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. We had cash of $1,191,940 and $699,335 of cash as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our primary uses of cash have been for compensation and benefits, fees paid to third parties for professional services, real estate taxes, general and administrative expenses, and the development of rental properties and other lines of business. All funds received have been expended in the furtherance of growing the business. We receive funds from the collection of rental income and advisory fees. The following trends are reasonably likely to result in changes in our liquidity over the near to long term:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance our current business,
● Addition of administrative and sales personnel as the business grows, and
● The cost of being a public company.
● An increase in investments in joint ventures and other projects.
We may need to raise additional funds, particularly if we are unable to continue to generate positive cash flows from our operations. We estimate that based on current plans and assumptions, that our available cash will be sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements under our present operating expectations for the next 12 months from the date of this annual report on Form 10-K. Other than revenue received from the lease of our rental properties, from advisory fees, and from brokerage revenues, we presently have no other significant alternative source of working capital.
We have used these funds to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations, develop rental properties, invest in joint ventures and notes receivable, and to grow our company. We may need to raise significant additional capital or debt financing to acquire new properties, to develop existing properties, to assure we have sufficient working capital for our ongoing operations and debt obligations, and to invest in new joint venture and other projects.
On March 19, 2020, we made an initial investment of $100,000 into KCB Jade Holdings, LLC (“KCB”). In exchange for the investment, KCB issued to us a convertible debenture (the “Debenture”) dated March 19, 2020 (the “Issuance Date”) in the original principal amount of $100,000. The Debenture bears interest at the rate of 6.5% per annum and matures on March 19, 2025 (the “Maturity Date”). Interest on the outstanding principal sum of the Debenture commences accruing on the Issuance Date and is computed on the basis of a 365-day year and the actual number of days elapsed and shall be payable annually due by the first day of each calendar anniversary following the Issuance Date. KCB may prepay the Debenture at any point after 18 months following the Issuance Date, in whole or in part. However, if KCB elects to prepay the Debenture prior to the Maturity Date or prior to any conversion as provided in the Debenture in whole or in part, we will be entitled to receive a number of KCB units, in addition to such prepayment amount, constituting 10% of the total outstanding units and 10% of the total percentage interest following such issuance and at the time of such issuance. On or after six months from the Issuance Date, we may convert all or a portion of the principal balance and all accrued and unpaid interest due into a number of units equal to the proportion of the outstanding amount being converted multiplied by 33% of the total number of units issued and outstanding at the time of conversion, constituting 33% of the total percentage interest (the “Conversion Percentage”). If KCB defaults on payment of the Debenture, we may, at its option, extend all conversion rights, through and including the date KCB tenders or attempts to tender payment in full of all amounts due under the Debenture. Conversion rights terminate upon acceptance by the Company of payment in full of principal, accrued interest, and any other amounts due under the Debenture. If (i) KCB does not elect to exercise its rights of prepayment prior to the Maturity Date, (ii) we do not elect to exercise its rights of conversion, and (iii) KCB pays to the Company all outstanding principal and interest accrued and due under the terms of the Debenture on the Maturity Date, we will still be entitled to receive a number of units, in addition to such payment amount, constituting 8% of the total outstanding units and 8% of the total percentage interest following such issuance and at the time of such issuance.
On February 19, 2021, we made an additional investment of $100,000 into KCB (the “Additional Investment”). In exchange, the KCB issued to the Company an amended and restated convertible debenture (the “A&R Debenture”) on the Amendment Date. The A&R Debenture amends and restates in its entirety the Original Debenture. Pursuant to the A&R Debenture, the Company and KCB agreed to certain new terms that did not exist in the Original Debenture, which are described below.
● Interest Accrual Commencement: Pursuant to the A&R Debenture, interest on the Initial Investment begins accruing as of March 19, 2020, while interest on the Additional Investment begins accruing on February 19, 2021.
● Franchise Fees. In the A&R Debenture, the parties acknowledge that each time that KCB sells one of its franchise locations, KCB earns a fee (an “Initial Fee”), and that KCB also earns a fee when one of its franchise locations renews its franchise with KCB (a “Renewal Fee”). Pursuant to the A&R Debenture, the Company and KCB agreed that, as additional consideration for the Additional Investment, KCB will pay to the Company, in perpetuity, 5% of any Initial Fee received by KCB after the Amendment Date, as well as 5% of any Renewal Fee received by KCB related to any franchise locations sold after the Amendment Date, in each case to be paid within five (5) days of receipt of KCB thereof.
In addition, following the Amendment Date, KCB agreed not to decrease the amount it charges its franchise locations for an Initial Fee or any Renewal Fee as in effect on the Amendment Date without the prior written consent of the Company, or to take any other actions that would reduce the value of KCB’s obligation to the Company with respect to these franchise fee payments. KCB’s obligation to pay the Company the franchise fees listed above will survive any termination, repayment, or conversion of the A&R Debenture. Failure by KCB to pay the Company the franchise fees in the manner described above will result in an event of default, and, among other things, any due and unpaid franchise fees will accrue interest at 12% per year from the date the obligation was due.
Apart from the terms described above, the terms of the A&R Debenture are substantially identical to the terms of the Original Debenture.
On August 2, 2021, KCB issued to the Company a second amended and restated convertible debenture (the “Second A&R Debenture”). The Second A&R Debenture amends and restates in its entirety the A&R Debenture. Pursuant to the Second A&R Debenture, the Company and KCB agreed to revise certain terms in the A&R Debenture, as described below.
Right of Prepayment. KCB may prepay the Second A&R Debenture at any point after 18 months following the Issue Date, in whole or in part. However, if KCB elects to prepay the Second A&R Debenture prior to March 19, 2025 (the “Maturity Date”) or prior to any conversion in whole or in part, the Company will be entitled to receive a number of KCB Class B units (“Class B Units”), in addition to such prepayment amount, constituting 10% of the total outstanding KCB Units (as defined in KCB’s Limited Liability Company Operating Agreement (the “Operating Agreement”)), for the avoidance of doubt, being 10% of the total of KCB’s Class A units (“Class A Units”) and the Class B Units together, and 10% of the total Percentage Interest (as defined in the Operating Agreement) following such issuance and at the time of such issuance.
Voluntary Conversion. On or after six months from the Issue Date, the Company is entitled to convert all or a portion of the principal balance and all accrued and unpaid interest due under the Second A&R Debenture (the “Outstanding Amount”) into a number of Class B Units equal to the proportion of the Outstanding Amount being converted multiplied by the Conversion Percentage, as defined below). Should KCB default on payment hereof, the Company may, at its option, extend all conversion rights, through and including the date KCB tenders or attempts to tender payment in full of all amounts due under the Second A&R Debenture. Conversion rights will terminate upon acceptance by the Company of payment in full of principal, accrued interest and any other amounts due under the Second A&R Debenture.
Conversion Percentage. The Conversion Percentage will be 33% of the total number of Units (for the avoidance of doubt, being 33% of the total of the Class A Units and the Class B Units together), issued and outstanding at the time of conversion, constituting 33% of the total Percentage Interest (the “Conversion Percentage”).
Right of Maturity Units. If (i) KCB does not elect to exercise its prepayment rights prior to the Maturity Date, and (ii) the Company does not elect to exercise its conversion rights, and (iii) KCB pays to the Company all outstanding principal and interest accrued and due under the terms of the Second A&R Debenture on the Maturity Date, then the Company will still be entitled to receive a number of Class B Units, in addition to such payment amount, constituting 8% of the total outstanding Units (for the avoidance of doubt, being 8% of the total of the Class A Units and the Class B Units together) and 8% of the total Percentage Interest (as such term is defined in the Second A&R Debenture) following such issuance and at the time of such issuance.
Apart from the terms described above, the terms of the Second A&R Debenture are substantially identical to the terms of the A&R Debenture.
As discussed in the Overview section and elsewhere, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we contributed $86,000 to the Beakon joint venture and we contributed $90,000 to the Zoneomics Green joint venture. Additionally, on December 31, 2021, we recorded an other-than-temporary impairment loss of $73,970 because it was determined that the fair value of our equity method investment in Beakon was less than its carrying value. Based on management’s evaluation, it was determined that due to market conditions and lack of committed funding, our ability to recover the carrying amount of the investment in Beakon was impaired.
Our future operations are dependent on our ability to manage our current cash balance, on the collection of rental and advisory revenues and the attainment of new advisory clients. Our real estate properties are leased to Significant Tenants under triple-net leases for which terms vary. We monitor the credit of these tenants to stay abreast of any material changes in credit quality. We monitor tenant credit by (1) reviewing financial statements and related metrics and information that are publicly available or that are provided to us upon request, and (2) monitoring the timeliness of rent collections. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an asset concentration related to our Significant Tenant leases. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, these Significant Tenants represented approximately 79.2% and 83.2% of total assets, respectively. If our Significant Tenants are prohibited from operating due to federal or state regulations or due to COVID-19, or cannot pay their rent, we may not have enough working capital to support our operations and we would have to seek out new tenants at rental rates per square less than our current rate per square foot.
We included audited financial statements of our Significant Tenants as Exhibit 99.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K since such audited financial statements represent material information and are necessary for the protection of investors.
We may secure additional financing to acquire and develop additional and existing properties. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital may restrict our ability to grow our business operations.
Cash Flow
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and
Net cash flow provided by operating activities was $489,257 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to net cash flow provided by operating activities of $170,040 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $319,217.
● Net cash flow provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily reflected a net loss of $165,819 adjusted for the add-back of non-cash items consisting of depreciation of $358,294, amortization expense of $28,350, stock-based compensation expense of $52,000, accretion of stock-based stock option expense of $56,180, a gain on sale of rental property of $(51,944), and a loss and impairment loss from unconsolidated joint ventures of $101,446, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisting of an increase in accounts receivable of $2,921, a decrease in prepaid expenses of $71,712, an increase in accounts payable of $11,244, an increase in accrued expenses of $16,278, and a decrease in deferred rent receivable of $8,987.
● Net cash flow provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected net loss of $78,338 adjusted for the add-back of non-cash items consisting of depreciation and amortization of $362,833, stock-based compensation expense of $24,200 and accretion of stock-based stock option expense of $24,231, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisting of an increase in deferred rent receivable of $173,757 attributable to the abatement of May and June 2020 rent as part of lease amendments effective on May 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash flow provided by investing activities amounted to $3,348 as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $110,486, a positive change of $113,834. During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by investing activities was attributable to proceeds from the sale of rental property of $322,332, offset by cash used for an investment in a convertible note receivable of $100,000 as discussed above, cash used in the improvement of rental properties of $40,360, cash used for the purchase of property and equipment of $2,624, and cash used for investment in joint ventures of $176,000. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash flow used in investing activities was attributable to cash used for an investment in a convertible note receivable of $100,000 as discussed above, cash used in the improvement of rental properties of $9,565 and cash used for the purchase of property and equipment of $923.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
We have certain fixed contractual obligations and commitments that include future estimated payments. Changes in our business needs, cancellation provisions, changing interest rates, and other factors may result in actual payments differing from the estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of payments. We have presented below a summary of the most significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the tables, in order to assist in the review of this information within the context of our consolidated financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
The following tables summarize our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands), and the effect these obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any other financial guarantees or other commitments to guarantee the payment obligations of any third parties. We have not entered into any derivative contracts that are indexed to our shares and classified as shareholders’ equity or that are not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. We do not have any variable interest in any unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to income taxes, and the valuation of equity transactions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any future changes to these estimates and assumptions could cause a material change to our reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the audited consolidated financial statements.
Rental properties
Rental properties are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Betterments, major renovations and certain costs directly related to the improvement of rental properties are capitalized. Maintenance and repair expenses are charged to expense as incurred. Depreciation is recognized on a straight-line basis over estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from 5 to 39 years. Tenant improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the lives of the related leases, which approximate the useful lives of the assets.
Upon the acquisition of real estate, we assess the fair value of acquired assets (including land, buildings and improvements, identified intangibles, such as acquired above-market leases and acquired in-place leases) and acquired liabilities (such as acquired below-market leases) and allocate the purchase price based on these assessments. The Company assesses fair value based on estimated cash flow projections that utilize appropriate discount and capitalization rates and available market information. Estimates of future cash flows are based on a number of factors including historical operating results, known trends, and market/economic conditions.
Our properties are individually reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment exists when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the aggregate projected future cash flows over the anticipated holding period on an undiscounted basis. An impairment loss is measured based on the excess of the property’s carrying amount over its estimated fair value. Impairment analyses are based on our current plans, intended holding periods and available market information at the time the analyses are prepared. If our estimates of the projected future cash flows, anticipated holding periods, or market conditions change, our evaluation of impairment losses may be different and such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements. The evaluation of anticipated cash flows is subjective and is based, in part, on assumptions regarding future occupancy, rental rates and capital requirements that could differ materially from actual results.
We have capitalized land, which is not subject to depreciation.
Lease accounting
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” using a modified retrospective method. On adoption, we also applied the package of practical expedients to leases, where we are the lessee or lessor, that commenced before the effective date whereby we elected to not reassess the following: (i) whether any expired or existing contracts contain leases; (ii) the lease classification for any expired or existing leases; and (iii) initial direct costs for any existing leases.
ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” sets out the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of leases for both parties to a contract (i.e., lessees and lessors). The new standard requires lessees to apply a dual approach, classifying leases as either finance or operating leases based on the principle of whether or not the lease is effectively a financed purchase by the lessee. This classification will determine whether lease expense is recognized based on an effective interest method or on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. A lessee is also required to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases with a term of greater than 12 months regardless of their classification. Leases with a term of 12 months or less will be accounted for similar to existing guidance for operating leases today. The new standard requires lessors to account for leases using an approach that is substantially equivalent to existing guidance for sales-type leases, direct financing leases and operating leases.
For contracts entered into on or after the effective date, where we are the lessee, at the inception of a contract, we assess whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. Our assessment is based on: (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether we have the right to direct the use of the asset. We allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments. Leases entered into prior to January 1, 2019 were accounted for under ASC 840 and were not reassessed.
For leases entered into on or after the effective date, where we are the lessor, at the inception of the contract, we assess whether the contract is a sales-type, direct financing or operating lease by reviewing the terms of the lease and determining if the lessee obtains control of the underlying asset implicitly or explicitly.
If a change to a pre-existing lease occurs, we evaluate if the modification results in a separate new lease or a modified lease. A new lease results when a modification provides additional right of use. The new lease or modified lease is then reassessed to determine its classification based on the modified terms. As disclosed in Note 3, on January 1, 2019, the Chino Valley lease was modified to increase the monthly base rent from $35,000 to $40,000. Additionally, on May 31, 2020, the Chino Valley lease was modified to decrease the monthly base rent from $40,000 to $32,800 and the Tempe lease was modified to increase the monthly base rent from $33,500 to $49,200. On August 23, 2021 and effective September 1, 2021, the Chino Valley lease was amended, and the monthly base rent was increased to $55,195. At the commencement of the modified terms, we reassessed its lease classification and concluded it remained properly classified as an operating lease.
The adoption of ASU 2016-02 did not have a material impact on the operating leases where we are a lessor. We will continue to record revenues from rental properties for its operating leases on a straight-line basis. Any revenue on the straight-line basis exceeding the monthly payment amount required on the operating lease is reflected as a deferred rent receivable. Effective May 31, 2020, we amended our leases for which we are the lessor on our Chino Valley, Tempe, Kingman and Green Valley properties. The amendments resulted in an abatement of rent for the months of June and July 2020. This rent abatement resulted in a deferred rent receivable as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $164,770 and $173,757, respectively.
For leases where we are a lessee, primarily for the Company’s administrative office lease, we analyzed if it would be required to record a lease liability and a right of use asset on its consolidated balance sheets at fair value upon adoption of ASU 2016-02. Since the terms of the Company’s operating lease for its office space is 12 months or less, pursuant to ASC 842, we determined that the lease meets the definition of a short-term lease and we did not recognize a right-of use asset and lease liability arising from this lease.
Investment in joint ventures
We have equity investments in various privately held entities. We account for these investments either under the equity method or cost method of accounting depending on our ownership interest and level of influence. Investments accounted for under the equity method are recorded based upon the amount of our investment and adjusted each period for our share of the investee’s income or loss. Investments are reviewed for changes in circumstance or the occurrence of events that suggest an other than temporary event where our investment may not be recoverable. We evaluate our investments in these entities for consolidation. We consider our percentage interest in the joint venture, evaluation of control and whether a variable interest entity exists when determining whether or not the investment qualifies for consolidation or if it should be accounted for as an unconsolidated investment under either the equity method of accounting. If an investment qualifies for the equity method of accounting, our investment is recorded initially at cost, and subsequently adjusted for equity in net income (loss) and cash contributions and distributions. The net income or loss of an unconsolidated investment is allocated to its investors in accordance with the provisions of the operating agreement of the entity. The allocation provisions in these agreements may differ from the ownership interest held by each investor. Differences, if any, between the carrying amount of our investment in the respective joint venture and our share of the underlying equity of such unconsolidated entity are amortized over the respective lives of the underlying assets as applicable. These items are reported as a single line item in the statements of operations as income or loss from investments in unconsolidated affiliated entities.
Revenue recognition
We follow the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). This standard establishes a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most of the existing revenue recognition guidance. ASC 606 requires an entity to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services and also requires certain additional disclosures.
Rental income includes base rents that each tenant pays in accordance with the terms of its respective lease and is reported on a straight-line basis over the non-cancellable term of the lease, which includes the effects of rent abatements under the leases. The Company commences rental revenue recognition when the tenant takes possession of the leased space or controls the physical use of the leased space and the leased space is substantially ready for its intended use.
Currently, the Company’s leases provide for payments with fixed monthly base rents over the term of the leases. The leases also require the tenant to remit estimated monthly payments to the Company for property taxes. These payments are recorded as rental income and the related property tax expense reflected separately on the statements of operations.
Revenues from advisory services is recognized when the Company performs services pursuant to its agreements with clients and collectability is reasonably assured.
Brokerage revenues primarily consists of real estate sales commissions and are recognized upon the successful completion of all required services have been performed which is when escrow closes. In accordance with the guidelines established for Reporting Revenue Gross as a Principal versus Net as an Agent in the ASC Topic 606, the Company records commission revenues and expenses on a gross basis. Of the criteria listed in ASC Topic 606, the Company is the primary obligor in the transaction, does not have inventory risk, performs all or part of the service, has credit risk, and has wide latitude in establishing the price of services rendered and discretion in selection of agents and determination of service specifications. Brokerage revenue that are payable upon payment of rent or other events beyond the Company’s control are recognized upon the occurrence of such events.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718 - “Compensation -Stock Compensation”, which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee, director, and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee, director, or non-employee is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee, director, and non-employee services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The Company has elected to recognize forfeitures as they occur as permitted under Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-09 Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 requires financial assets measured at amortized cost to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The measurement of expected credit losses is based on relevant information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amounts. An entity must use judgment in determining the relevant information and estimation methods that are appropriate in its circumstances. ASU 2016-13 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years, and a modified retrospective approach is required, with a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the guidance is effective. In November of 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, which delayed the implementation of ASU 2016-13 to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 for smaller reporting companies which applies to the Company. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of ASU 2016-13 on its future consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The ASU simplifies the accounting for certain convertible instruments, amends the guidance on derivative scope exceptions for contracts in an entity’s own equity and requires the use of the if-converted method for calculating diluted earnings per share. The ASU removes separation models for convertible debt with a cash conversion feature. Such convertible instruments will be accounted for as a single liability measured at amortized cost. The ASU is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted after December 15, 2020, which can either be on a modified retrospective or full retrospective basis. Adoption of the ASU is not expected to have a material impact on the Company's financial condition and results of operations.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, if adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying consolidated financial statements.