ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on August 20, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
The Business Combination
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on the date of Closing: (i) the ZF Merger, with ZeroFox being the surviving company in the ZF Merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of L&F Holdings, (ii) the IDX Merger, with IDX being the Transitional IDX Entity and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of L&F Holdings, and (iii) the IDX Forward Merger, with IDX Forward Merger Sub being the surviving company in the IDX Forward Merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of L&F Holdings (the “Mergers”).
Business Combination Consideration
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the effective times of the Mergers, among other things, (i) each outstanding share of common stock (including shares of common stock issued upon the mandatory conversion of shares of preferred stock) of ZeroFox, other than ZF Dissenting Shares (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) and ZF Cancelled Shares (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), will be automatically cancelled and converted into a right to receive a fraction of a share of LNFA Common Stock determined in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement on the basis of a pre-money enterprise value of ZeroFox of $866,250,000 and a price of $10.00 per share of LNFA Common Stock and (ii) each outstanding share of common stock and preferred stock of IDX, other than IDX Dissenting Shares (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) and IDX Cancelled Shares (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), will be automatically cancelled and converted into a right to receive (x) for common stock and series a-1 and series a-2 preferred stock, a fraction of a share of LNFA Common Stock, (y) for common stock and series a-1 and series a-2 preferred stock, a portion of $50,000,000 in cash consideration (subject to certain adjustments for cash, working capital, debt and transaction expenses, and net of liquidation preferences, as provided in the Business Combination Agreement), and (z) for series a-1, series a-2 and series b preferred stock, a liquidation preference amount of $0.361, in each case, in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement and on the basis of a pre-money enterprise value of IDX of $338,750,000 and a price of $10.00 per share of LNFA Common Stock.
Common Equity Investment
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, LNFA entered into subscription agreements (the “Common Equity Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors, including, among others, Victory Park Capital, certain existing stockholders of ZeroFox (certain funds affiliated with New Enterprise Associates, Highland Capital and Alsop Louie Partners (the “ZF Investors”)), and certain existing stockholders of IDX (certain funds affiliated with Blue Venture Fund, Peloton Equity and ForgePoint Capital (the “IDX Investors”)). Pursuant to the Common Equity Subscription Agreements, the investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and LNFA agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the Closing Date (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), an aggregate of 2,000,000 shares of LNFA Common Stock in exchange for an aggregate purchase price of $20,000,000 (the “Common Equity PIPE Financing”).
In addition, on December 16, 2021, the ZF Investors purchased PIK promissory notes issued by ZeroFox (the “ZF PIK Promissory Notes”) for an aggregate purchase price of $5,000,000. Such ZF PIK Promissory Notes accrue interest that will be paid-in-kind at a rate of 5.0% per annum. If the Closing occurs, the repayment of the original principal amount of the ZF PIK Promissory Notes may be offset against amounts owed by the ZF investors under their Common Equity Subscription Agreements.
In addition, if the Closing occurs, any portion of closing cash consideration to which the IDX Investors are entitled in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination may be reduced to fund the subscription amount the IDX Investors would otherwise be required to pay pursuant to the Common Equity Subscription Agreements.
The closing of the Common Equity PIPE Financing is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Business Combination. The Common Equity Subscription Agreements provide that LNFA will grant the investors in the Common Equity PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.
The foregoing description of the Common Equity Subscription Agreements and the Common Equity PIPE Financing is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the form of Common Equity Subscription Agreement, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 10.8 hereto and the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference.
Convertible Notes Investment
In connection with signing the Business Combination Agreement, LNFA entered into convertible note subscription agreements (the “Convertible Note Subscription Agreements”) with affiliates of Monarch Alternative Capital LP, Victory Park Capital and Corbin Capital (the “Note Investors”), in respect of $150,000,000 aggregate principal amount of unsecured convertible notes due in 2025 (the “Notes”) to be issued in connection with the closing of the Business Combination (the “Convertible Notes Financing”). The principal terms of the Notes are set forth in the form of indenture attached as an exhibit to the Convertible Note Subscription Agreements, which indenture shall be entered into by LNFA, the guarantors party thereto and the indenture trustee (the “Indenture”), and the form of global note attached thereto. The Notes will bear interest at a rate of 7.00% per annum, payable quarterly in cash; provided, that the issuer may elect to pay interest in kind at 8.75% per annum, and the Notes will be convertible at an initial conversion price of $11.50, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, including with respect to stock-splits and stock dividends, dividends and other distributions, above-market tender offers, below-market rights offerings and spin-offs (the “Conversion Price”), and shall mature on the date that is three years following the closing of the Convertible Notes Financing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable investments held in trust account after the initial public offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $5,598,086, which consists of change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,425,504 and interest earned on marketable investments held in Trust Account of $20,498, offset by operating costs of $3,847,916.
For the period from August 20, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $7,798,760, which consists of change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,829,174, transaction costs of $807,424 and interest earned on marketable investments held in Trust Account of $2,030, offset by operating costs of $164,192.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 23, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 15,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 6,859,505 private placement warrants to the Sponsor and Jefferies LLC at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant and approximately $1.21 per private placement warrant, respectively, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7,250,002.
On November 25, 2020, the company sold an additional 2,250,000 Units for total gross proceeds of $22,500,000 in connection with the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option. Simultaneously with the closing of the over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 728,925 private placement warrants to the sponsor and Jefferies LLC at $1.00 per private placement warrant and approximately $1.21 per private placement warrant, respectively, generating total proceeds of $787,500.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $175,087,500 was placed in the trust account, and we had $1,480,035 of cash held outside of the trust account, after payment of costs related to the initial public offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $10,050,665 in transaction costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees, $6,037,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $563,165 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $903,189. Net income of $5,598,086 was affected by change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,425,504 and interest earned on marketable investments held in trust account of $20,498. Changes in operating assets and liabilities, provided $2,944,727 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from August 20, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $327,906. Net loss of $7,798,760 was affected by formation costs paid by the Sponsor of $5,000, interest earned on marketable investments of $2,030, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,829,174, and transaction costs of $807,424. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $168,714 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $175,110,029. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $575,739 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until May 23, 2022 to consummate a business combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date and an extension not requested by the Sponsor, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after May 23, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Net (Loss) Income per Ordinary Share
Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective as of January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.