ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following information should be read in conjunction with our audited historical combined financial statements and related notes, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain percentages presented in this discussion and analysis are calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts and therefore may not recalculate from the rounded numbers used for disclosure purposes. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those factors discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” References in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “our audited historical combined financial statements,” “our combined financial statements” and similar expressions refer to the combined financial statements of the Spine and Dental Businesses of Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc., due to the fact that as of and during the periods presented in the financial statements, ZimVie was still a wholly-owned subsidiary of, and operated under those businesses of, Zimmer Biomet.
OVERVIEW
On February 5, 2021, Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc. (“Zimmer Biomet” or “Parent”) announced its intention to separate its spine and dental businesses from its core orthopedic businesses. ZimVie Inc. (“ZimVie,” “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”) was incorporated in the State of Delaware on July 30, 2021 as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Zimmer Biomet. We were formed solely for the purpose of effecting the distribution of 80.3% of our outstanding shares of common stock on a pro rata basis to holders of Zimmer Biomet common stock and to hold directly or indirectly the assets and liabilities associated with the spine and dental businesses of Zimmer Biomet prior to the distribution. The distribution was completed on March 1, 2022, and resulted in ZimVie becoming a standalone, publicly-traded company.
Our operations are principally managed on a products basis and include two segments: 1) the spine products segment and 2) the dental products segment.
In the spine products market, our core services include designing, manufacturing and distributing a full suite of spinal surgery solutions to treat patients with back or neck pain caused by degenerative conditions, deformities, tumors or traumatic injury of the spine. We also provide devices that promote bone healing.
In the dental products market, our core services include designing, manufacturing and distributing a comprehensive portfolio of dental implant solutions, biomaterials and digital dentistry solutions. Dental reconstructive implants are for individuals who are totally without teeth or are missing one or more teeth, dental prosthetic products are aimed at providing aesthetic and functional restoration to resemble the original teeth and dental regenerative products are for soft tissue and bone rehabilitation.
We have a broad geographic revenue base, with meaningful exposure to both established and emerging markets. We have six manufacturing site locations, and a global presence in approximately 25 countries.
Impact of the COVID-19 Global Pandemic
Our results have been impacted by the COVID-19 global pandemic. The vast majority of our net sales are derived from products used in elective surgical procedures. As COVID-19 rapidly started to spread throughout the world in early 2020, our net sales decreased as countries took precautions to prevent the spread of the virus with lockdowns and stay-at-home measures and as hospitals deferred elective surgical procedures. This resulted in a third-party net sales decline of 12% in 2020, as compared to 2019. Although we began to see some recovery of elective surgical procedures as various lockdowns and stay-at-home measures were lifted during 2021, resurgences and highly-transmissible variants resulted in further deferrals of elective surgical procedures in the second half of 2021. Overall, we experienced a third-party net sales increase of 12% in 2021, as compared to 2020.
Our business is seasonal in nature to some extent, as many of our products are used in elective procedures, which typically decline during the summer months and can increase at the end of the year once annual deductibles have been met on health insurance plans in the U.S. Due to the COVID-19 global pandemic, the typical seasonal patterns did not occur in 2021 or 2020.
With the deferral of elective surgical procedures, we have taken prudent measures in an effort to maintain an adequate financial profile to have access to capital to fund the business during these unprecedented times. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have temporarily reduced discretionary spending such as travel, meetings and other project spend that can be delayed with limited long-term detriment to the business, and we have temporarily suspended or limited production at certain manufacturing facilities. However, to date we have not experienced significant disruptions in our supply chain, or in our ability to meet our customer demands.
Cost Reductions
We reduced our selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses in 2020 when compared to previous years. The decline was driven by two primary factors: 1) a restructuring plan initiated by Zimmer Biomet in 2019 (the “2019 Restructuring Plan”) that reduced operating costs in areas such as headcount, and 2) lower travel, promotional, and selling expenses driven by COVID-19. The cost savings from the 2019 Restructuring Plan are expected to continue after the distribution. We expect travel, promotional, and selling expenses will increase as travel and conferences become safer due to vaccinations. However, we do not expect travel expenses to return to the same levels that existed prior to the pandemic, as we continue to better utilize technology that has made travel less necessary. Additionally, we expect increased corporate costs from becoming a standalone public entity.
2022 Outlook
We expect that to the extent surges related to COVID-19 continue in 2022 our net sales will be negatively impacted. While we are optimistic based on the vaccine rollout and current case numbers that elective surgical procedures will be able to return to pre-pandemic levels at some point during 2022, the consequences of COVID-19 continue to be fluid, and it is difficult to predict its continued and future impacts to our business and broader economic and market environments.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Net Sales by Product Category
The following tables present net sales by product category and the components of the percentage changes (dollars in millions):
Demand (Volume/Mix) Trends
Our business experienced growth over 2020 due to COVID-19 recovery. However, despite recovery from COVID-19 the spine product category continued to experience increased competition as observed in prior years. In the dental product category there has been increased demand for our digital dentistry and biomaterials products, creating growth year-over-year. As previously discussed, the demand for our products decreased significantly in 2020 as a result of COVID-19 due to lockdowns and stay-at-home measures and as hospitals and dental practices deferred elective surgical procedures. In 2019, the spine product category experienced increased competition in the key product areas of cervical and lumbar, which contributed to negative volume/mix trends. Within the dental product category, positive volume/mix trends reflect higher demand for tooth replacement procedures combined with the growing market segment of digital dentistry and biomaterials.
Pricing Trends
Our product categories have experienced price pressures in recent years, which we expect will continue. The spine product category decline has resulted from governmental healthcare cost containment efforts and similar efforts at local hospitals and health systems. The
dental product category has experienced price declines in certain, geographic regions. Europe and Asia Pacific have experienced larger price erosion due to premium implant competition, while pricing in North America has been more favorable.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
In countries where we have a subsidiary, we sell to customers in their local currencies. Accordingly, our net sales as reported in United States ("U.S.") Dollars are affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates. We are primarily exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk with respect to net sales denominated in Euros, Japanese Yen, Chinese Renminbi, Canadian Dollars, and Taiwan Dollars.
Expenses as a Percent of Net Sales
Cost of Products Sold and Intangible Asset Amortization
The increase in cost of products sold as a percentage of sales in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to expense of $40.3 million from excess and obsolete inventory, primarily related to certain product lines we intend to discontinue related to a brand rationalization initiative during the second half of 2021, as well as product mix.
The increase in cost of products sold as a percentage of sales in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to temporarily suspended or limited production at certain facilities, lower average selling prices and excess and obsolete inventory charges. The temporary suspension or limited production at certain manufacturing facilities due to lower demand from COVID-19 resulted in us immediately expensing certain fixed overhead costs and hourly production worker labor expenses that are included in the cost of inventory when these facilities are operating at normal capacity. Excess and obsolete inventory charges did not decline ratably with the significant decline in our net sales and therefore impacted our cost of products sold as a percentage of sales.
Intangible asset amortization as a percentage of net sales decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to amortization expense not increasing ratably with the significant increase in our net sales. Intangible asset amortization as a percentage of net sales increased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to acquisitions made in 2020 and amortization expense not declining ratably with the significant decline in our net sales.
Operating Expenses
Research and development ("R&D") expenses as a percentage of net sales increased from 2019 to 2021. R&D expenses increased in terms of dollars in 2021 compared to 2020, as we continued to focus on innovation of key product segments. R&D expenses in terms of dollars decreased in 2020 due to the 2019 Restructuring Plan and lower spending on travel and projects due to COVID-19. Our R&D investments are focused on implant innovation and the next generation of flagship implant products of T3 and Tapered Screw Vent in the dental product category and Mobi-C and The Tether device in the spine product category.
SG&A expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020, but decreased as a percentage of net sales. SG&A expenses increased primarily due to higher variable selling and distribution expenses from the increase in our net sales, travel increases and other projects. The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales was due to various fixed expenses that did not increase ratably with the significant increase in our net sales in 2021.
SG&A expenses decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, but increased as a percentage of net sales. SG&A expenses decreased due to lower variable selling and distribution expenses from the decline in our net sales, COVID-19 cost reductions for travel, consulting and other projects, savings from the 2019 Restructuring Plan and lower allocated charges related to compliance remediation efforts from Zimmer Biomet’s former Deferred Prosecution Agreement ("DPA"). The increase in SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales was due to various fixed expenses that did not decline ratably with the significant decline in our net sales from COVID-19.
In 2020, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $142.0 million related to our Dental reporting unit. For more information regarding this charge, see Note 11 to our combined financial statements.
Restructuring expense is related to Zimmer Biomet's 2019 Restructuring Plan instituted in the fourth quarter of 2019 with an overall objective of reducing costs to allow investment in higher priority growth opportunities. We recognized expenses of $3.3 million, $9.7 million and $1.8 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily related to employee termination benefits, contract terminations and retention period compensation and benefits. For more information regarding these expenses, see Note 4 to our combined financial statements.
Acquisition, integration, divestiture and related expenses increased in 2021 due to the increased costs related to the March 1, 2022 distribution. These costs continue into 2022 as the transaction was not complete by December 31, 2021. Acquisition, integration, divestiture and related expenses declined in 2020 compared to 2019 due to integration costs still being incurred in 2019 associated with significant acquisitions related to our spine business in 2016 and 2015.
Other Income (Expense), net, Interest Expense, net, and Income Taxes
Our non-operating other income (expense), net, primarily relates to the remeasurement of monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in a currency other than the subsidiary’s functional currency. Therefore, the income or expense varies from year-to-year based upon the volatility of foreign currency exchange rates.
Our interest expense, net, was related to debt due to parent and was insignificant in the periods presented.
Our effective tax rate (“ETR”) on loss before income taxes was 6.0%, 19.1% and (0.1%) for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2021, the reduction in income tax benefit compared to the 21% statutory rate was driven by an increase in valuation allowances against current year net operating losses and foreign tax credits. In 2020, the income tax benefit was driven by reduced uncertain tax positions related to expiration of statutes of limitations, offset by a non-deductible goodwill impairment charge which resulted in a loss before taxes, but had no corresponding tax benefit. In 2019, the provision was primarily driven by certain discrete activities and intercompany restructuring activities.
Our ETR in future periods could also potentially be impacted by: changes in our mix of pre-tax earnings; changes in tax rates, tax laws or their interpretation; the outcome of various federal, state and foreign audits; and the expiration of certain statutes of limitations. Currently, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact of these items on our financial results.
Segment Operating Profit
In 2021, both our segments' net sales grew from 2020 primarily due to increased procedure volumes as a result of fewer COVID-19 restrictions. In 2020, both our segments net sales and operating profit were significantly impacted by COVID-19 causing deferrals of elective surgical procedures. In our spine business, despite lower sales in 2019, our operating profit increased, driven by lower excess and obsolete inventory charges. In our dental business, our operating profit declined in 2019 as we made investments into our commercial organization that we believe will drive future net sales.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, we had $100.4 million in cash and cash equivalents. On a standalone basis, we had no direct third-party borrowings as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. We have historically participated in Zimmer Biomet's centralized approach to treasury, including financing and cash management activities. Under this centralized approach, cash management is performed through cash
pooling arrangements. Certain of our entities had standalone cash accounts that were not included in the centralized cash pooling arrangement. All cash balances specifically identifiable to us are included in the combined balance sheets and statement of cash flows. Cash flows presented in these combined statements of cash flows may not be indicative of the cash flows we would have recognized had we operated as an independent, publicly traded company for the periods presented.
Sources of Liquidity
Cash flows provided by operating activities were $64.3 million in 2021 compared to $86.0 million and $119.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have been able to generate positive operating cash flows despite our reported net losses, because the losses have been driven primarily by significant non-cash expenses such as goodwill impairment, intangible asset amortization and depreciation. Operating cash flows decreased in 2021 from 2020 primarily due to additional SG&A costs, a reduction in our tax benefit and an increase in cash from inventory and receivables. The decline in cash flows from operating activities in 2020 from 2019 was primarily the result of COVID-19 reducing our cash inflows due to lower net sales while we continued to pay many fixed operating costs. Additionally, in 2020 we terminated our accounts receivable purchase arrangements in the U.S. and Japan.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $60.3 million in 2021 compared to $49.5 million and $84.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Instrument and property, plant and equipment additions reflected ongoing investments in our product portfolio and optimization of our manufacturing and logistics network. In order to preserve cash due to the significant effects COVID-19 had on our business, we prioritized certain investments in 2020 that resulted in lower overall investments. As further discussed in Note 10 to our combined financial statements, we made various acquisitions in 2020 and 2019 that resulted in cash outflows from investing activities.
Cash flows provided by financing activities were $72.3 million in 2021 compared to cash flows used in financing activities of $46.5 million and $43.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. As further discussed in Note 18 to our combined financial statements, the primary use of cash from financing activities was related to transactions with Zimmer Biomet.
Post-Distribution Liquidity and Capital Resources
Subsequent to the distribution, we no longer participate in the centralized treasury management of Zimmer Biomet. Our ability to fund our operations and capital needs depends upon our ability to generate ongoing cash from operations and to access the capital markets. Our principal uses of cash in the future will be primarily to fund our operations, working capital needs, capital expenditures, repayment of borrowings and strategic business development transactions.
On February 28, 2022 we borrowed $595.0 million of available term loan borrowings and on March 1, 2022, we repaid $34.0 million of the term loan borrowing. Approximately $540.6 million of the proceeds from such borrowing was transferred to Zimmer Biomet. We will make principal and interest payments on the term loan borrowings quarterly. For additional information regarding our current debt arrangements, including the term loan amortization schedule, see Note 13 to our combined financial statements. We believe that future cash from operations will provide us the opportunity to enter into financing arrangements and access capital markets to provide adequate resources to fund our future cash flow needs, but we cannot assure you that we will be able to enter into such arrangements or transactions on satisfactory terms or at all.
MATERIAL CASH REQUIREMENTS
We have entered into contracts with various third parties in the normal course of business that will require future payments. The following table illustrates our contractual obligations and certain other commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in millions):
(1)While there was not a contractual obligation at December 31, 2021 we subsequently borrowed under a term loan with a resulting outstanding balance of $561.0 million that accrues interest at a variable rate. The term loan has an initial five-year term. See Note 13 to our combined financial statements for additional information on our debt arrangements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements is affected by the selection and application of accounting policies and methods, and also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Critical accounting estimates are those that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the accounting estimates and assumptions described below involve significant subjectivity and judgment, and changes to such estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on our financial condition or operating results.
Excess Inventory and Instruments
We must determine as of each balance sheet date how much, if any, of our inventory may ultimately prove to be unsaleable or unsaleable at our carrying cost. Similarly, we must also determine if instruments on hand will be put to productive use or remain undeployed as a result of excess supply. Accordingly, inventory and instruments are written down to their net realizable value. To determine the appropriate net realizable value, we evaluate current stock levels in relation to historical and expected patterns of demand for all of our products and instrument systems and components. The basis for the determination is generally the same for all inventory and instrument items and categories except for work-in-process inventory, which is recorded at cost. Obsolete or discontinued items are generally destroyed and completely written off. Management evaluates the need for changes to the net realizable values of inventory and instruments based on market conditions, competitive offerings and other factors on a regular basis.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining income tax expense.
We estimate income tax expense and income tax liabilities and assets by taxable jurisdiction. Realization of deferred tax assets in each taxable jurisdiction is dependent on our ability to generate future taxable income sufficient to realize the benefits. We evaluate deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis and provide valuation allowances unless we determine it is “more likely than not” that the deferred tax benefit will be realized.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. We are subject to regulatory review or audit in virtually all of those jurisdictions and those reviews and audits may require extended periods of time to resolve. We record our income tax provisions based on our knowledge of all relevant facts and circumstances, including existing tax laws, our experience with previous settlement agreements, the status of current examinations and our understanding of how the tax authorities view certain relevant industry and commercial matters.
We recognize tax liabilities in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board guidance on income taxes, and we adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences are reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined.
Commitments and Contingencies
We are involved in various ongoing proceedings, legal actions and claims arising in the normal course of doing business, including litigation related to products, labor and intellectual property. We establish liabilities for loss contingencies when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Accruals for product liability and other claims are established with the assistance of internal and external legal counsel based on current information and historical settlement information for claims, related legal fees and for claims incurred but not reported.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not below its carrying amount. We evaluate the carrying value of finite life intangible assets whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Significant assumptions are required to estimate the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets, most notably estimated future cash flows generated by these assets and risk-adjusted discount
rates. As such, these fair value measurements use significant unobservable inputs. Changes to these assumptions could require us to record impairment charges on these assets.
We recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $142.0 million related to the Dental reporting unit in the year ended December 31, 2020.
In our annual impairment test in the fourth quarter of 2021, the Dental reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by more than 20 percent. Fair value of the goodwill was determined using income and market approaches. Fair value under the income approach was determined by discounting to present value the estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit. Significant assumptions are incorporated into the income approach, such as estimated revenue growth rates, forecasted operating expenses and a risk-adjusted discount rate. Fair value under the market approach utilized the guideline public company methodology, which uses valuation indicators determined from other businesses that are similar to our reporting unit.
Future impairment in the Dental reporting unit could occur if the estimates used in the income and market approaches change. If our estimates of profitability in the reporting unit decline, the fair value estimate under the income approach will decline. Additionally, changes in the broader economic environment could cause changes to our estimated discount rate and comparable company valuation indicators, which may impact the estimated fair value. Further, changes in foreign currency exchange rates could increase the cost of procuring inventory and services from foreign suppliers, which could reduce reporting unit profitability.
Corporate Allocations
We historically operated as part of Zimmer Biomet and not as a separate, publicly traded company. Accordingly, certain shared costs have been allocated to us and are reflected as expenses in the accompanying combined statements of operations. Management considers the expense methodology and resulting allocation to be reasonable for all periods presented; however, the allocations may not be indicative of actual expenses that would have been incurred had we operated as an independent, publicly traded company for the periods presented. Actual costs that we may have incurred had we been a standalone company would depend on a number of factors, including the chosen organizational structure, whether functions were outsourced or performed by our employees and strategic decisions made in areas such as manufacturing, selling and marketing, R&D, information technology and infrastructure.
ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS
See Note 2 to our combined financial statements for information on how recent accounting pronouncements have affected or may affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.