ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
GAAP to NON-GAAP RECONCILIATIONS
This Form 10-K presents non-GAAP financial measures, in addition to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) financial measures, to provide investors with additional information. The adjustments to reconcile from the applicable GAAP financial measures to the non-GAAP financial measures are presented in the following schedules. We consider these adjustments to be relevant to ongoing operating results as they provide a basis for period-to-period and company-to-company comparisons. We use these non-GAAP financial measures to assess our performance, financial position, and for presentations of our performance to investors. We believe that presenting these non-GAAP financial measures permits investors to assess our performance on the same basis as that applied by management.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations and are not necessarily comparable to similar measures that may be presented by other financial services companies. Although non-GAAP financial measures are frequently used by stakeholders to evaluate a company, they have limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of results reported under GAAP.
Tangible Common Equity and Related Measures
Tangible common equity and related measures are non-GAAP measures that exclude the impact of intangible assets. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information about our use of shareholders’ equity and provide a basis for evaluating the performance of a company more consistently, whether acquired or developed internally.
Schedule 2
RETURN ON AVERAGE TANGIBLE COMMON EQUITY (NON-GAAP)
Schedule 3
TANGIBLE EQUITY RATIO, TANGIBLE COMMON EQUITY RATIO, AND TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE PER COMMON SHARE (ALL NON-GAAP MEASURES)
Efficiency Ratio and Adjusted Pre-Provision Net Revenue
The efficiency ratio is a measure of operating expense relative to revenue. We believe the efficiency ratio provides useful information regarding the cost of generating revenue. The methodology for determining the efficiency ratio may differ among companies. We make adjustments to exclude certain items that are not generally expected to recur frequently, as identified in the subsequent schedule, which we believe allow for more consistent comparability across periods. Adjusted noninterest expense provides a measure as to how well we are managing our expenses; adjusted pre-provision net revenue (“PPNR”) enables management and others to assess our ability to generate capital to cover credit losses through a credit cycle. Taxable-equivalent net interest income allows us to assess the comparability of revenue arising from both taxable and tax-exempt sources.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 4
EFFICIENCY RATIO (NON-GAAP) AND ADJUSTED PRE-PROVISION NET REVENUE (NON-GAAP)
1 Represents the expense incurred to terminate our defined benefit pension plan during the second quarter of 2020, and a subsequent refund received during the first quarter of 2021.
2 The success fee accrual is associated with the gains/(losses) from our SBIC investments. The gains/(losses) related to these investments are excluded from the efficiency ratio through securities gains, net.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Key Corporate Objectives
We conduct our operations through seven separately managed affiliates, each with its own local branding and management team. We focus our efforts and resources to maintain a competitive advantage and to achieve our desired growth objectives. In particular, we are strategically focused on four growth areas: small businesses, mid-sized commercial businesses, affluent customers, and capital markets. The graphic below illustrates these key corporate objectives.
We strive to achieve balanced growth of customers, PPNR, and earnings per share (“EPS”). Our incentive compensation plans are designed to support our growth objectives, as disclosed in our proxy statements. To facilitate the achievement of these objectives, we invest in the following five key areas, referred to as “strategic enablers”:
•Risk Management - we invest in enhanced risk management practices to ensure prudent risk taking and appropriate oversight.
•People and Empowerment - we invest in training our employees and providing them the tools and resources to build their capabilities, while promoting a diverse, inclusive, and equitable culture.
•Technology - we invest in technologies that will make us more efficient and enable us to remain competitive while helping to insulate us from the risks of bank-disrupting technology companies.
•Operational Excellence - we invest in and support ongoing improvements in how we safely and securely deliver value to our customers.
•Data and Analytics - we invest in advanced enterprise data and analytics to support local execution and prudent decision-making.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Navigating Through the Ongoing Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact our operations throughout 2021, though its effects varied compared with the prior year.
•During 2020, credit concerns were high given the significant uncertainty of the depth and duration of the pandemic and the related shut-downs, which resulted in a significant increase in the allowance for credit losses. However, with strong government stimulus and the development of vaccines and treatments, consumer and business spending rebounded in 2021. As such, credit concerns abated significantly during 2021, resulting in significant releases of the credit loss reserves we added in 2020.
•Since the beginning of the pandemic, we funded $10.2 billion of Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans ($2.9 billion in 2021 and $7.3 billion in 2020) for approximately 77,000 customers, positively impacting loan balances and interest income. We ranked as the 10th largest originator of PPP loans by dollar volume of all the participating financial institutions, as disclosed by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). In 2021, we continued to strengthen our relationships with more than 20,000 new-to-bank PPP customers, which resulted in additional revenue generating services. Total interest income from PPP loans during 2021 was $235 million, of which $138 million was related to accelerated recognition of net unamortized deferred fees on $6.5 billion of PPP loans forgiven by the SBA.
•Demand for loans softened considerably in 2020 as a result of increased uncertainty and reduced economic activity. Loan attrition continued in 2021, but reversed course during the latter half of the year. Excluding PPP, loan growth in the fourth quarter of 2021 was robust, reflecting one of our strongest growth rates in recent years.
•As with the prior year, we assisted our employees in adapting to a work-from-home environment, where applicable, to help limit the spread of COVID-19, by modifying operating hours, limiting lobby visits, and requiring masks, to help keep our employees and communities safe.
•The domestic money supply, as measured by the Federal Reserve, increased significantly in 2021. This increase, together with our ongoing efforts to deepen relationships with customers, positively affected our deposit growth.
•As 2021 progressed, we experienced elevated turnover rates in some of our entry-level jobs and found it increasingly difficult to fill employment vacancies, a challenge faced by many companies. In response, we have adjusted both cash and non-cash compensation and benefits to stem the turnover, which has generally normalized.
Our Financial Performance
This section and other sections provide information about our recent financial performance. For information about our results of operations for 2020 compared with 2019, see the respective sections in MD&A included in our 2020 Form 10-K.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Relative to 2020, our financial performance for 2021 reflects:
•Stable net interest income, driven largely by significant increases in average interest-earning assets. Growth in these assets contributed to compression in the net interest margin (“NIM”), given an increased concentration in lower-yielding assets, and the low interest rate environment.
•Significant growth of $11.1 billion, or 16%, in average interest-earning assets, and an increase of $12.6 billion, or 20%, in average total deposits. This deposit growth funded increases of $8.0 billion and $4.2 billion in average money market investments and average investment securities, respectively. We actively managed our balance sheet in view of the low interest rate environment, and evaluated opportunities to deploy excess liquidity into short-to-medium duration assets. We balanced competing objectives of increasing income, maintaining asset sensitivity to benefit from rising rates, maintaining sufficient liquidity for changes in deposit trends, and supporting loan growth.
•A $129 million, or 22%, increase in total noninterest income. Increases in customer-related fees were primarily due to improved customer transaction volume, new client activity, and deepening of existing client relationships, specifically resulting in the growth of card, commercial account, and wealth management fees. Increases in noncustomer-related revenue were driven largely by net securities gains related to our Small Business Investment Company (“SBIC”) investment portfolio.
•An increase of $37 million, or 2%, in noninterest expense, arising from inflationary and competitive labor pressures on wages and higher profit sharing expense, as well as increases in professional and legal services expenses, mainly due to various technology-related and other outsourced services associated with ongoing investments in our core technology systems.
•Strong credit performance. Net loan and lease charge-offs were $6 million, or 0.01% of average loans (ex-PPP), in 2021, compared with net charge-offs of $105 million, or 0.22% of average loans (ex-PPP), in the prior year. The provision for credit losses was a negative $276 million in 2021, compared with a positive $414 million in 2020, reflecting improvements in economic forecasts, loan portfolio changes, and strong credit quality.
•A decrease of $2.6 billion, or 5%, in total loans and leases, due to the forgiveness of PPP loans and a decline in 1-4 family residential mortgage loans. Excluding PPP loans, total loans and leases increased $1.1 billion, or 2%, reflecting improving loan growth trends during the second half of 2021.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
The result of the items discussed above yielded a 118% increase in net earnings applicable to common shareholders and a 125% increase in earnings per diluted share from the prior year.
The following schedule presents additional selected financial highlights. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation, where applicable.
Schedule 5
SELECTED FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS 1
1This table includes certain non-GAAP measures. See “GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations” on page 22 for more information.
2The common dividend payout ratio is equal to common dividends paid divided by net earnings applicable to common shareholders.
3 This ratio is the common dividends paid plus share repurchases for the year, divided by net earnings applicable to common shareholders.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin
Net interest income is the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities and is approximately 76% of our net revenue (net interest income plus noninterest income) for the year. The NIM is derived from both the amount of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and their respective yields and rates.
Schedule 6
NET INTEREST INCOME AND NET INTEREST MARGIN
1 Rates are calculated using amounts in thousands and a tax rate of 21% for the periods presented.
Net interest income remained relatively stable at $2.2 billion in 2021, relative to the prior year, and was driven largely by a significant increase in average interest-earning assets. Growth in these assets had a dilutive effect on the NIM, given an increased concentration in lower-yielding assets and the low interest rate environment.
Average interest-earning assets increased $11.1 billion, or 16%, driven by growth in average money market investments and investment securities. These increases were partially offset by declines in consumer mortgage loans. Average money market investments, including short-term deposits held at the Federal Reserve, increased to 13.4% of average interest-earning assets, compared with 4.3%. Average securities increased to 23.3% of average interest-earning assets, compared with 21.1%, as we have actively deployed excess liquidity into short-to-medium duration assets.
The NIM was 2.72%, compared with 3.15%. The yield on average interest-earning assets was 2.79% in 2021, a decrease of 58 basis points (“bps”). The yield on total loans decreased 13 bps to 3.76%, compared with 3.89%. Excluding PPP loans, the yield on loans decreased 33 bps. The yield on securities decreased 42 bps, primarily due to lower yields on re-investment of principal payments and other purchases throughout 2021.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Average loans and leases decreased $1.0 billion, or 2%, from $53.0 billion in 2020, primarily due to a decrease in 1-4 family residential mortgage loans. The decline in our mortgage loan portfolio is partly due to the low interest rate environment and refinancing activity. We generally originate residential mortgage loans and sell them to government-sponsored entities as part of our interest rate risk management efforts to limit our balance sheet exposure to long-term assets.
Since early 2020, we provided assistance to many small businesses through the SBA PPP and originated a total of $10.2 billion in PPP loans. During 2021 and 2020, PPP loans totaling $6.5 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively, were forgiven by the SBA. The yield on these loans was 5.16% and 3.22% for 2021 and 2020, respectively, and was positively impacted by accelerated amortization of deferred fees on paid off or forgiven PPP loans of $138 million and $26 million. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the remaining unamortized net origination fees on these loans totaled $45 million and $102 million, respectively.
Average total deposits increased $12.6 billion to $76.3 billion at an average cost of 0.04% in 2021, from $63.7 billion at an average cost of 0.17% in 2020. Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $2.5 billion, or 7%, and the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities decreased 26 bps to 0.14%. The rate paid on total deposits and interest-bearing liabilities was 0.07%, a significant decrease from 0.22% during 2020, which was primarily due to low interest-bearing deposit rates and strong noninterest-bearing deposit growth.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Average available-for-sale (“AFS”) securities balances increased $4.2 billion, or 29%, in 2021, from $14.2 billion in 2020, mainly due to an increase in our mortgage-backed securities portfolio.
Average borrowed funds decreased $1.4 billion in 2021, with average short-term borrowings decreasing $1.1 billion, and average long-term borrowings decreasing $0.3 billion. The average rate paid on short-term borrowings decreased 45 bps; the rate paid on long-term debt decreased 9 bps from the prior year, primarily due to senior debt that matured during 2021. We continued to rely less on borrowed funds due to strong deposit growth during the year.
Refer to the “Interest Rate and Market Risk Management” section on page 57 for more information on how we manage interest rate risk, and the “Liquidity Risk Management” section beginning on page 62 for more information on how we manage liquidity risk.
The following schedule summarizes the average balances, the amount of interest earned or paid, and the applicable yields for interest-earning assets and the costs of interest-bearing liabilities.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 7 - AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS, YIELDS, AND RATES
1 Rates are calculated using amounts in thousands and tax rates of 21% for 2021, 2020, 2019 and 2018, and 35% for 2017. The taxable-equivalent rates used are the rates that were applicable at the time of each respective reporting period.
2 Interest on total securities included $118 million and $111 million of taxable-equivalent premium amortization for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
3 Net of unearned income and fees, net of related costs. Loans include nonaccrual and restructured loans.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
The following schedule presents year-to-year changes in net interest income on a fully taxable-equivalent basis for the years indicated. For purposes of calculating the yields in this schedule, the average loan balances also include the principal amounts of nonaccrual and restructured loans. Interest payments received on nonaccrual loans are not recognized into interest income, but are applied as a reduction to the principal outstanding. In addition, interest on restructured loans is generally accrued at modified rates.
In the analysis of taxable-equivalent net interest income changes due to volume and rate, changes are allocated to volume with the following exceptions: when volume and rate both increase, the variance is allocated proportionately to both volume and rate; when the rate increases and volume decreases, the variance is allocated to rate.
Schedule 8
ANALYSIS OF TAXABLE-EQUIVALENT NET INTEREST INCOME CHANGES DUE TO VOLUME AND RATE
1 Taxable-equivalent rates used where applicable.
2 Net of unearned income and fees, net of related costs. Loans include nonaccrual and restructured loans.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Provision for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) is the combination of both the allowance for loan and lease losses (“ALLL”) and the reserve for unfunded lending commitments (“RULC”). The ALLL represents the estimated current expected credit losses related to the loan and lease portfolio as of the balance sheet date. The RULC represents the estimated reserve for current expected credit losses associated with off-balance sheet commitments. Changes in the ALLL and RULC, net of charge-offs and recoveries, are recorded as the provision for loan and lease losses and the provision for unfunded lending commitments, respectively, in the income statement. The ACL for debt securities is estimated separately from loans.
On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, and its subsequent updates, often referred to as the Current Expected Credit Loss (“CECL”) model. Upon adoption of this ASU, we recorded the full amount of the ACL for loans and leases of $526 million, resulting in an after-tax increase to retained earnings of $20 million. The impact of the adoption of CECL for our securities portfolio was less than $1 million. As a result of the CECL accounting standard, the ACL is subject to economic forecasts that may change materially from period to period.
The provision for credit losses, which is the combination of both the provision for loan losses and the provision for unfunded lending commitments, was a negative $276 million in 2021, compared with a positive $414 million in 2020. The ACL decreased $282 million to $553 million at December 31, 2021. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases (ex-PPP) at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 1.13% and 1.74%, respectively. The provision for security losses was less than $1 million during 2021 and 2020.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
The ACL was $553 million at December 31, 2021, compared with $835 million at December 31, 2020. The bar chart above shows the broad categories of change in the ACL from the prior year period. The second bar represents changes in economic forecasts and current economic conditions, which decreased the ACL by $220 million from the prior year due to improvements in both realized economic results and economic forecasts, compared with the economic stress caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, and was partially offset by the expected impact of the resurgence of COVID-19 cases resulting from the Omicron variant.
The third bar represents changes in credit quality factors and includes risk-grade migration and specific reserves against loans, which, when combined, decreased the ACL by $25 million, indicating significant improvements in credit quality. Net loan and lease charge-offs were $6 million, or 0.01% of average loans (ex-PPP) in 2021, compared with $105 million, or 0.22% of average loans (ex-PPP) in the prior year, reflecting strong credit performance.
The fourth bar represents loan portfolio changes, driven by changes in portfolio mix, the aging of the portfolio, and other risk factors; all of which resulted in a $37 million reduction in the ACL. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on how we determine the appropriate level of the ALLL and the RULC.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income represents revenue we earn from products and services that generally have no associated interest rate or yield and is classified as either customer-related fees or noncustomer-related revenue. Customer-related fees exclude items such as securities gains and losses, dividends, insurance-related income, and mark-to-market adjustments on certain derivatives.
Total noninterest income increased $129 million, or 22%, in 2021. Noninterest income accounted for 24% and 21% of net revenue during 2021 and 2020, respectively. The following schedule presents a comparison of the major components of noninterest income.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 9
NONINTEREST INCOME
1 Wealth management fees for 2020 and 2019 included certain retirement service-related fees of $3 million in both periods. Beginning in 2021, those fees, which totaled $4 million, were reported in other customer-related fees.
Customer-related Fees
Customer-related fee income growth is a result of our focus on our key corporate objectives. By providing high-quality treasury management products, wealth management advisory services, and capital market solutions, we seek to deepen existing relationships with our commercial and small business customers.
Total customer-related fees increased $26 million, or 5%, in 2021, largely driven by improved customer transaction volume and new client activity during the year, compared with the more-stressed economic activity impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year.
Key drivers impacting customer-related fees include:
•Card fees increased $13 million, or 16%, in 2021, due to increased economic activity and transaction volume. Commercial account fees increased $9 million or 7%, for similar reasons.
•Wealth management fee income increased $6 million, or 14%, resulting from continued growth in assets and further adoption of wealth and advisory services from our customer base. Consequently, our assets under management increased $2.3 billion, or 26%, to $11.0 billion at December 31, 2021, which included meaningful increases in net new assets.
•Loan-related fees and income decreased $14 million or 13%, in 2021, primarily due to a decline in mortgage banking income, particularly lower margins on loan sales.
•Capital markets and foreign exchange income decreased $4 million, or 5%, primarily due to reduced interest rate swap sales. During the prior year, as a result of the low interest rate environment, many commercial customers purchased interest rate swaps from us to effectively fix the interest rate on their variable-rate loans. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in loan syndication fees.
Noncustomer-related Revenue
Total noncustomer-related revenue increased $103 million in 2021, primarily due to a $64 million increase in net securities gains and losses, which was largely driven by net gains related to our SBIC investment portfolio. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we recognized a $31 million realized gain resulting from the sale of one of our SBIC investments. During 2021, we also recognized a net $23 million unrealized gain related to our investment in Recursion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which completed an initial public offering (“IPO”) in the second quarter of 2021.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Fair value and nonhedge derivative income increased $20 million, due to recognized net gains related to credit valuation adjustments (“CVA”) on client-related interest rate swaps, compared with net CVA losses in the prior year period. The CVA may fluctuate from period to period based on the credit quality of our clients and changes in interest rates, which impact the value of, and our credit exposure to, the client-related interest rate swaps.
Dividends and other income increased $19 million, or 79%, primarily due to a $12 million gain on sale of certain bank-owned facilities during 2021. These sales related to the consolidation of a substantial portion of our technology and operations facilities in advance of occupying our new Corporate Technology Center, which is expected to be completed in mid-2022.
Noninterest Expense
The following schedule presents a comparison of the major components of noninterest expense.
Schedule 10
NONINTEREST EXPENSE
Noninterest expense increased $37 million, or 2%, in 2021, relative to the prior year, primarily due to salaries and benefits expense, which represented the largest component, or 65% and 64%, of total noninterest expense during the same time periods, respectively. The following schedule presents detail of the major segments of salaries and employee benefits expense.
Schedule 11
SALARIES AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Salaries and benefits expense increased $40 million, or 4%, primarily due to inflationary and competitive labor pressures on wages and higher profit sharing expense as a result of improved profitability. We had 9,685 full-time equivalent employees at December 31, 2021, which remained relatively flat when compared with the prior year. We believe that inflation and the competitive labor market may continue to impact our salaries and benefits expense.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Professional and legal services expense increased $16 million, or 31%, mainly due to various technology-related and other outsourced services related to our ongoing investment in our core technology systems.
Other noninterest expense decreased $24 million, or 10%, primarily due to higher expenses in the prior year, including a $30 million charitable contribution (compared with $10 million in 2021) and a $28 million pension termination-related expense in 2020. The decrease in expense was partially offset by an increase of $14 million in software licenses and maintenance and a $7 million increase in success fee accruals associated with net gains on our SBIC investments in 2021.
Adjusted noninterest expense increased $64 million, or 4%, primarily due to the increases in noninterest expense previously discussed. The efficiency ratio was 60.8%, compared with 59.4%. For information on non-GAAP financial measures, including differences between noninterest expense and adjusted noninterest expense, see page 22.
Income Taxes
The following schedule summarizes the income tax expense and effective tax rates for the periods presented.
Schedule 12
INCOME TAXES
The income tax rates for the tax years presented above were reduced by nontaxable municipal interest income and nontaxable income from certain bank-owned life insurance (“BOLI”), and were increased by the nondeductibility of FDIC premiums, certain executive compensation, and other fringe benefits. The tax rate for 2020 was also reduced as a result of the proportional increase in nontaxable items and tax credits relative to pretax book income, as compared with 2021 and 2019. Our investments in technology initiatives, low-income housing, and municipal securities during 2021, 2020, and 2019, generated tax credits and nontaxable income that benefited the tax rate for each respective year.
We had a net deferred tax asset (“DTA”) of $96 million at December 31, 2021, compared with a net deferred tax liability (“DTL”) of $3 million at December 31, 2020. The increase to a DTA from a DTL resulted primarily from an increase in unrealized losses in accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) associated with investment securities and the capitalization of expenses related to intangible assets, and was partially offset by significant negative provisions for credit losses during 2021.
We had no valuation allowance at December 31, 2021. See Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about the factors that impacted our effective tax rate, significant components of our DTAs and DTLs, and our assessment of any potential additional valuation allowances.
Preferred Stock Dividends
Preferred stock dividends totaled $29 million in 2021, and $34 million in both 2020 and 2019. The decrease in preferred dividends was due to the redemption of the outstanding shares of our Series H preferred stock during the second quarter of 2021. See further details in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
BUSINESS SEGMENT RESULTS
We manage our operations through seven affiliate banks located in different geographic markets, each with its own local branding and management team. These affiliate banks comprise our primary business segments and include: Zions Bank, Amegy Bank (“Amegy”), California Bank & Trust (“CB&T”), National Bank of Arizona (“NBAZ”), Nevada State Bank (“NSB”), Vectra Bank Colorado (“Vectra”), and The Commerce Bank of Washington (“TCBW”). In maintaining alignment with our key corporate objectives, we emphasize local authority, responsibility, and pricing, with customization of certain products (as applicable) to maximize customer satisfaction and strengthen community relations.
We allocate the cost of centrally provided services to the business segments based upon estimated or actual usage of those services. We also allocate capital based on the risk-weighted assets held at each business segment. We use an internal Funds Transfer Pricing (“FTP”) allocation process to report results of operations for business segments. This process is continually refined. Where applicable, prior period amounts have been revised to reflect the impact of these changes had they been instituted for the periods presented. See Note 22 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our FTP allocations, the Other segment, and more performance information including net interest income, noninterest income, and noninterest expense by segment.
The following schedule summarizes selected financial information of our business segments. Ratios are calculated based on amounts in thousands.
Schedule 13
SELECTED SEGMENT INFORMATION
Zions Bank
Zions Bank is headquartered in Salt Lake City, Utah, and conducts operations in Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the second largest full-service commercial bank in Utah and the seventh largest in Idaho, as measured by domestic deposits in these states.
Zions Bank’s income before income taxes increased $86 million, or 29%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $93 million decrease in the provision for credit losses, and a $27 million increase in noninterest income, partially offset by an $18 million increase in noninterest expense. The loan portfolio decreased $981 million during 2021, which consisted of decreases of $897 million and $108 million in commercial and CRE loans, respectively, partially offset by an increase of $24 million in consumer loans. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 1.08% at December 31, 2021, compared with 1.21%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $8 million, or 8%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 25% in 2021.
Amegy Bank
Amegy Bank is headquartered in Houston, Texas. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the ninth largest full-service commercial bank in Texas as measured by domestic deposits in the state.
Amegy’s income before income taxes increased $185 million, or 104%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $207 million decrease in the provision for credit losses, and an $8 million increase in noninterest income, partially offset by an $8 million increase in noninterest expense. The loan portfolio decreased $998 million during 2021, which consisted of decreases of $471 million, $427 million, and $100 million, in commercial, consumer, and CRE loans, respectively. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 1.05% at December 31, 2021,
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
compared with 1.60%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $41 million, or 31%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 18% in 2021.
California Bank & Trust
California Bank & Trust is headquartered in San Diego, California. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the 17th largest full-service commercial bank in California as measured by domestic deposits in the state.
CB&T’s income before income taxes increased $224 million, or 123%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $198 million decrease in the provision for credit losses, and a $7 million increase in noninterest income, partially offset by a $6 million increase in noninterest expense. The loan portfolio increased $22 million during 2021, which consisted of increases of $242 million and $10 million in CRE and consumer loans, respectively, and a decrease of $230 million in commercial loans. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 0.70% at December 31, 2021, compared with 1.28%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $15 million, or 27%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 11% in 2021.
National Bank of Arizona
National Bank of Arizona is headquartered in Phoenix, Arizona. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the fifth largest full-service commercial bank in Arizona as measured by domestic deposits in the state.
NBAZ’s income before income taxes increased $52 million, or 69%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $62 million decrease in the provision for credit losses, and a $5 million increase in noninterest income, partially offset by an increase of $4 million in noninterest expense. The loan portfolio decreased $438 million during 2021, which consisted of decreases of $291 million, $104 million, and $43 million, in commercial, consumer, and CRE loans, respectively. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 0.78% at December 31, 2021, compared with 1.18%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $6 million, or 35%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 26% in 2021.
Nevada State Bank
Nevada State Bank is headquartered in Las Vegas, Nevada. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the sixth largest full-service commercial bank in Nevada as measured by domestic deposits in the state.
NSB’s income before income taxes increased $79 million, or 718%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $72 million decrease in the provision for credit losses, and an increase of $7 million in noninterest income, partially offset by an increase of $1 million in noninterest expense. The loan portfolio decreased $415 million during 2021, which consisted of decreases of $394 million and $59 million in commercial and consumer loans, respectively, partially offset by an increase of $38 million in CRE loans. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 0.86% at December 31, 2021, compared with 1.90%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $16 million, or 40%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 27% in 2021.
On February 11, 2022, NSB announced that it has entered into an agreement to purchase three Northern Nevada branches and their associated deposit, credit card, and loan accounts. In addition to the three branches, the purchase includes approximately $480 million in deposits and $110 million in commercial and consumer loans. The transaction is expected to be completed by the third quarter of 2022, subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approval.
Vectra Bank Colorado
Vectra Bank Colorado is headquartered in Denver, Colorado. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the tenth largest full-service commercial bank in Colorado as measured by domestic deposits in the state.
Vectra’s income before income taxes increased $43 million, or 179%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $46 million decrease in the provision for credit losses, and an increase of $1 million in noninterest income, partially offset by a $5 million increase in noninterest expense. The loan portfolio decreased $15 million during 2021, which consisted of decreases of $42 million and $18 million in consumer and CRE loans, respectively,
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
partially offset by an increase of $45 million in commercial loans. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 1.08% at December 31, 2021, compared with 1.38%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $1 million, or 5%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 10% in 2021.
The Commerce Bank of Washington
The Commerce Bank of Washington is headquartered in Seattle, Washington, and operates in Washington under The Commerce Bank of Washington name and in Portland, Oregon, under The Commerce Bank of Oregon name. Its business strategy focuses primarily on serving the financial needs of commercial businesses, including professional services firms. If it were a separately chartered bank, it would be the 24th largest full-service commercial bank in Washington and the 35th largest in Oregon, as measured by domestic deposits in these states.
TCBW’s income before income taxes increased $14 million, or 50%, during 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $10 million decrease in the provision for credit losses. The loan portfolio increased $71 million during 2021, which consisted of increases of $84 million and $12 million in CRE and commercial loans, respectively, partially offset by a decrease of $25 million in consumer loans. The ratio of ACL to net loans and leases decreased to 0.51% at December 31, 2021, compared with 0.75%. Nonperforming lending-related assets decreased $7 million, or 88%, from the prior year. Deposits increased 20% in 2021.
BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS
Interest-earning Assets
Interest-earning assets are assets that have associated interest rates or yields, and generally consist of money market investments, securities, loans, and leases. We strive to maintain a high level of interest-earning assets relative to total assets. For more information regarding the average balances, associated revenue generated, and the respective yields of our interest-earning assets, see Schedule 7 on page 32.
AVERAGE OUTSTANDING LOANS AND DEPOSITS
(at December 31)
Investment Securities Portfolio
We invest in securities to generate interest income and to actively manage liquidity, interest rate, and credit risk. Refer to the “Liquidity Risk Management” section on page 62 for additional information about how we manage our liquidity risk. The following schedule presents the components of our investment securities portfolio. See Note 3
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
and Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on fair value measurements and the accounting for our investment securities portfolio.
Schedule 14
INVESTMENT SECURITIES PORTFOLIO
The amortized cost of investment securities increased 54% from the prior year, and approximately 11% of the total investment securities are floating rate at December 31, 2021, compared with 23% at December 31, 2020.
The investment securities portfolio includes $443 million of net premium that is distributed across various asset classes. Total premium amortization for our investment securities was $110 million in 2021, compared with $105 million in 2020.
At December 31, 2021, based on the GAAP fair value hierarchy, 0.6% and 99.4% of the AFS securities portfolio was valued at Level 1 and Level 2, respectively, compared with 1.2% and 98.8% at December 31, 2020. None of the AFS securities portfolio was valued at Level 3 for either period. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of fair value accounting.
Exposure to Municipalities
We provide products and services to state and local governments (referred to collectively as “municipalities”), including deposit services, loans, and investment banking services. We also invest in securities issued by municipalities. Schedule 15 summarizes our exposure to state and local municipalities:
Schedule 15
MUNICIPALITIES
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
The municipal loan and lease portfolio is primarily secured by general obligations of municipal entities. Other types of collateral also include real estate, revenue pledges, or equipment. Our municipal loans and securities primarily relate to municipalities located within our geographic footprint. At December 31, 2021, no municipal loans were on nonaccrual. Municipal securities are internally graded, similar to loans, using risk-grading systems which vary based on the size and type of credit risk exposure. The internal risk grades assigned to our municipal securities follow our definitions of Pass, Special Mention, and Substandard, which are consistent with published definitions of regulatory risk classifications. At December 31, 2021, all municipal securities were graded as Pass. See Notes 5 and 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about the credit quality of these municipal loans and securities.
Loan and Lease Portfolio
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the ratio of loans and leases to total assets was 55% and 66%, respectively. The largest loan category was commercial and industrial loans, which constituted 27% and 25% of our total loan portfolio for the same time periods.
Schedule 16 presents our outstanding loan portfolio by type and contractual maturity. This schedule also reflects the repricing characteristics of these loans. In a small number of cases, we have hedged the repricing characteristics of our variable-rate loans as more fully described in “Interest Rate Risk” on page 60.
Schedule 16
LOAN AND LEASE PORTFOLIO BY TYPE AND MATURITY
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
The loan and lease portfolio decreased $2.6 billion from December 31, 2020, primarily due to the forgiveness of PPP loans. Excluding PPP loans, commercial loans increased $1.7 billion, driven largely by increases in municipal loans, owner-occupied loans, and commercial and industrial loans of $0.7 billion, $0.5 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively. Commercial real estate construction and land development loans increased $0.4 billion, while term commercial real estate loans decreased $0.3 billion. Consumer loans decreased $0.7 billion, primarily due to a $0.9 billion decline in 1-4 family residential mortgage loans, partially offset by a $0.3 billion increase in home equity credit lines (“HECL”).
Other Noninterest-bearing Investments
Other noninterest-bearing investments are equity investments that do not generally provide interest income, but are held primarily for capital appreciation, dividends, or for certain regulatory requirements. Schedule 17 summarizes our related investments:
Schedule 17
OTHER NONINTEREST-BEARING INVESTMENTS
Total other noninterest-bearing investments increased $34 million, or 4%, during 2021, primarily due a net $23 million unrealized gain related to our investment in Recursion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which completed an IPO in the second quarter of 2021.
Premises, Equipment, and Software
Net premises, equipment, and software increased $110 million, or 9.1%, during 2021, primarily due to capitalized construction costs related to the completion of our new Corporate Technology Center. During 2020, we announced the construction of a 400,000 square-foot technology campus in Midvale, Utah. The campus is expected to be completed in mid-2022 and will be our primary technology and operations center, accommodating more than 2,000 employees. The new campus will allow us to achieve significant efficiencies by eliminating a number of smaller facilities totaling 520,000 square feet and reducing related occupancy costs by more than 20%. During 2021, we sold a substantial portion of our smaller technology and operations facilities, resulting in net gains on sale of $12 million.
In 2020, we announced the construction of a new corporate center for Vectra in Denver, Colorado. The 127,000 square-foot, nine-story, mixed-use building is scheduled to open in late-2022. We are also in the final phase of a three-phase project to replace our core loan and deposit banking systems, and are on track to convert our deposit servicing system by 2023. Capitalized costs associated with the core system replacement project generally carry a useful life of ten years, and are summarized in the following schedule.
Schedule 18
CAPITALIZED COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE CORE SYSTEM REPLACEMENT PROJECT
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Deposits
Deposits are our primary funding source. The following schedule presents our deposits by category and percentage of total deposits:
Schedule 19
DEPOSITS
Total deposits increased $13.1 billion, or 19%, in 2021, primarily due to an $8.6 billion increase in noninterest-bearing deposits. When combined, savings and money market deposits and noninterest-bearing deposits comprised 98% and 96% of total deposits at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Total deposits included $0.4 billion and $1.3 billion of brokered deposits for the same time periods.
Total U.S. time deposits that exceed the current FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 were $563 million and $547 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The estimated total amount of uninsured deposits, including related interest accrued and unpaid, was $49 billion and $38 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
See Notes 12 and 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and “Liquidity Risk Management” on page 62 for additional information on funding and borrowed funds.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk management is an integral part of our operations and is a key determinant of our overall performance. We utilize the three lines of defense approach to risk management with responsibilities for each line of defense defined in our Risk Management Framework. The first line of defense represents units and functions throughout the Bank engaged in activities related to revenue generation, expense reduction, operational support, and technology services. These units and functions are accountable for owning and managing the risks associated with these activities. The second line of defense represents functions responsible for independently assessing and overseeing risk management activities. The third line of defense is our internal audit function that provides independent assessment of the effectiveness of the first and second lines of defense.
In support of management's efforts, the Board has established certain committees to oversee our risk management processes. The Audit Committee oversees financial reporting risk, and the Risk Oversight Committee (“ROC”) oversees the other risk management processes. The ROC meets on a regular basis to monitor and review Enterprise Risk Management (“ERM”) activities. As required by its charter, the ROC provides oversight for various ERM activities and approves ERM policies and activities as detailed in the ROC charter.
We employ various strategies to reduce the risks to which our operations are exposed, including credit risk, market and interest rate risk, liquidity risk, strategic and business risk, operational risk, technology risk, cyber risk, capital/financial reporting risk, legal/compliance risk (including regulatory risk), and reputational risk. These risks are overseen by various management committees of which the Enterprise Risk Management Committee is the focal point.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Credit Risk Management
Credit risk is the possibility of loss from the failure of a borrower, guarantor, or another obligor to fully perform under the terms of a credit-related contract. Credit risk arises primarily from our lending activities, as well as from off-balance sheet credit instruments.
The Board, through the ROC, is responsible for approving the overall credit policies relating to the management of credit risk. The ROC also oversees and monitors adherence to key credit policies and the credit risk appetite as defined in the Risk Management Framework. The Board has delegated responsibility for managing credit risk and approving changes to credit policies to the Chief Credit Officer, who chairs the Credit Risk Committee.
Credit policies, credit risk management, and credit examination functions inform and support the oversight of credit risk. Our credit policies emphasize strong underwriting standards and early detection of potential problem credits in order to develop and implement action plans on a timely basis to mitigate potential losses. These formal credit policies and procedures provide us with a framework for consistent underwriting and a basis for sound credit decisions at the local banking affiliate level.
Our credit policies and practices are also designed to help manage potential risks, including those arising from environmental issues. Environmental risk related to our lending practices is primarily covered in our environmental credit policy and by our environmental subject matter experts and manager. The extent of environmental due diligence performed by our environmental risk team is based on the risks identified at each property and the loan amount. The extension of credit to certain borrowers, or those connected with certain activities, may be restricted or require escalated approval, by policy, because of various environmental risks.
Our credit risk management function is separate from the lending function and strengthens control over, and the independent evaluation of, credit activities. In addition, we have a well-defined set of standards for evaluating our loan portfolio, and we utilize a comprehensive loan risk-grading system to determine the risk potential in the portfolio.
The internal credit examination department, which is independent of the lending function, periodically conducts examinations of our lending departments and credit activities. These examinations are designed to review credit quality, adequacy of documentation, appropriate loan risk-grading administration, and compliance with credit policies. Credit examinations related to the ACL are reported to both the Audit Committee and the ROC.
Our overall credit risk management strategy includes diversification of our loan portfolio. Our business activity is conducted primarily within the geographic footprint of our banking affiliates. We seek to avoid the risk of undue concentrations of credit in any particular industry, collateral type, location, or with any individual customer or counterparty. We have certain significant concentrations, including CRE and oil and gas-related lending. We have adopted and adhere to concentration limits on leveraged lending, municipal lending, oil and gas-related lending, and various types of CRE lending, particularly construction and land development lending. Concentration limits are regularly monitored and revised as necessary.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 20 presents the composition of our loan and lease portfolio.
Schedule 20
LOAN AND LEASE PORTFOLIO
Government Agency Guaranteed Loans
We participate in various guaranteed lending programs sponsored by U.S. government agencies, such as the SBA, Federal Housing Authority, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Export-Import Bank of the U.S., and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. At December 31, 2021, $2.3 billion of these loans were guaranteed, primarily by the SBA. The following schedule presents the composition of U.S. government agency guaranteed loans and includes $1.9 billion of the previously mentioned PPP loans.
Schedule 21
U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCY GUARANTEES
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Commercial Lending
The following schedule provides information regarding lending exposures to certain industries in our commercial lending portfolio.
Schedule 22
COMMERCIAL LENDING BY INDUSTRY GROUP 1
1 Industry groups are determined by North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes.
2 Includes primarily utilities, power, and renewable energy.
3 No other industry group individually exceeds 2.7%.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Commercial Real Estate Loans
The following schedule presents credit quality information for our CRE loan portfolio segmented by real estate category and collateral location.
Schedule 23
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE PORTFOLIO BY LOAN TYPE AND COLLATERAL LOCATION
1No other geography exceeds $65 million for all three loan types.
2Delinquency rates include nonaccrual loans.
3At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was no meaningful nonaccrual activity for commercial construction and land development loans, nor delinquency or nonaccrual activity for residential construction and land development loans.
At December 31, 2021, our CRE construction and land development and term loan portfolios represented approximately 24% of the total loan portfolio. The majority of our CRE loans are secured by real estate, which is primarily located within our geographic footprint. Approximately 19% of the CRE loan portfolio matures in the next 12 months. Construction and land development loans generally mature in 18 to 36 months and contain full or partial recourse guarantee structures with one- to five-year extension options or roll-to-perm options that often result in term debt. Term CRE loans generally mature within a three- to seven-year period and consist of full, partial, and nonrecourse guarantee structures. Typical term CRE loan structures include annually tested operating covenants that require loan rebalancing based on minimum debt service coverage, debt yield, or loan-to-value tests.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Approximately $160 million, or 6%, of the commercial construction and land development portfolio at December 31, 2021 consists of acquisition and development loans. Most of these acquisition and development loans are secured by specific retail, apartment, office, or other projects.
Underwriting on commercial properties is primarily based on the economic viability of the project with significant consideration given to the creditworthiness and experience of the sponsor. We generally require that the owner’s equity be injected prior to bank advances. Re-margining requirements (required equity infusions upon a decline in value or cash flow of the collateral) are often included in the loan agreement along with guarantees of the sponsor. Consideration of projected cash flows is critical when underwriting commercial properties, as these cash flows ultimately support a project’s debt service. Therefore, in most projects (with the exception of multi-family and hospitality construction projects), we require substantial pre-leasing or leasing in our underwriting, and we generally require a minimum projected stabilized debt service coverage ratio of 1.20 or higher, depending on the project asset class.
Within the residential construction and development sector, many of the requirements previously mentioned, such as creditworthiness and experience of the developer, up-front injection of the developer’s equity, principal curtailment requirements, and the viability of the project are also important in underwriting a residential development loan. Consideration is also given to the expected market acceptance of the product, location, strength of the developer, and the ability of the developer to stay within budget. Progress inspections by qualified independent inspectors are routinely performed before disbursements are made.
Real estate appraisals are ordered in accordance with regulatory guidelines and are validated independently of the loan officer and the borrower, generally by our internal appraisal review function, which is staffed by licensed appraisers. In some cases, reports from automated valuation services are used or internal evaluations are performed. A new appraisal or evaluation is required when a loan deteriorates to a certain level of credit weakness.
Advance rates will vary based on the viability of the project and the creditworthiness of the sponsor, but our guidelines generally limit advances to 50% for raw land, 65% for land development, 65% for finished commercial lots, 75% for finished residential lots, 80% for pre-sold homes, 75% for models and homes not under contract, and 75% for commercial properties. Exceptions may be granted on a case-by-case basis.
Loan agreements require regular financial information on the project and the sponsor in addition to lease schedules, rent rolls and, on construction projects, independent progress inspection reports. The receipt of this financial information is monitored, and calculations are made to determine adherence to the covenants set forth in the loan agreement.
The existence of a guarantee that improves the likelihood of repayment is taken into consideration when evaluating CRE loans for expected losses. If the support of the guarantor is quantifiable and documented, it is included in the potential cash flows and liquidity available for debt repayment, and our expected loss methodology takes this repayment source into consideration.
In general, we obtain and consider updated financial information for the guarantor as part of our determination to extend credit. The quality and frequency of financial reporting collected and analyzed varies depending on the contractual requirements for reporting, the size of the transaction, and the strength of the guarantor.
Complete underwriting of the guarantor includes, but is not limited to, an analysis of the guarantor’s current financial statements, tax returns, leverage, liquidity (brokerage) confirmations, global cash flow, global debt service coverage, and contingent liabilities. The assessment also includes a qualitative analysis of the guarantor’s willingness to perform in the event of a problem and demonstrated history of performing in similar situations.
A qualitative assessment is performed on a case-by-case basis to evaluate the guarantor’s experience, performance track record, reputation, and willingness to work with us. We also utilize market information sources, rating, and scoring services in our assessment. This qualitative analysis, coupled with a documented quantitative ability to
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
support the loan, may result in a higher-quality internal loan grade, which may ultimately reduce the level of allowance we estimate.
In the event of default, we pursue any and all appropriate potential sources of repayment, which may come from multiple sources, including the guarantee. A number of factors are considered when deciding whether or not to pursue a guarantor, including, but not limited to, the value and liquidity of other sources of repayment (collateral), the financial strength and liquidity of the guarantor, possible statutory limitations (e.g., single action rule on real estate) and the overall cost of pursuing a guarantee compared with the ultimate amount we may be able to recover.
Consumer Loans
We generally originate first-lien residential home mortgages considered to be of prime quality. We typically hold variable-rate loans in our portfolio and sell “conforming” fixed-rate loans to third parties, including Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, for which we make representations and warranties that the loans meet certain underwriting and collateral documentation standards.
We also originate home equity credit lines (“HECL”). At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our HECL portfolio totaled $3.0 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively. The following schedule presents the composition of our HECL portfolio by lien status.
Schedule 24
HECL PORTFOLIO BY LIEN STATUS
At December 31, 2021, loans representing less than 1% of the outstanding balance in the HECL portfolio were estimated to have combined loan-to-value (“CLTV”) ratios above 100%. An estimated CLTV ratio is the ratio of our loan plus any prior lien amounts divided by the estimated current collateral-value. At origination, underwriting standards for the HECL portfolio generally include a maximum 80% CLTV with high credit scores.
Approximately 90% of our HECL portfolio is still in the draw period, and approximately 19% of those loans are scheduled to begin amortizing within the next five years. We believe the risk of loss and borrower default in the event of a loan becoming fully amortizing and the effect of significant interest rate changes is minimal. The ratio of HECL net charge-offs for the trailing twelve months to average balances at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was (0.01)% for both periods. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the credit quality of the HECL portfolio.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets as a percentage of loans and leases and other real estate owned (“OREO”) decreased to 0.53% at December 31, 2021, compared with 0.69% at December 31, 2020.
Total nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 decreased to $271 million from $367 million, reflecting credit quality improvements across most of our loan portfolios.
The balance of nonaccrual loans can decrease due to paydowns, charge-offs, and the return of loans to accrual status under certain conditions. If a nonaccrual loan is refinanced or restructured, the new note is immediately placed on nonaccrual. If a restructured loan performs under the new terms for at least a period of six months, the loan can be considered for return to accrual status. See “Restructured Loans” and Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on nonaccrual loans.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
The following schedule presents our nonperforming assets:
Schedule 25
NONPERFORMING ASSETS
1 Does not include banking premises held for sale.
2 Includes loans held for sale.
Troubled Debt Restructured Loans
Loans may be modified in the normal course of business for competitive reasons or to strengthen our collateral position. Loan modifications and restructurings may also occur when the borrower experiences financial difficulty and needs temporary or permanent relief from the original contractual terms of the loan. Loans that have been modified to accommodate a borrower who is experiencing financial difficulties, and for which we have granted a concession that we would not otherwise consider, are classified as troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”). TDRs totaled $326 million at December 31, 2021, compared with $311 million at December 31, 2020. Modifications that qualified for applicable accounting and regulatory exemptions for borrowers experiencing financial difficulties exclusively related to the COVID-19 pandemic were not classified and reported as TDRs.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
If the restructured loan performs for at least six months according to the modified terms, and an analysis of the customer’s financial condition indicates that we are reasonably assured of repayment of the modified principal and interest, the loan may be returned to accrual status. The borrower’s payment performance prior to and following the restructuring is taken into account to determine whether a loan is returned to accrual status.
Schedule 26
ACCRUING AND NONACCRUING TROUBLED DEBT RESTRUCTURED LOANS
In the periods following the calendar year in which a loan was restructured, a loan may no longer be reported as a TDR if it is on accrual, is in compliance with its modified terms, and yields a market rate (as determined and documented at the time of the modification or restructure). See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding TDRs.
Schedule 27
TROUBLED DEBT RESTRUCTURED LOANS ROLLFORWARD
Allowance for Credit Losses
The ACL includes the ALLL and the RULC. The ACL represents our estimate of current expected credit losses related to the loan and lease portfolio and unfunded lending commitments as of the balance sheet date. To determine the adequacy of the allowance, our loan and lease portfolio is segmented based on loan type. The following schedule shows the changes in the allowance for credit losses and a summary of credit loss experience:
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 28
SUMMARY OF CREDIT LOSS EXPERIENCE
1 Beginning balances at January 1, 2020 for the allowance for loan and lease losses and reserve for unfunded lending commitments do not agree to their respective ending balances at December 31, 2019 because of the adoption of the CECL accounting standard.
2 The ratio of allowance for credit losses to net loans and leases (ex-PPP loans), at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 1.13% and 1.74%, respectively.
3 The ratio of total net charge-offs to average loans and leases (ex-PPP loans), at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 0.01% and 0.22%, respectively.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 29
ALLOCATION OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The total ACL decreased $282 million during 2021, primarily due to improvements in economic forecasts and credit quality, compared with the economic stress caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year period. Due to the adoption of the CECL standard in 2020, the ACL is not comparable to periods presented prior to that time.
The RULC represents a reserve for potential losses associated with off-balance sheet loan commitments and standby letters of credit, and decreased $18 million during 2021. The reserve is separately recorded on the consolidated balance sheet in “Other liabilities,” and any related increases or decreases in the reserve are recorded on the consolidated income statement in “Provision for unfunded lending commitments.”
See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to the ACL and credit trends experienced in each portfolio segment.
Interest Rate and Market Risk Management
Interest rate risk is the potential for reduced net interest income and other rate-sensitive income resulting from adverse changes in the level of interest rates. Market risk is the potential for loss arising from adverse changes in the fair value of fixed-income securities, equity securities, other earning assets, and derivative financial instruments as a result of changes in interest rates or other factors. As a financial institution that engages in transactions involving various financial products, we are exposed to both interest rate risk and market risk.
Our Board approves the overall policies relating to the management of our financial risk, including interest rate and market risk management. The Board has delegated the responsibility of managing our interest rate and market risk to the Asset/Liability Committee (“ALCO”), which consists of members of management. ALCO establishes and periodically revises policy limits and reviews with the ROC the limits and limit exceptions reported by management.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is one of the most significant risks to which we are regularly exposed. We strive to position the Bank for interest rate changes and manage the balance sheet sensitivity to reduce net interest income volatility. We generally have granular, stable deposit funding. Much of this funding has an indeterminate life with no maturity and can be withdrawn at any time. However, because most deposits come from household and business accounts, their duration is generally long, compared with the short duration of our loan portfolio. As such, we are naturally “asset-sensitive” - meaning that our assets are expected to reprice faster or more significantly than our liabilities. In previous interest rate environments, we have added (1) interest rate swaps to synthetically increase the duration of the loan portfolio, (2) longer-duration securities, and (3) longer-duration loans to reduce the asset sensitivity to a level where an increase in interest rates of 100 basis points would result in only a slightly positive change in net interest income. During the COVID-19 pandemic with short-term interest rates at or near zero, we judged the risk-reward profile to be in favor of allowing the balance sheet to become significantly more asset-sensitive. We increased our investment securities portfolio during 2021 and added interest rate swaps in part to prevent the Bank from becoming even more asset-sensitive.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Asset sensitivity to rising rates is dependent upon assumptions we use for deposit runoff and repricing behavior. As rapid growth in new deposits has led to more uncertainty in future behavior, these assumptions have become more significant. Average total deposits increased 20% from the prior year, and a significant portion of the deposits were invested in money market investments, resulting in increased asset sensitivity to rising rates. We are less asset-sensitive to declining rates than rising rates due to the limited amount of compression that could occur between the spread of the cost of deposits and the yield on money market investments.
The following schedule presents derivatives utilized in our asset-liability management activities that are designated in qualifying hedging relationships at December 31, 2021. Included are the average outstanding derivative notional amounts for each period presented and the weighted average fixed-rate paid or received for each category of cash flow and fair value hedge.
Schedule 30
DERIVATIVES DESIGNATED IN QUALIFYING HEDGING RELATIONSHIPS
1 Cash flow hedges consist of receive-fixed swaps hedging pools of floating-rate loans. Increases in the average outstanding notional are due to forward-starting interest rate swaps.
2 Fair value debt hedges consist of receive-fixed swaps hedging fixed-rate debt. The $500 million fair value debt hedge matures at the end of July 2029.
3 Fair value assets hedges consist of pay-fixed swaps hedging AFS fixed-rate securities.
Interest Rate Risk Measurement
We monitor interest rate risk through the use of two complementary measurement methods: net interest income simulation, or Earnings at Risk (“EaR”), and Economic Value of Equity at Risk (“EVE”). EaR measures the expected change in near-term (one year) net interest income in response to changes in interest rates. EVE measures the expected changes in the fair value of equity in response to changes in interest rates.
EaR is an estimate of the change in total net interest income that would be recognized under different interest rate environments over a one-year period. This simulated impact to net interest income due to a change in rates uses as its base a modeled net interest income that is not necessarily the same as the most recent year’s reported net interest income. Rather, EaR employs estimated net interest income under an unchanged interest rate scenario as the basis for comparison. The EaR process then simulates changes to the base net interest income under several interest rate scenarios, including parallel and nonparallel interest rate shifts across the yield curve, taking into account deposit repricing assumptions and estimates of the possible exercise of embedded options within the portfolio (e.g., a borrower’s ability to refinance a loan under a lower-rate environment). The EaR model does not contemplate
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
changes in fee income that are amortized into interest income (e.g., premiums, discounts, origination points and costs, etc.).
EVE is calculated as the fair value of all assets minus the fair value of liabilities. We measure changes in the dollar amount of EVE for parallel shifts in interest rates. Due to embedded optionality and asymmetric rate risk, changes in EVE can be useful in quantifying risks not apparent for small rate changes. Examples of such risks may include out-of-the-money interest rate caps (or limits) on loans, which have little effect under small rate movements but may become important if large rate changes were to occur, or substantial prepayment deceleration for low-rate mortgages in a higher-rate environment.
Estimating the impact on net interest income and EVE requires that we assess a number of variables and make various assumptions in managing our exposure to changes in interest rates. The assessments address deposit withdrawals and deposit product migration (e.g., customers moving money from checking accounts to certificates of deposit), competitive pricing (e.g., existing loans and deposits are assumed to roll into new loans and deposits at similar spreads relative to benchmark interest rates), loan and security prepayments, and the effects of other embedded options. As a result of uncertainty about the maturity and repricing characteristics of both deposits and loans, we also calculate the sensitivity of EaR and EVE results to key assumptions. As previously noted, most of our liabilities are comprised of indeterminate maturity and managed-rate deposits, such as checking, savings, and money market accounts, and therefore, the modeled results are highly sensitive to the assumptions used for these deposits and to prepayment assumptions used for assets with prepayment options. We use historical regression analysis as a guide for setting such assumptions; however, due to the current low-interest-rate environment, which has little historical precedent, estimated deposit behavior may not reflect actual future results. Additionally, competition for funding in the marketplace may produce changes to deposit pricing on interest-bearing accounts that are greater or less than changes in benchmark interest rates or the federal funds rate.
Under most rising interest rate scenarios, we would expect some customers to move balances from demand deposits to interest-bearing accounts such as money market, savings, or certificates of deposit. The models are particularly sensitive to the assumption about the rate of such migration.
In addition, we assume a correlation, often referred to as a “deposit beta,” with respect to interest-bearing deposits, wherein the rates paid to customers change at a different pace when compared with changes in average benchmark interest rates. Generally, certificates of deposit are assumed to have a high correlation, while interest-on-checking accounts are assumed to have a lower correlation. Actual results may differ materially due to factors including the shape of the yield curve, competitive pricing, money supply, our credit worthiness, and so forth; however, we use our historical experience as well as industry data to inform our assumptions.
The migration and correlation assumptions previously discussed result in deposit durations presented in the following schedule:
Schedule 31
DEPOSIT ASSUMPTIONS
With interest rates forecast to rise more, the effective duration of deposits has shortened due to higher expected runoff and/or migration to more rate sensitive deposit products.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Incorporating the assumptions previously discussed, the following schedule presents EaR, or percentage change in net interest income, and our estimated percentage change in EVE; both EaR and EVE are based on a static balance sheet size under parallel interest rate changes ranging from -100 bps to +300 bps.
Schedule 32
INCOME SIMULATION - CHANGE IN NET INTEREST INCOME AND CHANGE IN ECONOMIC VALUE OF EQUITY
1 Assumes rates cannot go below zero in the negative rate shift.
For non-maturity, interest-bearing deposits, the weighted average modeled beta is 26%. If the weighted average deposit beta were to increase 11%, the EaR in the +100 bps rate shock would change from 11.2% to 9.0%.
The asset sensitivity, as measured by EaR, increased in 2021, primarily due to growth in demand deposits and money market investments. The EaR analysis focuses on parallel rate shocks across the term structure of rates. The yield curve typically does not move in a parallel manner. If we consider a steepener rate ramp where the short-term rate declines to zero but the ten-year rate moves to +200 bps, the increase in EaR is 59.5% less over 24 months compared with the parallel +200 bps rate ramp.
In the -100 bps rate shock, the EVE would increase due to the fact that we cap the value of our indeterminate deposits at their par value, or equivalently we assume no premium would be required to dispose of these liabilities given that depositors could be repaid at par. Since our assets increase in value as rates fall and the majority of our liabilities are indeterminate deposits, EVE increases disproportionately. The changes in EVE measures from December 31, 2020 are primarily driven by the behavior of the deposit models.
Our focus on business banking also plays a significant role in determining the nature of our asset-liability management posture. At December 31, 2021, $22 billion of our commercial lending and CRE loan balances were scheduled to reprice in the next six months. Of these variable-rate loans, approximately 98% are tied to either the prime rate, LIBOR, or AMERIBOR. For these variable-rate loans, we have executed $3.1 billion of cash flow hedges by receiving fixed rates on interest rate swaps. Additionally, asset sensitivity is reduced due to $6 billion of variable-rate commercial and CRE loans being priced at floored rates at December 31, 2021, which were above the “index plus spread” rate by an average of 54 bps. At December 31, 2021, we also had $3 billion of variable-rate consumer loans scheduled to reprice in the next six months, and approximately $1 billion were priced at floored rates, which were above the “index plus spread” rate by an average of 31 bps. See Notes 3 and 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding derivative instruments.
LIBOR Exposure
LIBOR is being phased out globally, and U.S. banking regulators instructed banks to cease entering into new lending arrangements using LIBOR no later than December 31, 2021, and migrate to alternative reference rates no later than June 2023. To facilitate the transition process, we instituted an enterprise-wide program to identify, assess, and monitor risks associated with the expected discontinuance or unavailability of LIBOR, which includes active engagement with industry working groups and regulators. This program also includes active involvement of senior management with regular engagement from the Enterprise Risk Management Committee, and seeks to minimize client and internal business operational impacts, while providing reporting transparency, consistency, and a central governance model that aligns with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”), and other regulatory guidance.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
We have implemented processes, procedures, and systems to ensure contract risk is sufficiently mitigated. New originations, and any modifications or renewals of LIBOR-based contracts, contain fallback language to ensure transition to an alternative reference rate. For our contracts that referenced LIBOR and had a duration beyond December 31, 2021, all fallback provisions and variations were identified and classified based upon those provisions. During 2021, we originated more non-LIBOR referenced loans than LIBOR referenced loans, and by the end of the year, we had discontinued substantially all new originations referencing LIBOR.
We have a significant number of assets and liabilities that reference LIBOR. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $33 billion in loans (mainly commercial loans), unfunded lending commitments, and securities referencing LIBOR. The amount of borrowed funds referencing LIBOR at December 31, 2021 was less than $1 billion. These amounts exclude derivative assets and liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2021, the notional amount of our LIBOR-referenced interest rate derivative contracts was more than $18 billion, of which more than $14 billion related to contracts with central counterparty clearinghouses.
The adoption of alternative reference rates continues to evolve in the marketplace. We are positioned to support our customers’ needs by accommodating multiple alternative reference rates, including the Constant Maturity Treasury rate (“CMT”), the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) rate, the American Interbank Offered Rate (“AMERIBOR”), the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), and the Bloomberg Short Term Bank Yield Index (“BSBY”). During 2022, customers will be prompted to either voluntarily modify their contracts and migrate to a reference rate other than LIBOR no later than June 2023, or be subject to the fallback provisions in their contracts. Voluntary modifications are expected to qualify for the available Tax Safe-Harbor provisions as allowed by IRS guidance.
We expect that customers who voluntarily migrate to an alternative reference rate will do so by the end of year 2022, and we expect the remaining customers to move to an alternative rate index in accordance with the relevant fallback provisions in their contracts prior to June of 2023.
For more information on the transition from LIBOR, see Risk Factors on page 13.
Market Risk - Fixed Income
We underwrite municipal and corporate securities. We also trade municipal, agency, and U.S. Treasury securities. This underwriting and trading activity exposes us to a risk of loss arising from adverse changes in the prices of these fixed-income securities.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $372 million and $266 million of trading assets, and $254 million and $61 million of securities sold, not yet purchased, respectively.
We are exposed to market risk through changes in fair value. This includes market risk for interest rate swaps used to hedge interest rate risk. Changes in the fair value of AFS securities and in interest rate swaps that qualify as cash flow hedges are included in AOCI for each financial reporting period. During 2021, the after-tax change in AOCI attributable to AFS securities decreased $336 million, due largely to changes in the interest rate environment, compared with a $229 million increase in the same prior year period.
Market Risk - Equity Investments
Through our equity investment activities, we own equity securities that are publicly traded. In addition, we own equity securities in governmental entities and companies, e.g., Federal Reserve Bank and the FHLB, that are not publicly traded. Equity investments may be accounted for at cost, fair value, the equity method, or full consolidation methods of accounting, depending on our ownership position and degree of influence over the investees’ affairs. Regardless of the accounting method, the value of our investment is subject to fluctuation. Because the fair value of these securities may fall below the cost at which we acquired them, we are exposed to the possibility of loss. Equity investments in private and public companies are approved, monitored, and evaluated by our Equity Investments Committee consisting of members of management.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
We hold both direct and indirect investments in predominantly pre-public companies, primarily through various SBIC venture capital funds. Our equity exposure to these investments was approximately $179 million and $135 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. On occasion, some of the companies within our SBIC investments may issue an IPO. In this case, the fund is generally subject to a lockout period before liquidating the investment, which can introduce additional market risk. During 2021, we recognized a $31 million realized gain resulting from the sale of one of our SBIC investments, and a net $23 million unrealized gain related to our investment in Recursion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which completed an IPO in the second quarter of 2021. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the valuation of our SBIC investments.
Liquidity Risk Management
Overview
Liquidity refers to our ability to meet our cash, contractual, and collateral obligations, and to manage both expected and unexpected cash flows without adversely impacting our operations or financial strength. Sources of liquidity include deposits, borrowings, equity, and unencumbered assets, such as marketable loans and investment securities.
Since liquidity risk is closely linked to both credit risk and market risk, many of the previously described risk control mechanisms also apply to the monitoring and management of liquidity risk. We manage our liquidity to provide adequate funds for our customers’ credit needs, capital plan actions, anticipated financial and contractual obligations, which include withdrawals by depositors, debt and capital service requirements, and lease obligations.
Overseeing liquidity management is the responsibility of ALCO, which implements a Board-approved corporate Liquidity Policy. This policy addresses monitoring and maintaining adequate liquidity, diversifying funding positions, and anticipating future funding needs. The policy also includes liquidity ratio guidelines, such as a 30-day liquidity coverage ratio, that are used to monitor our liquidity positions as well as our various stress test and liquid asset measurements. We perform liquidity stress tests and assess our portfolio of highly liquid assets (sufficient to cover 30-day funding needs under stress scenarios). At December 31, 2021, our investment securities portfolio of $24.9 billion and cash and money market investments of $13.0 billion collectively comprised 41% of total assets.
Our Treasury group, under the direction of the Corporate Treasurer, manages our liquidity and funding, with oversight by ALCO. The Treasurer is responsible for recommending changes to existing funding plans and our policies related to liquidity and funding. These recommendations are submitted for approval to ALCO, and changes to the policies are also approved by the ERMC and the Board. We have adopted policy limits that govern liquidity risk. The policy requires us to maintain a buffer of highly liquid assets sufficient to cover cash outflows in the event of a severe liquidity crisis. We complied with this policy throughout 2021.
Liquidity Regulation
We perform liquidity stress tests and assess our portfolio of highly liquid assets (sufficient to cover 30-day funding needs under the stress scenarios) even though we are no longer subject to the enhanced prudential standards for liquidity management (Reg. YY). In addition, we exceed the regulatory requirements that mandate a buffer of securities and other liquid assets to cover 70% of 30-day cash outflows under the assumptions mandated therein, although we are no longer subject to the regulations of the Final LCR Rule.
Liquidity Management Actions
Our consolidated cash, interest-bearing deposits held as investments, and security resell agreements were $12.9 billion at December 31, 2021, compared with $7.3 billion at December 31, 2020. During 2021, the primary sources of cash came from significant increases in deposits, redemptions and sales of investment securities, and net cash provided by operating activities. Uses of cash during the same period included primarily increases in investment securities and money market investments, repurchases of our common stock, and a decrease in short-term borrowings.
Total deposits were $82.8 billion at December 31, 2021, compared with $69.7 billion at December 31, 2020. The $13.1 billion increase during 2021 was a result of an $8.6 billion and $5.5 billion increase in noninterest-bearing
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
demand deposits and savings and money market deposits, respectively, partially offset by a $1.0 billion decrease in time deposits. An increase in the money supply contributed meaningfully to overall deposit growth. Our core deposits, consisting of noninterest-bearing demand deposits, savings and money market deposits, and time deposits under $250,000, were $81.9 billion at December 31, 2021, compared with $68.2 billion at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, maturities of our long-term senior and subordinated debt ranged from March 2022 to October 2029. During 2021, we redeemed $281 million of senior debt which matured and was not replaced with a new debt issuance. In February 2022, we redeemed $290 million of the 4-year, 3.35% senior notes on the contractual call date one month prior to final maturity.
Our cash payments for interest, reflected in operating expenses, decreased to $81 million during 2021, from $195 million during 2020, primarily due to lower interest rates paid on deposits and borrowed funds and a decreased balance of fed funds and other short-term borrowings. Additionally, we paid approximately $263 million of dividends on preferred and common stock during 2021, compared with $259 million during 2020. Dividends paid per common share were $1.44 in 2021, compared with $1.36 in 2020. In January 2022, the Board approved a quarterly common dividend of $0.38 per share.
General financial market and economic conditions impact our access to, and cost of, external financing. Access to funding markets is also directly affected by the credit ratings received from various rating agencies. The ratings not only influence the costs associated with borrowings, but can also influence the sources of the borrowings. All of the credit rating agencies rate our debt at an investment-grade level, and they recently improved their outlook: Kroll from Stable to Positive, Fitch and S&P from Negative to Stable, and Moody’s from Stable to Review for Upgrade. Our credit ratings and outlooks are presented in the following schedule.
Schedule 33
CREDIT RATINGS
The FHLB system and Federal Reserve Banks have been, and continue to be, a significant source of additional liquidity and funding. We are a member of the FHLB of Des Moines, which allows member banks to borrow against eligible loans and securities to satisfy liquidity and funding requirements. We are required to invest in FHLB and Federal Reserve stock to maintain our borrowing capacity. At December 31, 2021, our total investment in FHLB and Federal Reserve stock was $11 million and $81 million, respectively, compared with $11 million and $98 million at December 31, 2020.
The amount available for additional FHLB and Federal Reserve borrowings was approximately $18.3 billion at December 31, 2021, compared with $17.1 billion at December 31, 2020. Loans with a carrying value of approximately $26.8 billion at December 31, 2021 have been pledged at the FHLB of Des Moines and the Federal Reserve as collateral for current and potential borrowings, compared with $24.7 billion at December 31, 2020. At both December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no FHLB or Federal Reserve borrowings outstanding.
Our AFS investment securities are primarily held as a source of contingent liquidity. We target securities that can be easily turned into cash through sale or repurchase agreements and whose value remains relatively stable during market disruptions. We manage our short-term funding needs through secured borrowing with the securities pledged as collateral. Our AFS securities balances increased $8.3 billion during 2021.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Our loan-to-total deposit ratio was 61% at December 31, 2021, compared with 77% at December 31, 2020, reflecting higher deposit growth in 2021. With deposit growth driving our increase in funding, liquidity considerations are highly dependent on the future behavior of deposit growth. By primarily deploying excess funds in liquid securities and money market investments, we retain the ability to address changes to our funding or liquidity profile.
Borrowed funds (both short- and long-term) decreased by $993 million during 2021, as deposit growth exceeded loan demand. We used deposit funding to increase money market investments and investment securities, which increased $5.6 billion and $8.2 billion, respectively, during 2021.
We may, from time to time, issue additional preferred stock, senior or subordinated notes, or other forms of capital or debt instruments, depending on our capital, funding, asset-liability management, or other needs as market conditions warrant. These additional issuances may be subject to required regulatory approvals. We believe that our sources of available liquidity are adequate to meet all reasonably foreseeable short- and intermediate-term demands.
Contractual Obligations
The following schedule summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021.
Schedule 34
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
1 Indeterminable maturity deposits include noninterest-bearing demand, savings, and money market deposits.
2 Commitments to make venture and other noninterest-bearing investments do not have defined maturity dates. They are due upon demand and may be drawn immediately. Therefore, these commitments are shown as having indeterminable maturities.
3 The values presented do not reflect the associated hedges.
In addition to the commitments specifically noted in the schedule above, we enter into a number of contractual commitments in the ordinary course of business. These include software licensing and maintenance, telecommunications services, facilities maintenance and equipment servicing, supplies purchasing, and other goods and services used in the operation of our business. Some of these contracts are renewable or cancellable annually or in shorter time intervals. To secure favorable pricing concessions, we may also commit to contracts that may extend several years.
We enter into derivative contracts under which we are required either to receive or pay cash, depending on changes in interest rates. These contracts are measured at fair value on the balance sheet, reflecting the net present value of the expected future cash receipts and payments based on market interest rates. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on derivative contracts.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Operational, Technology, and Cyber Risk Management
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings or capital arising from inadequate or failed internal processes or systems, human errors or misconduct, or adverse external events. ERM assists employees, management, and the Board with assessing, measuring, managing, and monitoring this risk in accordance with our Risk Management Framework. We have documented control self-assessments related to financial reporting under the 2013 framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (“COSO”) and the FDICIA.
We have instituted a number of measures to manage our operational risk, including, but not limited to: (1) transactional documentation requirements; (2) systems and procedures to monitor transactions and positions; (3) systems and procedures to detect and mitigate attempts to commit fraud, penetrate our systems or telecommunications, access customer data, or deny normal access to those systems to our legitimate customers; (4) regulatory compliance reviews; and (5) periodic reviews by our Compliance Risk Management, Internal Audit, and Credit Examination departments. Reconciliation procedures have been established to ensure that data processing systems consistently and accurately capture critical data. In addition, the Data Governance department provides additional oversight of data integrity and data availability. Further, we maintain disaster recovery and business continuity plans for operational support in the event of natural or other disasters. We also mitigate certain operational risks through the purchase of insurance, including errors and omissions and professional liability insurance.
We continually strive to improve our operational risk management, including enhancement of risk identification, risk and control self-assessments, business process mappings, regular tests of controls, and anti-fraud measures, which are reported on a regular basis to enterprise management committees. The Operational Risk Committee reports directly to the ROC. Key measures have been established in line with our Risk Management Framework to increase oversight by ERM and Operational Risk Management through the strengthening of new initiative reviews and enhancements to enterprise supply chain and vendor risk management. We also continue to enhance and strengthen the Enterprise Business Continuity program, Enterprise Security program, and Enterprise Incident Management reporting.
Significant enhancements have also been made to governance, technology, and reporting, including the establishment of Policy and Committee Governance programs; the implementation of a governance, risk, and control system to manage and integrate business processes, risks, controls, assessments, and control testing; and the creation of an Enterprise Risk Profile and Operational Risk Profile. In addition, our Enterprise Exam Management department has standardized our response and reporting, and increased our effectiveness and efficiencies with regulatory examination, communications and issues management.
Technology Risk
Technology risk is the risk of adverse impact to business operations and customers due to reduced or denied availability or inadequate value delivery caused by technology-related assets, infrastructure, strategy or processes. We make significant investments to enhance our technology capabilities and to mitigate the risk from outdated and unsupported technologies (technical debt). This includes updating core banking systems, as well as introducing new digital customer-facing capabilities. Technology projects, initiatives, and operations are governed by a change management framework that assesses the activities and risk within our business processes to limit disruption and resource constraints. New, expanded, or modified products and services, as well as new lines of business, change initiative status, and other risks are regularly reviewed and approved by the Change, Initiatives, and Technology Committee. This Committee includes, among other senior executives, the CEO, CFO, COO and CRO. Initiative risk and change impact from the framework are reported to the ROC.
Technology governance is also in place at the operational level within our Enterprise and Technology Operations (ETO) division to help ensure safety, soundness, operational resiliency, and compliance with our cybersecurity requirements. ETO management teams participate in enterprise architecture review boards and technology risk
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
councils to address such issues as enterprise standards compliance and strategic alignment, cyber vulnerability management, end-of-life, audit, risk and compliance issue management, and asset management. Thresholds are defined to escalate risks in these areas to the attention of the ROC and ERMC committees as appropriate.
Cyber Risk
Cyber risk is the risk of adverse impacts to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data owned, stored or processed by the Bank. The number and sophistication of attempts to disrupt or penetrate our systems, and those of our suppliers - sometimes referred to as hacking, cyber fraud, cyberattacks, or other similar names - continues to grow. To combat the ever-increasing sophistication of cyberattacks, we are continually improving methods for detecting and preventing attacks. We have implemented policies and procedures, developed specific training for our employees, and have elevated our oversight and internal reporting to the Board and relevant committees. Further, we regularly engage independent third-party cyber experts to test for vulnerabilities in our environment. We also conduct our own internal simulations and tabletop exercises as well as participate in financial sector-specific exercises. We have engaged consultants at both the strategic level and at the technology implementation level to assist us in better managing this critical risk. Cyber defense and improving our resiliency against cybersecurity threats remain a key focus at all levels of management, and of our Board.
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
Overview
The Board is responsible for approving the policies associated with capital management. The Board has delegated responsibility of managing our capital risk to the Capital Management Committee (“CMC”), which is chaired by the Chief Financial Officer, consists of members of management, and whose primary responsibility is to recommend and administer the approved capital policies that govern our capital management. Other major CMC responsibilities include:
•Setting overall capital targets within the Board-approved Capital Policy, monitoring performance compared with our Capital Policy limits, and recommending changes to capital including dividends, common stock issuances and repurchases, subordinated debt, and changes in major strategies to maintain ourselves at well-capitalized levels;
•Maintaining an adequate capital cushion to withstand adverse stress events while continuing to meet the borrowing needs of our customers, and to provide reasonable assurance of continued access to wholesale funding, consistent with fiduciary responsibilities to depositors and bondholders; and
•Reviewing our agency ratings.
A strong capital position is vital to the achievement of our key corporate objectives, our continued profitability, and to promoting depositor and investor confidence. We have fundamental financial objectives and policies to consistently improve risk-adjusted returns on our shareholders’ capital, including (1) maintaining sufficient capital to support the current needs and growth of our businesses, and (2) fulfilling responsibilities to depositors and bondholders while managing capital distributions to shareholders through dividends and repurchases of common stock. Under the National Bank Act and OCC regulations, certain capital transactions are subject to the approval of the OCC.
We continue to utilize stress testing as an important mechanism to inform our decisions on the appropriate level of capital, based upon actual and hypothetically stressed economic conditions, which are comparable in severity to the scenarios published by the FRB. The timing and amount of capital actions are subject to various factors, including our financial performance, business needs, prevailing and anticipated economic conditions, and the results of our internal stress testing, as well as Board and OCC approval. Shares may be repurchased occasionally in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Schedule 35
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
Total shareholders’ equity decreased $423 million, or 5% to $7.5 billion at December 31, 2021. An $866 million increase in retained earnings was offset by significant decreases in common stock and additional paid-in capital, AOCI, and preferred stock. Common stock and additional paid-in capital decreased $758 million, primarily due to common stock repurchases. AOCI decreased $405 million, primarily due to decreases in the fair value of available-for-sale securities as a result of changes in interest rates. Preferred stock decreased $126 million due to the redemption of the outstanding shares of our 5.75% Series H Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock at par value during the second quarter of 2021.
Capital Management Actions
Weighted average diluted shares outstanding decreased 5.4 million in 2021, primarily due to common stock repurchases. During 2021, we repurchased 13.5 million common shares outstanding for $800 million, which is equivalent to 8.2% of common stock outstanding as of December 31, 2020. In January 2022, the Board approved a plan to repurchase up to $50 million of common shares outstanding during the first quarter of 2022. In February 2022, we repurchased 107,559 common shares outstanding for $7.5 million at an average price of $69.73.
Schedule 36
CAPITAL DISTRIBUTIONS
Under the OCC’s “Earnings Limitation Rule,” our dividend payments are restricted to an amount equal to the sum of the total of (1) our net income for that year, and (2) retained earnings for the preceding two years, unless the OCC approves the declaration and payment of dividends in excess of such amount. As of January 1, 2022, we had $1.1 billion of retained net profits available for distribution.
The common stock dividend was $0.38 per share during the second half of 2021, compared with $0.34 during the first half of the year and the prior year. We paid common dividends of $232 million in 2021, compared with $225 million in 2020. In January 2022, the Board declared a quarterly dividend of $0.38 per common share payable on
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
February 24, 2022, to shareholders of record on February 17, 2022. We also paid dividends on preferred stock of $29 million in 2021, compared with $34 million in 2020.
CECL
We elected to phase-in the regulatory capital effects of the adoption of CECL, as allowed by federal bank agencies, and as described in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. On December 31, 2021, the two-year deferral period for any adverse effect from CECL on regulatory capital expired. The application of these provisions had no impact on our CET1, Tier 1 risk-based, Total risk-based capital, and Tier 1 leverage capital ratios at December 31, 2021, and therefore, will not have any phase-in impact to our capital ratios over the next three years.
Basel III
We are subject to Basel III capital requirements to maintain adequate levels of capital as measured by several regulatory capital ratios. At December 31, 2021, we met all capital adequacy requirements under the Basel III capital rules. Based on our internal stress testing and other assessments of capital adequacy, we believe we hold capital sufficiently in excess of internal and regulatory requirements for well-capitalized banks.
The following schedule presents our capital and other performance ratios. The Supervision and Regulation section on page 6 and Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contain more information about Basel III capital requirements.
Schedule 37
CAPITAL RATIOS
1 See “GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations” on page 22 for more information regarding these ratios.
At December 31, 2021, Basel III regulatory tier 1 risk-based capital and total risk-based capital was $6.5 billion and $7.7 billion, respectively, compared with $6.6 billion and $7.9 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
Our Tier 1 leverage ratio declined to 7.2% from 8.3%, and has become more relevant in our capital adequacy assessments. Deployment of deposit-driven balance sheet growth into lower risk-weighted assets during the year has resulted in a modest reduction in our risk-weighted regulatory capital ratios, and a larger reduction in the Tier 1 leverage ratio, as the denominator for this ratio is not adjusted for risk.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT ESTIMATES
Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contains a summary of our significant accounting policies. Described below are certain significant accounting policies that we consider critical to our financial statements. These critical accounting policies were selected because the amounts affected by them are significant to the financial statements. Any changes to these amounts, including changes in estimates, may also be significant to the financial statements. We believe that an understanding of these policies, along with the related estimates we are required to make in recording our financial transactions, is important to have a complete picture of our financial
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
condition. In addition, in arriving at these estimates, we are required to make complex and subjective judgments, many of which include a high degree of uncertainty. The following discussion of these critical accounting policies includes the significant estimates related to these policies. We have discussed each of these accounting policies and related estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board.
We have included, where applicable in this document, sensitivity schedules and other examples to demonstrate the impact of the changes in estimates made for various financial transactions. The sensitivities in these schedules and examples are hypothetical and should be viewed with caution. Changes in estimates are based on variations in assumptions and are not subject to simple extrapolation, as the relationship of the change in the assumption to the change in the amount of the estimate may not be linear. In addition, the effect of a variation in one assumption is likely to cause changes in other assumptions, which could potentially magnify or counteract the sensitivities.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The ACL includes the ALLL and the RULC and represents our estimate of current expected credit losses related to the loan and lease portfolio and unfunded lending commitments as of the balance sheet date. The ACL for our securities portfolio is estimated separately from loans.
On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU 2016-13, or CECL. Upon adoption of the ASU, we recorded the full amount of the ACL for loans and leases of $526 million, resulting in an after-tax increase to retained earnings of $20 million. The impact of the adoption of CECL for our securities portfolio was less than $1 million.
The CECL allowance is calculated based on quantitative models and management qualitative judgment based on many factors over the life of loan. The primary assumptions of the CECL quantitative model are the economic forecast, the length of the reasonable and supportable forecast period, the length of the reversion period, prepayment rates, and the credit quality of the portfolio.
As a result of the CECL accounting standard, the ACL may change significantly each period because, under the CECL methodology, the ACL is subject to economic forecasts that may change materially from period to period. Although we believe that our methodology for determining an appropriate level for the ACL adequately addresses the various components that could potentially result in credit losses, the processes and their elements include features that may be susceptible to significant change. Any unfavorable differences between the actual outcome of credit-related events and our estimates could require an additional provision for credit losses.
For example, if the ACL was evaluated on the baseline economic scenario rather than probability weighting four scenarios, the quantitatively determined amount of the ACL at December 31, 2021 would decrease by approximately $82 million. Additionally, if the probability of default risk grade for all pass-graded loans was immediately downgraded one grade on our internal risk-grading scale, the quantitatively determined amount of the ACL at December 31, 2021 would increase by approximately $40 million. These sensitivity analyses are hypothetical and have been provided only to indicate the potential impact that changes in economic forecasts and changes in risk grades may have on the ACL estimate. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the processes and methodologies used to estimate the ACL.
Fair Value Estimates
We measure many of our assets and liabilities at fair value. Fair value is the price that could be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. To increase consistency and comparability in fair value measurements, GAAP has established a three-level hierarchy to prioritize the valuation inputs among (1) observable inputs that reflect quoted prices in active markets, (2) inputs other than quoted prices with observable market data, and (3) unobservable data such as our own data or single dealer nonbinding pricing quotes.
When observable market prices are not available, fair value is estimated using modeling techniques such as discounted cash flow analysis. These modeling techniques use assumptions that market participants would consider in pricing the asset or the liability, including assumptions about the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique,
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
the effect of a restriction on the sale or use of an asset, the life of the asset and applicable growth rate, the risk of nonperformance, and other related assumptions.
The selection and weighting of the various fair value techniques may result in a fair value higher or lower than the carrying value of the item being valued. Considerable judgment may be involved in determining the amount that is most representative of fair value.
For assets and liabilities measured at fair value, our policy is to maximize the use of observable inputs, when available, and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when developing fair value measurements. In certain cases, when market observable inputs for model-based valuation techniques may not be readily available, we are required to make judgments about the assumptions market participants would use in estimating the fair value of the financial instrument. The models used to determine fair value adjustments are regularly evaluated by management for relevance under current facts and circumstances.
Changes in market conditions may reduce the availability of quoted prices or observable data. For example, reduced liquidity in the capital markets or changes in secondary market activities could result in observable market inputs becoming unavailable. When market data is not available, we use valuation techniques requiring more management judgment to estimate the appropriate fair value.
Fair value is used on a recurring basis for certain assets and liabilities in which fair value is the primary measure of accounting. Fair value is used on a nonrecurring basis to measure certain assets or liabilities (including loans held for sale and OREO) for impairment or for disclosure purposes in accordance with current accounting guidance.
Impairment analysis also relates to long-lived assets, goodwill, and core deposit and other intangible assets. An impairment loss is recognized if the carrying amount of the asset is not likely to be recoverable and exceeds its fair value. In determining the fair value, management uses models and applies the techniques and assumptions previously described.
AFS securities are valued using several methodologies, which depend on the nature of the security, availability of current market information, and other factors. AFS securities in an unrealized loss position are formally reviewed on a quarterly basis for the presence of impairment. If we have an intent to sell an identified security, or it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we first recognize an identified impairment. If we do not have the intent to sell a security, and it is more likely than not that we will not be required to sell a security prior to recovery of its amortized cost basis, then we determine whether there is any impairment attributable to credit-related factors.
Notes 1, 3, 5, 7, and 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the “Investment Securities Portfolio” on page 43 contain further information regarding the use of fair value estimates.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded at fair value in the financial statements of a reporting unit at the time of its acquisition and is subsequently evaluated at least annually for impairment in accordance with current accounting guidance. We perform this annual test at the beginning of the fourth quarter, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of any of our reporting units, inclusive of goodwill, is less than fair value. The goodwill impairment test for a given reporting unit compares its fair value with its carrying value. If the carrying amount, inclusive of goodwill, is more likely than not to exceed its fair value, additional quantitative analysis must be performed to determine the amount, if any, of goodwill impairment. Our reporting units with goodwill are Amegy, CB&T, and Zions Bank.
To determine the fair value of a reporting unit, we historically have used a combination of up to three separate quantitative methods: comparable publicly-traded commercial banks in the Western and Southwestern states (“Market Value”); where applicable, comparable acquisitions of commercial banks in the Western and
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Southwestern states (“Transaction Value”); and the discounted present value of management’s estimates of future cash flows.
Critical assumptions that are used as part of these calculations may include:
•Selection of comparable publicly-traded companies based on location, size, and business focus and composition;
•Selection of market comparable acquisition transactions, if available, based on location, size, business focus and composition, and date of the transaction;
•The discount rate, which is based on our estimate of the cost of equity capital;
•The projections of future earnings and cash flows of the reporting unit;
•The relative weight given to the valuations derived by the three methods described; and
•The control premium associated with reporting units.
We apply a control premium in the Market Value approach to determine the reporting units’ equity values. Control premiums represent the ability of a controlling shareholder to change how we are managed and can cause the fair value of a reporting unit as a whole to exceed its market capitalization. Based on a review of historical bank acquisition transactions within our geographic footprint, and a comparison of the target banks’ market values 30 days prior to the announced transaction to the deal value, we have determined that up to a 25% control premium for the reporting units is appropriate.
Since estimates are an integral part of the impairment test computations, changes in these estimates could have a significant impact on our reporting units' fair value and the goodwill impairment amount, if any. Estimates include economic conditions, which impact the assumptions related to interest and growth rates, loss rates, and imputed cost of equity capital. The fair value estimates for each reporting unit incorporate current economic and market conditions, including Federal Reserve monetary policy expectations and the impact of legislative and regulatory changes. Additional factors that may significantly affect the estimates include, among others, competitive forces, customer behaviors and attrition, loan losses, changes in growth trends, cost structures and technology, changes in equity market values and merger and acquisition valuations, and changes in industry conditions.
Weakening in the economic environment, a decline in the performance of the reporting units, or other factors could cause the fair value of one or more of the reporting units to fall below carrying value, resulting in a goodwill impairment charge. Additionally, new legislative or regulatory changes not anticipated in management’s expectations may cause the fair value of one or more of the reporting units to fall below the carrying value, resulting in a goodwill impairment charge. Any impairment charge would not affect our regulatory capital ratios, tangible common equity ratio, or liquidity position.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed our annual goodwill impairment evaluation, effective October 1, 2021. We concluded that none of our reporting units were impaired. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed a full quantitative analysis and determined that the fair values of Zions Bank, CB&T, and Amegy exceeded their carrying values by 44%, 28%, and 12%, respectively. As part of the quantitative analysis, we also performed a hypothetical sensitivity analysis on the discount rate assumption to evaluate the impact of an adverse change to this assumption. If the discount rate applied to future earnings was increased by 100 bps, the fair values of Zions Bank, CB&T, and Amegy, would exceed their carrying values by 39%, 24%, and 9%, respectively.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements discusses recently issued accounting pronouncements that we will be required to adopt. Also described is our expectation of the impact these new accounting pronouncements will have, to the extent they are material, on our financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity.
ZIONS BANCORPORATION, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION