Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. For convenience of presentation some of the numbers have been rounded in the text below.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including a year-to-year comparison between 2021 and 2020, is presented below. For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a year-to-year comparison between 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed on March 25, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering and developing small molecule therapeutics targeting fundamental biological pathways of cancers. We use our highly efficient drug discovery engine, which we refer to as our “Integrated Discovery Engine”, to identify targets and develop small molecule new chemical entities, or NCEs, with properties that we believe could result in potentially differentiated product profiles. Our discovery engine combines our extensive experience and capabilities across cancer biology and medicinal chemistry. We believe our product candidates are differentiated from current programs targeting similar pathways and, if approved, have the potential to significantly impact clinical outcomes of patients with cancer.
Clinical Program Overview
We are developing a broad pipeline of product candidates with an initial focus on validated oncology targets with the potential to address large patient populations. We currently have two lead product candidates - ZN-c3, an inhibitor of Wee1, a protein tyrosine kinase, and ZN-c5, an oral selective estrogen receptor degrader, or SERD. Our other clinical product candidates include ZN-d5, a selective inhibitor of B-cell lymphoma 2, or BCL-2, and ZN-e4, an irreversible inhibitor of mutant epidermal growth factor receptor, or EGFR.
ZN-c3 (Wee1 Inhibitor)
ZN-c3 is currently being evaluated in multiple ongoing clinical trials, including a Phase 2 monotherapy clinical trial for the treatment of women with recurrent or persistent uterine serous carcinoma, or USC. The study was initiated following an end-of-Phase 1 meeting with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, which concurred in principle with the proposal that ZN-c3 has the potential for an accelerated approval pathway based on the proposed global study design. The FDA granted Fast Track designation in November 2021 to ZN-c3 for the treatment of recurrent or persistent uterine serous carcinoma in adult women.
In addition, ZN-c3 in combination with chemotherapy has received orphan drug designation and rare pediatric disease designation from the FDA for osteosarcoma. We initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of ZN-c3 in combination with chemotherapy in pediatric and adult patients with osteosarcoma during the third quarter of 2021. We expect to report initial results from this trial in the second half of 2022. If ZN-c3 were to obtain approval for the designated indication, we believe it may be eligible for a rare pediatric disease priority voucher upon approval.
ZN-c3 is also being evaluated in an ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial for the treatment of advanced solid tumors as a monotherapy and in an ongoing Phase 1b clinical trial in combination with chemotherapy in patients with advanced ovarian cancer.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we initiated a Phase 2 monotherapy trial for a tumor agnostic, predictive biomarker, subject to FDA feedback. This Phase 2 tumor agnostic trial planned with registrational intent would investigate ZN-c3 in patients with solid tumors that express the identified predictive biomarker. We also initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial evaluating ZN-c3 in combination with GlaxoSmithKline’s PARP inhibitor niraparib (ZEJULA®), as part of a clinical research collaboration in ovarian cancer. We also announced the plans to initiate a Phase 1/2 combination trial of ZN-d5 + ZN-c3 in AML and a Phase 1b combination trial of ZN-c5 + ZN-c3 in CDK4/6i resistant breast cancer in 2022.
We have agreed to support two planned additional investigator-initiated trials that we expect to initiate in 2022: a trial with the Ivy Brain Center in glioblastoma multiforme and a trial in combination with immunotherapy with Dana Farber in triple negative breast cancer.
ZN-c5 (Oral SERD)
In the ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial evaluating ZN-c5 in combination with Pfizer’s CDK4/6 palbociclib, and the
Phase 1b clinical trial evaluating ZN-c5 in combination with Lilly’s CDK4/6 abemaciclib, the safety and tolerability data suggested ZN-c5 has the potential to be a promising candidate for further evaluation in combinations. We continue to enroll patients in the two separate combination trials and expect to report initial results in the first half of 2022 from these trials. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we announced plans to initiate a Phase 1b combination of ZN-c5 + ZN-c3 in CDK4/6i resistant breast cancer in 2022.
ZN-d5 (BCL-2 Inhibitor)
The ongoing Phase 1 monotherapy dose escalation trial for ZN-d5 is enrolling patients with relapsed/refractory Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma and additionally began enrolling patients with acute myeloid leukemia in the third quarter of 2021. We reported initial results from this Phase 1 trial in the fourth quarter of 2021. We also announced plans to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial in amyloidosis and a Phase 1/2 combination trial of ZN-d5 + ZN-c3 in AML.
ZN-e4 (EGFR Inhibitor)
We reported initial results from the Phase 1/2 dose escalation trial for ZN-e4 in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in both osimertirab-naive and experienced patients in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Zentera Therapeutics
Our China joint venture, Zentera, is also advancing corresponding clinical trials in China for ZN-c3, ZN-c5 and ZN-d5. See “License Agreements and Strategic Collaborations-Zentera Therapeutics” below and Notes 3 and 15 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity Overview
Since our inception, our operations have been limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and performing research and development of our product pipeline. We do not have any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenues from product sales. We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. We will need to raise substantial additional capital to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $166.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had an accumulated deficit of $359.6 million as of December 31, 2021. We had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $339.9 million as of December 31, 2021. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third quarter of 2023.
Corporate Conversion
In connection with our IPO, we converted from a Delaware limited liability company into a Delaware corporation pursuant to a statutory conversion, and changed our name from Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, LLC to Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. We refer to all transactions related to our conversion to a corporation as the Corporate Conversion. As a result of the Corporate Conversion, all holders of units of Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, LLC became holders of shares of common stock of Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
In connection with the Corporate Conversion, our outstanding Series A convertible preferred units, Series B convertible preferred units, Series C convertible preferred units, Class A common units and Class B common units, or Units, converted into an aggregate of 25,288,854 shares of our common stock (including 1,160,277 shares of restricted common stock) based on the IPO price of $18.00 per share of common stock.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor how the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our employees, business, preclinical studies and clinical trials. In response to the spread of COVID-19, we have closed our executive offices with our administrative employees continuing their work outside of our offices and limited the number of staff in any given research and development laboratory to maintain proper social distancing while keeping our science and discovery work on track. Disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in difficulties including delays in initiating new trial sites and certain supply chain activities, suspension of enrollment at some of our existing trial sites, and the incurrence of additional costs as a result of preclinical study and clinical trial delays and adjustments. Limited operations at our laboratory facilities have also resulted in delays in our research-stage programs. As a result, we expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, results of operations, clinical development timelines and financial condition. At this time, there is significant uncertainty relating to the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic and impact of related responses. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the continued impact on financial markets and the global economy, and the effectiveness of the global response to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and we expect will continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials.” in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
License Agreements and Strategic Collaborations
Recurium IP Holdings, LLC
In December 2014, and as amended and restated effective as of December 2017 and September 2019 and as amended in May 2020, we entered into a license agreement, or the Recurium Agreement, with Recurium IP Holdings, LLC, or Recurium IP, under which we were granted an exclusive worldwide license to certain intellectual property rights owned or controlled by Recurium IP to develop and commercialize pharmaceutical products for the treatment or prevention of disease, other than for pain. In connection with the May 2020 amendment, we clarified certain aspects of the sublicensing payment provisions. We have the right to sublicense our rights under the Recurium Agreement, subject to certain conditions. We are required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize at least one product that comprises or contains a licensed compound and to execute certain development activities.
Under the terms of the Recurium Agreement, we are obligated to make development and regulatory milestone payments, pay royalties for net sales and make sublicensing payments with respect to certain licensed products directed to one of ten specific biological targets, including ZN-c3, ZN-c5 and ZN-e4. We are obligated to make development and regulatory milestone payments for such licensed products of up to $44.5 million. In addition, we are obligated to make milestone payments up to $150,000 for certain licensed products used in animals. We are also obligated to pay royalties on sales of such licensed products at a mid- to high-single digit percentage. In addition, if we choose to sublicense or assign to any third parties our rights under the Recurium Agreement with respect to such licensed products, we must pay to Recurium IP 20% of sublicensing income received in connection with such transaction.
Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research
In February 2016, and as amended in April 2017 and December 2017, we entered into an option agreement, or the Mayo Agreement, with Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research under which we were granted an exclusive option to obtain a nonexclusive worldwide license to know-how and an exclusive worldwide license to related patent rights created by Mayo under the Mayo Agreement. The Mayo Agreement provided that it will expire on the date of the last to expire of the Mayo patent rights or, if no Mayo patent rights arise, on February 11, 2021. No Mayo patent rights were created under the Mayo Agreement; therefore the agreement expired on February 11, 2021. In consideration for the grant of know-how we provided grants of common stock on the first anniversary and Class A common units on the second and third anniversaries following entry into the Mayo Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we have granted equity securities which amount to 15,435 shares of common stock under the Mayo Agreement.
SciClone Pharmaceuticals International (Cayman) Development Ltd.
In December 2014, and as amended in December 2016 and December 2017, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement, or the SciClone Agreement, with SciClone Pharmaceuticals International (Cayman) Development Ltd., or SciClone, under which we granted an exclusive license certain intellectual property rights in the People’s Republic of China (including the territories of Macao and Hong Kong), South Korea, Taiwan and Vietnam, or the SciClone Territory, for SciClone to develop and commercialize a licensed product for the treatment or prevention of oncologic diseases and an exclusive option to obtain a similar license for up to two additional licensed products. Under the SciClone Agreement, SciClone is responsible for clinical development activities required in order to obtain regulatory approval in the SciClone Territory. SciClone paid to us a one-time
upfront payment of $1.0 million upon entering into the SciClone Agreement, and $4.0 million in aggregate milestone payments. No additional development or commercial milestones or reimbursement for research and development expenses are payable under the SciClone Agreement, as amended. We are entitled to receive a mid-single digit royalty on net sales of licensed products in the SciClone Territory, which royalty is subject to certain reductions in the event that SciClone is unable to achieve certain gross margins or if generic products are sold or if technology covering a licensed product is licensed from a third party. We have also agreed to pay SciClone tiered royalties pursuant to the terms of the SciClone Agreement, the applicable rate of which are determined based on whether a compound is developed to a successful dual IND submission and the costs incurred by SciClone for the development of such product candidate. Following the December 2016 amendment to the SciClone Agreement, SciClone retains the exclusive license to develop and commercialize our EGFR inhibitor product candidate, ZN-e4, in the SciClone Territory, and the exclusive option to obtain an exclusive license to develop up to two specified compounds under the SciClone Agreement for which we submit an IND by providing notice and paying $5.0 million to us. SciClone’s and our royalty obligations will expire on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis on the later of fifteen years from the date of first commercial sale or when there is no longer a valid patent claim covering such licensed product in such country.
Pfizer Clinical Trial Collaboration and Supply Agreement
In May 2018, we entered into a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Pfizer, Inc. to evaluate the safety, tolerability and efficacy of ZN-c5 in combination with their CDK4/6 inhibitor, palbociclib, in our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial of ZN-c5. Pursuant to this agreement, we will be responsible for the conduct and cost of the relevant studies, under the supervision of a joint development committee made up of our representatives and representatives of Pfizer that meets quarterly. Pfizer will supply palbociclib for use in the trial, at no cost to us.
Eli Lilly and Company Clinical Trial Collaboration and Supply Agreement
In July 2020, we entered into a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Eli Lilly and Company, or Lilly, to evaluate the safety, tolerability and efficacy of ZN-c5 in combination with their CDK4/6 inhibitor, abemaciclib, in a Phase 1b open label multi-center clinical trial that we initiated in November 2020. Pursuant to this agreement, we will be responsible for the conduct and cost of the relevant studies. Lilly is obligated to supply abemaciclib for use in the trial, at no cost to us. We are required to provide to Lilly clinical data and other reports at major decision points during the trial and no later than 60 days following completion of the planned Phase 1b clinical trial.
This agreement does not grant any right of first negotiation to participate in future clinical trials, and each of the parties retains all rights and ability to evaluate their respective compounds in any clinical studies, either as monotherapy or in combination with any other product or compound, in any therapeutic area.
The agreement with Lilly will expire upon completion of all obligations of the parties thereunder or upon termination by either party. We and Lilly each have the right to terminate the agreement for material breach by the other party. In addition, the agreement may be terminated by either party due to safety considerations or if either party decides to discontinue development of its own compound for medical, scientific, legal or other reasons or if a regulatory authority takes any action preventing that party from supplying its compound for the study. Lilly also has the right to terminate this agreement if it notifies us in writing that it reasonably and in good faith believes that abemaciclib is being used in an unsafe manner, and we fail to incorporate changes to address such issue, and the issue is unable to be resolved following elevation to appropriate parties.
GlaxoSmithKline Clinical Trial Collaboration and Supply Agreement
In April 2021, we entered into a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with GlaxoSmithKline plc, or GSK, in which we will evaluate the combination of ZN-c3, our oral Wee1 inhibitor product candidate, and niraparib, GSK’s poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, in patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. We are currently conducting clinical studies with ZN-c3 both as a monotherapy and in combination with certain standard of care therapies.
Pursuant to this agreement, we will be responsible for the conduct and cost of the relevant studies, under the supervision of a joint development committee made up of our representatives and representatives of GSK that meets quarterly. GSK will supply niraparib for use in the collaboration, at no cost to us. We are required to provide to GSK clinical data and other reports upon completion of the study.
This agreement does not grant any right of first negotiation to participate in future clinical trials, and each of the parties retains all rights and ability to evaluate their respective compounds in any clinical studies, either as monotherapy or in combination with any other product or compound, in any therapeutic area.
The agreement with GSK will expire upon completion of all obligations of the parties thereunder or upon termination by either party. We and GSK each have the right to terminate the agreement for material breach by the other party. In addition, the agreement may be terminated by either party due to safety considerations or if either party decides to discontinue development of its own compound for medical, scientific, legal or other reasons or if a regulatory authority takes any action preventing that party from supplying its compound for the study or in the event the other party is subject to specified bankruptcy, insolvency or similar circumstances. GSK also has the right to terminate this agreement if it notifies us in writing that it reasonably and in good faith believes that niraparib is being used in an unsafe manner, and we fail to incorporate changes to address such issue, and the issue is unable to be resolved following elevation to appropriate parties.
Zentera Therapeutics
In May 2020, each of our subsidiaries Zeno Alpha, Inc., K-Group Alpha, Inc. Zeno Management, Inc. and K-Group Beta, Inc. entered into a collaboration and license agreement with our joint venture, Zentera, which we refer to as the “Zentera Sublicenses”, pursuant to which we collaborate with Zentera on the development and commercialization of ZN-c3, ZN-c5 and ZN-d5, respectively, whether alone or in a licensed product, or the Collaboration Products, in each case for the treatment or prevention of disease, other than for pain, which is referred to as the Zentera Field, in the People’s Republic of China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, which is referred to as the “Zentera Collaboration Territory”. Under each Zentera Sublicense, Zentera will lead development, and upon regulatory approval, the commercialization, of the Collaboration Products in the Zentera Collaboration Territory. On May 19, 2020, Zentera issued an aggregate of 60.2% of its issued shares of common stock to Zeno Alpha, Inc., K-Group Alpha, Inc., K-Group Beta, Inc., Zeno Management, Inc. and Zeno Beta, Inc. In July 2021, Zentera entered into a Series B Preference Shares Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which it raised $75.0 million in gross proceeds. As of December 31, 2021, we hold a 40.3% equity interest in Zentera. Anthony Y. Sun, M.D., our President and Chief Executive Officer, serves as Chief Executive Officer and a member of the board of directors of Zentera, and Kevin D. Bunker, Ph.D., our Chief Operating Officer, serves as a member of the board of directors of Zentera.
Under each Zentera Sublicense, we granted Zentera an exclusive, royalty-bearing license under certain of our technology, including technology licensed from Recurium under the Recurium Agreement, to develop and commercialize the Collaboration Products in the Zentera Field and in the Zentera Collaboration Territory, subject to certain rights that we retain, and upon a successful manufacturing transfer, a non-exclusive license under certain of our manufacturing technology to manufacture Collaboration Products in the Zentera Field and in the Zentera Collaboration Territory. Zentera has the right to sublicense its rights under the Zentera Sublicenses subject to certain conditions.
Under the terms of the Zentera Sublicenses, Zentera is responsible for the costs of developing the Collaboration Products in the Zentera Collaboration Territory, and we are responsible for the costs of developing the Collaboration Products outside the Zentera Collaboration Territory, provided that Zentera will reimburse us for a portion of its costs for global data management, pharmacovigilance, safety database management, and chemistry, manufacturing and controls activities with respect to each Collaboration Product. Under the Zentera Sublicenses, we will be eligible to receive future development and regulatory milestones of up to $4.45 million per Collaboration Product. Zentera will pay us royalties on net sales of Collaboration Products in the Zentera Collaboration Territory at a mid- to high-single digit percentage, subject to certain reductions. In addition, if Zentera or its affiliate chooses to sublicense or assign to any third parties its rights under the Zentera Sublicenses with respect to any Collaboration Product, Zentera must pay to us 20% of sublicensing income received by Zentera or its affiliates in connection with such transaction.
Zentera’s royalty obligations will expire on a Collaboration Product-by-Collaboration Product and region-by-region basis upon the later of the date on which such product is no longer covered by a valid claim of a licensed patent and the 15th anniversary of the first commercial sale of such product in such region.
Zentera filed four Clinical Trial Applications, or CTAs (China equivalent of IND), and four have been approved in China to date for ZN-c3, ZN-c5, ZN-d5 and ZN-c3 in combination. Zentera has begun enrolling four clinical trials for ZN-c3, ZN-c5 and ZN-d5.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue, and we do not expect to generate any revenue in the foreseeable future from product sales. We have generated, and may in the future generate, revenue from payments received under our collaboration
agreements, which includes payments of upfront fees, license fees, milestone-based payments and reimbursements for research and development efforts.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, and include:
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, and other third parties that conduct research, preclinical activities and clinical trials on our behalf as well as contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, that manufacture drug material for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
•the costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
•license payments made for intellectual property used in research and development activities; and
•allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Reimbursed research and development costs under government grant arrangements are recorded as a reduction to research and development expenses and are recognized in the period in which the related costs are incurred.
We track external development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, license payments made under our licensing arrangements or other internal costs to specific development programs or product candidates. These costs are included in unallocated research and development expenses in the table below.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate or development program:
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have a higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future and will comprise a larger percentage of our total expenses as we complete our ongoing clinical trials, initiate new clinical trials, continue to discover and develop additional product candidates and prepare regulatory filings for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical development.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of our existing and future clinical trials of our product candidates or any other product candidate we may develop or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any product candidate for which we obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any product candidate. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates and any other product candidate we may develop in the future will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of patients who enroll in each trial;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•any delays in clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the phase of development of the product candidate;
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
•uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
•the actual probability of success for our product candidates, including the safety and efficacy, early clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability;
•significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
•the timing and receipt of any marketing approvals; and
•the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our personnel headcount to support increased research and development activities relating to ZN-c3, ZN-c5, ZN-d5, ZN-e4, and any other product candidate we may develop. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale marketable securities.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we and our corporate subsidiaries have generated cumulative federal, state and foreign net operating loss for which we have not recorded any net tax benefit due to uncertainty around utilizing these tax attributes within their respective carryforward periods.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in those items in dollars:
Revenue
We did not generate any revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $175.6 million, compared to $84.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $90.7 million was primarily due to increases in external research and development expenses related to our lead product candidates, as we advanced our clinical pipeline in 2021. In addition, in 2021, we conducted additional preclinical studies, incurred additional manufacturing costs, and incurred increased costs for study and lab materials. Increases of $23.6 million, $22.9 million and $15.0 million were seen in clinical trial spend, personnel expenditures, and chemistry, manufacturing and controls costs, respectively. Lab equipment and supplies also increased by $1.8 million. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021 we incurred $10.0 million in milestone payments, $7.0 million in increased collaboration costs and recorded an $8.8 million impairment charge on Kalyra's IPR&D. Increases of $6.4 million and $0.3 million were the result of additional overhead allocation to research and development as well as a decrease in grant revenue, respectively. These amounts were partially offset by $5.3 million in reimbursements from Zentera.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $40.9 million, compared to $33.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $7.1 million was primarily attributable to an increase of $8.7 million in employee-related costs, of which $4.5 million was driven by non-cash stock-based compensation from incentive grants issued during the period and increased headcount to support our growth. Other increases include $2.4 million in rent and depreciation, $2.0 million in office supplies, equipment and software, and $0.7 million in insurance costs. These amounts were partially offset by a reduction of $6.4 million in allocable overhead and $0.3 million in external consultant expense.
Investment and Other Income, Net
Investment and other income was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $0.3 million was primarily the result of a loss on foreign currency from our Australian subsidiary.
Gain on Deconsolidation of Zentera
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Zentera was deconsolidated, resulting in a gain of $51.6 million. There was no comparable event during the corresponding period in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have been limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and performing research and development of our product pipeline. We do not have any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenues from product sales and we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our research programs and product candidates. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase in connection with conducting additional preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current and future research programs and product candidates, contracting with CMOs to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for our operations.
As a result, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we plan to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, which may include collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. There are no assurances that we will be successful in obtaining an adequate level of financing as and when needed to finance our operations on terms acceptable to us or at all, particularly in light of the economic downturn and ongoing uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic could adversely affect the economies and financial markets of the global economy, resulting in an economic downturn that could also affect our operations, our ability to conduct our clinical trials, our ability to raise additional funds through public offerings and the volatility of our stock price and trading in our stock. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we expect we will continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of any economic recession or depression that has occurred or may occur in the future. If we are unable to secure adequate additional funding as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing and commercializing therapeutics, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
We do not currently have any approved products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities. From inception through December 31, 2021, we raised a total of $701 million in gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock and Series A, B and C convertible preferred units. As of December 31, 2021, we had $59.7 million in cash and cash equivalents, $280.2 million in marketable securities, and an accumulated deficit of $359.6 million. We had no indebtedness as of December 31, 2021.
ATM Program
In May 2021, we entered into a sales agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with SVB Leerink LLC, or SVB Leerink, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may, from time to time, issue and sell common stock with an aggregate value of up to $200.0 million in “at-the-market” offerings, or the ATM, under our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-255769) filed with the SEC on May 4, 2021. Sales of common stock, if any, pursuant to the Sales Agreement, may be made in sales deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a) of the Securities Act, including sales made directly through the Nasdaq Global Market or any other existing trading market for our common stock. From May 3, 2021 to December 31, 2021, we sold 125,643 shares of common stock under the 2021 Sales Agreement at a volume weighted-average price of $79.59 per share, raising aggregate gross proceeds of $10.0 million, before fees and expenses of $0.3 million.
July 2021 Follow-On Offering
In July 2021, we completed a follow-on offering of our common stock in which we issued and sold 3,565,000 shares of our common stock (including 465,000 shares of common stock in connection with the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a public offering price of $48.50 per share, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $172.9 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of $10.7 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the period presented:
Operating Activities
We have incurred losses since inception. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $154.1 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $166.1 million as we incurred expenses associated with research activities for our lead product candidates and incurred general and administrative expenses, as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities of $16.6 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $4.6 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $86.8 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $118.5 million as we incurred expenses associated with research activities for our lead product candidates and incurred general and administrative expenses, and partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $7.8 million and non-cash adjustments of $23.9 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $18.1 million was attributable to the net investment of excess cash of $363.5 million and the purchases of property and equipment of $6.1 million, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $365.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $284.8 million was attributable to the net investment of excess cash of $284.1 million and the purchases of property and equipment of $0.8 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $178.5 million primarily relates to the July 2021 follow-on offering and shares sold during December 2021 under the Sales Agreement which provided net proceeds of $162.2 million and $9.7 million, respectively. An additional $7.7 million was provided from the issuance of common stock under equity incentive plans.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 of $360.4 million primarily relates to net proceeds from the completion of our initial public offering of $172.5 million, net proceeds from our August 2020 follow-on offering of $155.9 million, net proceeds from the issuance of our Series C convertible preferred units of $14.2 million, and contributions from noncontrolling interest owners of $18.4 million.
Funding Requirements
Our operating expenses have increased substantially in 2021 and are expected to increase substantially in the future in connection with our ongoing activities.
Specifically, our expenses will increase as we:
•advance the clinical development of ZN-c3, ZN-c5, ZN-d5 and ZN-e4 for the treatment of oncology indications;
•pursue the preclinical and clinical development of other current and future research programs and product candidates;
•in-license or acquire the rights to other products, product candidates or technologies;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional personnel in research, manufacturing and regulatory and clinical development as well as management personnel;
•seek regulatory approval for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical development; and
•expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our operations as a public company.
As of December 31, 2021, we have $1.5 million and $44.5 million in current and long-term lease liabilities, respectively. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third quarter of 2023. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical drugs, it is difficult to estimate with certainty the amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress, costs and results of our clinical trials for our programs for ZN-c3, ZN-c5, ZN-d5 and ZN-e4;
•the progress, costs and results of additional research and preclinical studies in other research programs we initiate in the future;
•the costs and timing of process development and manufacturing scale-up activities associated with our product candidates and other programs we advance them through preclinical and clinical development;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other agreements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to other products, product candidates or technologies; and
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property-related claims.
In addition, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our liquidity and future funding requirements is uncertain as the pandemic continues to evolve globally. We have considered and will continue to consider the availability of relief provided by such legislative actions as the Families First Act and the CARES Act, and have opted to pursue certain, but not all measures including the deferral of employer payroll taxes, but not including Payroll Protection Plan loans. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” and “Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and we expect will continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials".
Further, our operating results may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Until such time, if ever, that we can generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration agreements, other third-party funding, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and marketing and distribution arrangements.
We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other third-party funding, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying
values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those
most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Goodwill
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
Our goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of net assets acquired from its business combination. The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from business combinations and asset acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of net tangible assets and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if an event occurs indicating the potential for impairment.
During the impairment review process, we consider qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, including goodwill. If we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then no additional assessment is deemed necessary. Otherwise, we proceed to compare the estimated fair values of the reporting units with the carrying values, including goodwill. If the carrying amounts of the reporting units exceed the fair value, we record an impairment loss based on the difference.
We use available market information and valuation methodologies using estimates to determine the fair values of the goodwill. We base our estimates on the best information available at the time and available market information may vary. If we over estimate the fair value of the goodwill, our actual impairment charge may differ from our estimates.
Research and Development Expenses - Clinical Trial Accruals
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
All of our clinical trials have been executed with support from contract research organizations, (CROs), and other vendors. We accrue costs for clinical trial activities performed by CROs and other vendors based upon the estimated amount of work completed on each trial. For clinical trial expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, the activities to be performed for each patient, the number of active clinical sites, and the duration for which the patients will be enrolled in the trial. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent possible through internal reviews, correspondence with CROs and review of contractual terms.
We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. However, additional information may become available to us, which may allow us to make a more accurate estimate in future periods. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. There were no such significant changes during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Share-Based Payments
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
The Company maintains a Stock Incentive Plan, which provides for share-based payment awards, including stock options, employee stock purchase plan, restricted stock and performance awards. We determine the fair value of our stock option awards and performance awards at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes model. We determine the fair value of our restricted stock awards at the date of grant using the closing market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Option-pricing models and generally accepted valuation techniques require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the future volatility of our stock price, expected dividend yield and future employee stock option exercise behaviors. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Our performance awards require management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving long-term Company goals. We do not currently believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in estimates or assumptions we use to determine stock-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in share-based compensation expense that could be material.
If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions used, the share-based compensation expense reported in our financial statements may not be representative of the actual economic cost of the share-based compensation. A 10% change in our share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $3.6 million in 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on certain accounting standards that have been adopted during 2021 or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.