Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of the Company. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and forward-looking information under applicable Canadian securities law requirements (collectively, “forward-looking statements”) which are intended to be covered by the safe harbors created thereby. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under the “Part I - Item 1A Risk Factors” section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as, in other reports and documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission from time to time. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a veterinary health company creating products for companion animals by focusing on the unmet needs of clinical veterinarians. Our mission is to enrich the lives of the animals we love and the people that care for them by providing products and technologies that improve patient care and enhance practice health. Our product portfolio includes innovative diagnostics and therapeutic medical devices that emphasize patient health and enhancing practice economics.
We currently have two discrete platforms - our TRUFORMA® platform, comprising point-of-care diagnostic products for disease states in dogs and cats, and our PulseVet® platform, which provides for treatment of musculoskeletal issues in horses and small animals.
Dogs and cats commonly suffer from adrenal disorders and thyroid disease, including hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. We believe that diagnostic tests are vital for identifying these disorders in sick patients as well as for screening apparently healthy patients. In certain cases, multiple assays must be performed to reach a definitive diagnosis of a specific disease or condition. Clinical veterinarians often do not have access to the equipment and assays to perform this testing at the point-of- care. As a result, certain tests must be sent to a reference lab, resulting in delay in diagnosis and treatment, and depriving clinical veterinarians of potential testing revenue.
Through our TRUFORMA platform, we are focused on the development and commercialization of diagnostic instruments and related assays for use at the point-of-care that provide reference lab accuracy, thereby enabling practitioners to diagnose and treat diseases sooner.
Through our PulseVet platform, we are the world leader in electro-hydraulic shockwave technology for the treatment of a wide variety of conditions in horses and small animals. Our technology is indicated for conditions including osteoarthritis, tendon and ligament healing, bone healing, chronic pain relief and wound healing.
On October 1, 2021, we acquired Pulse Veterinary Technologies (“PulseVet”), a leader in electro-hydraulic shock wave technology for use on companion animals.
As a result of an internal strategic view, we have focused our development and commercialization efforts on our TRUFORMA platform and our PulseVet technology. We believe this narrowed focus will enable us to capitalize on our core strengths and to accelerate the commercialization of these existing platforms.
For the foreseeable future, we expect to continue to incur losses, which will begin to decrease from historical levels as we continue the commercialization of our TRUFORMA® platform, and recognize additional profits from the expansion of PulseVet, expand our product development activities, and expand our sales and marketing activities.
We commenced the commercialization of our TRUFORMA platform in March 2021. Our results for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the results of PulseVet from and after its acquisition in October 2021. Consequently, results for the year ended December 31, 2021 are not necessarily comparable to the results expected in future periods.
For further information on the regulatory, business and product pipeline, please see the “Business” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For further information on the risk factors, please see the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Reportable Segments
Our reportable segments are:
•
Diagnostics, which consists of our parent company and its U.S subsidiary and includes the TRUFORMA products, and
•
Therapeutics, which consists of PulseVet operations and its two international subsidiaries, HMT High Medical Technologies (Japan) Co. Ltd. ("HMT") and NeoPulse, GmbH ("NeoPulse"), and includes the ProPulse products and services.
Revenue
Our revenue consisted of instruments, cartridges, and warranty services sold in the U.S in association with our TRUFORMA platform, as well as instruments, trodes and warranty services sold in the U.S and internationally in association with our PulseVet products.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consisted primarily of the cost of raw materials used in the assembly of PulseVet instruments and trodes, the cost of TRUFORMA instruments purchased, and consumables and the related warranties purchased. We expense all inventory obsolescence provisions related to normal manufacturing changes as cost of revenue.
Operating Expenses
The majority of our operating expenses through December 31, 2021, have been for the general and administrative activities related to general business activities, capital market activities and stock-based compensation, developing a commercial team and research and development activities related to our product development.
Research and Development Expense
All costs of research and development are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. Research and development costs primarily consist of salaries and related expenses for personnel, fees paid to consultants, outside service providers, professional services, travel costs and materials used in clinical trials and research and development.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation for employees, consultants and directors. These expenses also include costs associated with sales and marketing activity, professional fees, and corporate administrative and overhead costs, including rent and other facilities costs, amortization, and depreciation.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $28.1 million and non-capital loss carryforwards for Canada of approximately $37.2 million, which will begin to expire in fiscal year 2035. We have evaluated the factors bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets, which are comprised principally of net operating loss carryforwards and non-capital loss carryforwards. We concluded that, due to the limitations under Section 382, our U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryfowards for the periods prior to February 11, 2021 have been limited to zero. We therefore have derecognized $21.0 million of our U.S deferred tax assets, resulting in a remaining carryforward balance of $7.2 million.
In Canada, due to the uncertainty of realizing any tax benefits as of December 31, 2021, we continue to fully value our Canadian deferred tax assets.
Translation of Foreign Currencies
The functional currency, as determined by management, for our subsidiaries in the United States, Switzerland, and Canada is the U.S. dollar, which is also our reporting currency
The functional currency, as determined by management, for our Japanese subsidiary is the Japanese Yen. Japanese Yen are translated for financial reporting purposes with translation gains and losses recorded as a component of other comprehensive income or loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of equity-settled transactions by reference to the fair value of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted.
We calculate stock-based compensation using the fair value method, under which the fair value of the options at the grant date is calculated using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model, and subsequently expensed over the vesting period of the option using the graded vesting method. The provisions of our stock-based compensation plans do not require us to settle any options by transferring cash or other assets, and therefore we classify the awards as equity. Stock-based compensation expense recognized during the period is based on the value of stock-based payment awards that are ultimately expected to vest. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise these estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. The expected term, which represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding, is estimated based on an average of the term of the options. The risk-free rate assumed in valuing the options is based on the Canadian treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the expected term of the option. The expected dividend yield percentage at the date of grant is zero as we are not expected to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
Loss Per Share
Basic loss per share, or EPS, is computed by dividing the loss attributable to common shareholders, including the charge to retained earnings from the preferred share exchange, by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted EPS reflects the potential dilution that could occur from common shares issuable through the exercise or conversion of stock options, restricted stock awards, warrants and convertible securities. In certain circumstances, the conversion of options, warrants and convertible securities are excluded from diluted EPS if the effect of such inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
The dilutive effect of stock options is determined using the treasury stock method. Stock options and warrants to purchase our common shares issued during the period were not included in the computation of diluted EPS, as the effect would be anti-dilutive.
Comprehensive Loss
We follow ASC topic 220. This statement establishes standards for reporting and display of comprehensive (loss) income and its components. Comprehensive loss is net loss plus certain items that are recorded directly to shareholders’ equity.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this document, management has identified the following as “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates”: Intangible Assets and Business Combinations, Inventory Reserves, and Revenue Recognition and Liabilities due to Customers. We believe that the estimates and assumptions involved in these accounting policies may have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements.
Intangible Assets and Business Combinations
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed as part of a business combination are recognized at their acquisition date fair values. In determining these fair values, we utilized various forms of the income, cost and market approaches depending on the asset or liability being valued.
We used a discounted cash flow model to measure the trade names, customer relationship, and technology assets. The estimation of fair value required significant judgment related to future net cash flows based on assumptions related to revenue and EBITDA growth rates, discount rates, and attrition factors. Inputs were generally determined by taking into account competitive trends, market comparisons, independent appraisals, and historical data, among other factors, and were supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions.
Variances in future cash flows, anticipated growth rates and revenue could significantly impact the value assigned to intangible assets. Any variance could cause impairment charges upon testing.
We will evaluate goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently when an event occurs or circumstances change indicating the carrying value may not be recoverable. When testing goodwill for impairment, we may first assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. During a qualitative analysis, we consider the impact of changes, if any, to the following factors: macroeconomic, industry and market factors; cost factors; changes in overall financial performance; and any other relevant events and uncertainties impacting a reporting unit. If our qualitative assessment indicates a goodwill impairment is more likely than not, we perform additional quantitative analyses. We may also elect to skip the qualitative testing and proceed directly to the quantitative testing. For reporting units where a quantitative analysis is performed, we will perform a test measuring the fair values of the reporting units and comparing them to their aggregate carrying values, including goodwill. If the fair value is less than the carrying value of the reporting unit, an impairment is recognized for the difference, up to the carrying amount of goodwill.
We will estimate the fair values of our reporting units using a discounted cash flow method or a weighted combination of discounted cash flows and a market-based method. The discounted cash flow method includes assumptions about a wide variety of internal and external factors. Significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow method include financial projections of free cash flow, including revenue trends, medical costs trends, operating productivity, income taxes and capital levels; long-term growth rates for determining terminal value beyond the discretely forecasted periods; and discount rates. Financial projections and long-term growth rates used for our reporting units will be consistent with, and use inputs from, our internal long-term business plan and strategies. Discount rates will be determined for each reporting unit and include consideration of the implied risk inherent in their forecasts. Our most significant estimate in the discount rate determinations involves our adjustments to the peer company weighted average costs of capital reflecting reporting unit-specific factors. We will not make any adjustments to decrease a discount rate below the calculated peer company weighted average cost of capital for any reporting unit. Company-specific adjustments to discount rates are subjective and thus are difficult to measure with certainty. The passage of time and the availability of additional information regarding areas of uncertainty with respect to the reporting units’ operations could cause these assumptions to change in the future. Additionally, as part of our quantitative impairment testing, we will perform various sensitivity analyses on certain key assumptions, such as discount rates, cash flow projections and peer company multiples to analyze the potential for a material impact. The market-based method requires determination of an appropriate peer group whose securities are traded on an active market. The peer group is used to derive market multiples to estimate fair value. As of October 1, 2021, we did not complete an annual impairment tests for goodwill as there was no goodwill prior to our acquisition of PulseVet.
Inventory Reserves
Our Diagnostics segment purchases instruments and places them in inventory. Instruments are removed from inventory and recorded as fixed assets when they are placed with our customers under the agreement that they will repeatedly purchase assays (tests) which are utilized in the instrument. Each instrument placed in the portfolio represents an asset that we own. An estimate is made of the anticipated future revenue over the life of the instrument, based on the sale of assays, which is typically ten years. If the payback period of the initial investment in the asset is less than the ten-year life of the asset, we conclude that the inventory has been properly recorded, and no write-down is necessary. We rely on third-party data that considers various data points and assumptions, including, but not limited to, the expected volume of assays which will be sold, anticipated growth rates and placements of instruments. Realization of the anticipated revenue is dependent on the current assumptions and forecasted models.
The customer is obligated to purchase assays during the placement period. However, since the customer is not obligated to purchase the instrument, and can return it at any time, we are exposed to a risk of loss to the extent the customer returns the instrument and discontinues assay purchases.
On December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our Diagnostic inventory was approximately $1.8 million. A significant assumption included in the realization model is a placement rate of two instruments per month, per account manager.
The effect of a 10% reduction in the estimated annual placements of instrument would increase the payback period on December 31, 2021, by .09 years.
Changes to placement rates are not expected to decrease, nor do we expect that any decrease would be permanent.
Revenue Recognition and Liabilities Due to Customers
The nature of our Therapeutics business segment gives rise to variable consideration, including discounts and applicator (“trode”) returns. Credits are issued for unused shocks on returned trodes, which can be used toward the purchase of replacement trodes. When revenue is recognized, a simultaneous adjustment for returns is estimated, reducing revenue. Estimated return credits are presented as a reduction to gross sales with the corresponding reserve presented as customer contract liabilities.
Variable consideration related to unused shock credits is calculated using the expected value method, which estimates the amount that is expected to be earned. Estimated amounts are included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Estimates of variable consideration are based upon historical experience and known trends. These estimated credits are non-refundable and may only be used towards the purchase of future trode refurbishments. This practice encourages refurbishment purchase prior to complete utilization of the previous trode, so the customer will always have a trode at hand with ample capacity to perform treatments.
The number of trodes returned by year is tracked against the number of trodes sold in that same year, creating a current experience rate. It is assumed that the ultimate return rate for the trodes is 96%. For annual calculations, it is assumed that the expected returns in the current year for each layer increase to the experience rate of the year immediately preceding it. Once the 96% is reached the layer is removed from the calculation. The annual incremental change in expected returns is multiplied by an average return credit amount, generating the current liability due to customers.
The average return credit is calculated by dividing the actual shock credits issued by the actual number of trodes returned. A variance in the assumed return rate compared to the actual rate would impact the estimate and potentially understate net sales (overestimated rate) or overstate net sales (underestimated rate) in any given year and create a corresponding misstatement of the liability due to customers.
On December 31, 2021, the estimated value of our Therapeutics customer contract liability was approximately $340,000. If the expected return rate was increased by 2%, the effect on current year reduction in sales and customer liability would have been approximately $274,000.
Results of Consolidated Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020 are as follows:
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $4.1 million, compared to $0 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue in 2021 resulted primarily from the inclusion of PulseVet’s results in the fourth quarter of 2021 and consisted of instruments, trodes and warranty services sold worldwide. Commercialization of the TRUFORMA platform commenced in March 2021 and revenues for the remainder of 2021 were approximately $0.1 million. In general, we expect PulseVet revenue to increase in 2022 over 2021 levels and that consolidated revenue will increase in 2022 as we commence reporting a full year of PulseVet operating activity.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $1.1 million, compared to $0 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of revenue in 2021 resulted primarily from the inclusion of PulseVet’s results in the fourth quarter of 2021. As noted above, commercialization of the TRUFORMA platform commenced in March 2021 and cost of revenue was immaterial. We expect that cost of revenue will increase as we sell additional products in subsequent periods. In general, while we expect PulseVet costs to be similar to 2021 level, we anticipate that consolidated costs will increase in 2022 as we commence reporting a full year of PulseVet operating activity.
Gross Profit
Gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately 74%, compared to zero for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit resulted primarily from the inclusion of PulseVet’s results in the fourth quarter of 2021. In general, we believe gross margins will remain relatively unchanged due to a variety of factors, including the ability to effectively stimulate demand for certain of our products; potential increases in the cost of components and outside manufacturing services; our ability to manage warranty costs effectively; shifts in the mix of products and services, or in the geographic, currency or channel mix; and fluctuations in exchange rates.
Research and Development
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $1.6 million, compared to approximately $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $6.4 million or 79%. The decrease was a result of an overall reduction in research and development costs related to TRUFORMA as we completed development of the instrument and three of the first five assays and began transitioning to commercialization activities. Research and development expense for the PulseVet segment was immaterial. We expect that research and development will increase in 2022 as we continue development of TRUFORMA related assays and complete the clinical studies related to PulseVet.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $22.7 million, compared to approximately $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $14.0 million, or 160%. The increase was due to an increase in salaries, bonus and benefits of approximately $8.0 million primarily resulting from an increase in share-based compensation expense of approximately $5.4 million compared to the 2020 year, and an increase in salaries for marketing, sales and other administrative personnel of approximately $2.6 million relating to the build-out of our internal sales force and the inclusion of PulseVet in our results in the fourth quarter of 2021. Professional fees also increased by approximately $3.6 million, related primarily to the PulseVet acquisition, the exchange of our Series 1 preferred stock, and increased fees associated with SEC compliance requirements. Regulatory fees increased for the annual shareholders meeting of approximately $0.7 million largely as a result of administrative costs related to increases in the shareholder base. Other increases for approximately $1.7 million include marketing, depreciation and amortization, travel costs, contracted expenditure and insurance expense. We expect selling, general and administrative expense to increase in 2022 as a result of increased headcount relating to the acquisition of PulseVet and the expansion of our sales and marketing activities.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $18.4 million, or $0.05 per share, compared with a net loss of approximately $16.9 million, or $0.05 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in losses of approximately $1.5 million or 8.7%. The net loss in each period was attributed to the matters described above. We expect to continue to record net losses in future periods until such time as we have sufficient revenue from organic or acquired product sales to offset our operating expenses.
Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods set forth below:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $14.3 million, compared to approximately $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $1.9 million, or 12%. The reduction in net cash used in operating activities resulted primarily from an increase in the net loss, offset by an increase in non-cash expenses including stock-based compensation of approximately $5.4 million, approximately $0.5 million in gains recognized on extinguishment of debt and an increase in working capital requirements of approximately $2.2 million. Other non-cash activity in the 2021 period included increased amortization and depreciation of approximately $0.7 million.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $71.9 million, compared to cash provided by investing activities of approximately $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in cash used of approximately $72.9 million, or 7,252%. The increase in cash used in investing activities during 2021 was primarily due to the acquisition of PulseVet for approximately $71.9 million, net of cash acquired of approximately $0.5 million, a reduction in cash received from the modification of leases of approximately $1.0 million, and an increase in investments in intangible and other property and equipment of approximately $0.5 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $219.2 million, compared to approximately $76.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $142.4 million, or 186%. The increase resulted primarily from the sale of our equity securities in 2021 for total gross proceeds of approximately $199.5 million, cash received of approximately $32.1 million from warrant exercises, and cash received of approximately $1.8 million from stock option exercises, offset by stock issuance costs of approximately $14.3 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception in May 2015. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $119.4 million. We have funded our working capital requirements primarily through the sale of our equity and equity-related securities and the exercise of stock options and warrants.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $195.0 million, inventory of approximately $2.8 million, prepaid expenses and deposits of approximately $1.8 million, trade receivables of approximately $ 0.3 million and other receivables approximately $0.5 million.. Current assets amounted to approximately $200.4 million with current liabilities of approximately $4.3 million, resulting in working capital (defined as current assets minus current liabilities) of approximately $196.1 million.
Short Term Cash Requirements
We believe that our existing cash is sufficient to fund our expected short-term needs. We currently have cash fixed obligations in association with our building leases and quarterly inventory orders. We also have payment obligations associated with our on-going clinical studies, and expect that we have sufficient cash to cover these requirements. We do not expect that PulseVet’s operations will require significant increases in our short-term cash needs.
Long Term Cash Requirements
We believe that our existing cash resources will be sufficient to fund our expected operational requirements through at least December 2024. We regularly evaluate our business plans and strategy. These evaluations often result in changes to our business plans and strategy, some of which may be material and significantly change our cash requirements. Ongoing business development activity may also require us to use some of our liquidity for an acquisition, and use of additional capital to fund newly acquired operations. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our existing security holders will likely experience dilution; and the incurring of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could require us to agree to operating and financial covenants that could restrict operations.
Our future capital requirements depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
·
the costs and timing of our development and commercialization activities;
·
the cost of manufacturing our existing and future products;
·
the cost of marketing and selling our existing and future products including marketing, sales, service, customer support and distribution costs;
·
the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
·
the costs associated with being a public company;
·
the costs associated with additional business development or mergers and acquisitions activity, including acquisition-related costs, earn-outs or other contingent payments and costs of developing and commercializing any technologies to which we obtain rights;
·
third-party costs associated with the development and commercialization of our existing and future products and the ability of our development partners to satisfy our requirements on a timely basis;
·
the scope and terms of our business plans from time to time, and our ability to realize upon our business plans; and
·
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing possible patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of any such litigation.
Outstanding Share Data
The only class of outstanding voting equity securities of the Company are the common shares. As of March 1, 2022:
·
there are 979,899,668 common shares issued and outstanding;
·
there are stock options outstanding under our Stock Option Plan to acquire an aggregate of 65,043,727 common shares
·
there are common share purchase warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 197,917 common shares at an exercise price of $0.15 per share issued in February 2020.
·
there are common share purchase warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 363,501 common shares at an exercise price of $0.15 per share issued in April 2020.
·
there are common share purchase warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 120,000 common shares at an exercise price of $0.15 per share issued in May 2020.
·
there are common share purchase warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 231,000 common shares at an exercise price of $0.16 per share issued in July 2020.
·
All of the currently outstanding warrants also have a “cashless exercise” feature which is applicable in certain circumstances. The cashless exercise feature could result in the potential issuance of common shares based upon the “in-the-money” value of the applicable warrants at the time of exercise of the applicable warrants. The number of the common shares that may be issued is not determinable. However, the number of common shares that are issuable is based upon a formula contained in the applicable warrants, which determines the number of common shares issuable by dividing the “in-the-money” value (based upon the then current market price, as provided in the applicable warrants) by the then current market price and multiplying this result by the number of common shares that are issuable under the applicable warrants pursuant to cash exercise.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, the FASB or other standard setting bodies issue new accounting pronouncements. Updates to the FASB ASC are communicated through issuance of an ASU. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that recently issued guidance, whether adopted or to be adopted in the future, is not expected to have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements upon adoption.
To understand the impact of recently issued guidance, whether adopted or to be adopted, please review the information provided in Note 3 - Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements.