Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Our Sponsor is an affiliate of a private investment fund management by Zimmer, a Delaware limited partnership that manages several investment vehicles. Although we may pursue an acquisition opportunity in any business or industry, we intend to capitalize on the Zimmer platform to identify, acquire and operate a business in industries that may provide opportunities for attractive risk-adjusted returns in the energy value chain in North America, with a focus on energy transition and sustainability. This broadly includes environmental, social and governance growth-focused companies in the energy, industrial, and infrastructure sectors.
The Registration Statement for our Public Offering was declared effective on June 15, 2021. On June 18, 2021, we consummated our Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units, which includes the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 4,500,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to us of $345,000,000. Transaction costs for the Public Offering amounted to $18,426,851, consisting of $6,200,000 of underwriting discounts and commissions, $10,850,000 of deferred underwriting discounts and commissions, and $1,376,851 of other offering costs.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the Public Offering, we completed the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of 10,550,000 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $10,550,000.
$345,000,000 of the gross proceeds ($10.00 per Unit) of the Public Offering and the Private Placement (including the Over-allotment Units) were deposited into the Trust Account with the Trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as otherwise permitted under our amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Public Offering, or June 18, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and Public Offering, and, since the completion of the Public Offering, our search for a target to consummate an initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of an initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Public Offering and placed in the Trust Account.
For the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $9,827,847 consisting of formation and operating costs of $14,388, general and administrative costs of $988,190, financing expense of $3,196,156 and offering costs allocated to Warrants of $794,474, as well as change in fair value of Warrants and Forward Purchase Units of $4,849,830, offset by income on marketable securities (net), dividends and interest on investment held in the Trust Account of $15,191.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of our Public Offering through a capital contribution of our Sponsor of $25,000 for Founder Shares, and the Note.
On June 18, 2021, we consummated our Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units, which includes the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 4,500,000 Units at the initial public offering price to cover over-allotments. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value per share, and one-third of one redeemable warrant. Each whole Warrant entitles the holder thereof to purchase one share of our Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, and only whole Warrants are exercisable. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000. Since August 6, 2021, holders of the Units may elect to separately trade the Units sold in the Public Offering and Warrants included in the Units. No fractional Warrants are issued upon separation of the Units and only whole Warrants trade. Simultaneously with the consummation of the Public Offering and the issuance and sale of the Units on June 18, 2021, we consummated the Private Placement of 10,550,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating total proceeds of $10,550,000.
Transaction costs for the Public Offering amounted to $18,426,851, consisting of $6,200,000 of underwriting discounts and commissions, $10,850,000 of deferred underwriting discounts and commissions, and $1,376,851 of other offering costs.
Upon closing of the Public Offering and the Private Placement, a total of $345,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. The proceeds held in the Trust Account have been invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside our Trust Account of $1,634,576 and had working capital of $1,776,113. All remaining cash from the Public Offering is held in the Trust Account and is generally unavailable for use prior to an initial business combination. We believe the cash outside of our Trust Account is sufficient to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting discounts and commissions) and the proceeds from the sale of the Forward Purchase Units to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our franchise and income taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations for the taxable years beginning after the completion of our Public Offering, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding after the completion of our Public Offering, to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, and which we may pay from funds from the Public Offering held outside of the Trust Account or from interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and released to us for this purpose. Our 2021 franchise tax was calculated using a partial year proration and amounted to $169,913. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account reduced by our operating expense and franchise taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination, which may include a specified future issuance. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the (i) Founder Shares, (ii) Private Placement Warrants and (iii) private placement warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated as of June 15, 2021. The holders of at least 20% in interest of the then-outstanding number of these securities are entitled to demand that we file a registration statement covering such securities subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination and to require us to effect up to an aggregate of three underwritten offerings of such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. In addition, the shares of Class A common stock and Warrants (and underlying shares of Class A common stock) purchased by the Zimmer Entity as part of the Units in the Public Offering are entitled to registration rights under the registration rights agreement. The Zimmer Entity is not subject to any lock-up period with respect to any securities it purchased in the Public Offering. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreements, we agreed to use reasonable best efforts (i) to file within 30 days after the closing of the initial business combination a registration statement with the SEC for a secondary offering of the Forward Purchase Shares and the Forward Purchase Warrants (and underlying shares of Class A common stock), (ii) to cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than 60 days after the initial filing, (iii) to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which the Forward Purchasers or their respective assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby, and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 under the Securities Act and (iv) after such registration statement is declared effective, cause us to conduct firm commitment underwritten offerings, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the Forward Purchase Agreements provide for certain “piggy-back” registration rights to the holders of Forward Purchase Securities to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us.
Administrative Services Agreement
Pursuant to an administrative services agreement, dated June 15, 2021, we have agreed to pay Zimmer a total of $10,000 per month from funds held outside the Trust Account for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Upon the earlier of the consummation by the Company of an initial business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had accrued $64,000 pursuant to this agreement, which was included in the amount of $65,705 due to the related party as of December 31, 2021.
Forward Purchase Agreements
On June 11, 2021, we entered into Forward Purchase Agreements with the Zimmer Entity and Bluescape Resources. Pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreements, the Zimmer Entity agreed to purchase 10,000,000 Forward Purchase Units and Bluescape Resources agreed to purchase up to 10,000,000 Forward Purchase Units, with each Forward Purchase Unit consisting of one share of Class A common stock and one-third of one warrant to purchase one share of Class A common stock, at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, for a purchase price of $10.00 per Forward Purchase Unit. The obligation of Bluescape Resources to purchase the Forward Purchase Units pursuant to its Forward Purchase Agreement is subject to the approval of its investment committee. The purchase of the Forward Purchase Units will take place in one or more private placements to occur concurrently and only in connection with the closing of the initial business combination. The proceeds from the sale of Forward Purchase Units may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial business combination, expenses in connection with the initial business combination or for working capital in the post-business combination company.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters in the Public Offering are entitled to deferred underwriting discounts and commissions of $10,850,000, which will be payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of unaudited condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies other than the following.
Warrant Liabilities and Forward Purchase Units
The Company accounts for the warrants issued as part of the Units in the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants as liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The assessment considers whether the Warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of Warrant issuance and as of each subsequent reporting period while the Warrants are outstanding. Because the Company does not control the occurrence of events, such as a tender offer or exchange, that may trigger cash settlement of the Warrants where not all of the stockholders also receive cash, the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, as such, the Warrants must be recorded as a derivative liability. The Company accounts for the Forward Purchase Agreements in accordance with ASC 815-40 and accounts for such agreements as a derivative liability. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date, with changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations.
The Warrants are publicly traded and as such are classified as Level 1 and no longer require a valuation. The estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and Forward Purchase Units are determined using a Black-Scholes model with Level 3 inputs. Inherent in a Black-Scholes model are assumptions related to expected stock-price volatility (pre-merger and post-merger, expected term, dividend yield and risk-free interest rate). The Company estimates the volatility of its Class A common stock based on management’s understanding of the volatility associated with instruments of other similar entities. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the warrants is estimated based on management assumptions regarding the timing and likelihood of completing an initial business combination. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero.
The estimated fair value of the public warrants is determined using the publicly traded price of the public warrants, which is classified as a Level 1 input in the fair value hierarchy.
The following table presents information about the assumptions used to value the Company’s liabilities that are classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the financial statements required by Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to
comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.