Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our annual consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” In addition to historical information, this discussion includes forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report.
Overview
Zovio Inc is an education technology services company that partners with higher education institutions and employers to deliver innovative, personalized solutions to help learners and leaders achieve their aspirations. For additional information regarding our business, see Part I, Item 1, “Business.”
Until December 1, 2020, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Ashford University, LLC (“AU LLC”), owned and operated Ashford University, a regionally-accredited, online university (the “University”). On December 1, 2020, the Company and AU LLC finalized the Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, AU LLC, the Arizona Board of Regents, a body corporate, for and on behalf of the University of Arizona (the “University of Arizona”), and the University of Arizona Global Campus, a newly formed Arizona nonprofit corporation (“Global Campus”).
In April 2019, we acquired Fullstack Academy, Inc. (“Fullstack”) an immersive coding bootcamp offering web development and cybersecurity training to students looking for competitive paying and in-demand tech jobs. Fullstack offers full- and part-time programs online, in addition to working with colleges and universities to expand their program offerings and close technological skills gaps in their local communities.
Also in April 2019, we acquired TutorMe.com, Inc. (“TutorMe”), which provides 24/7 tutoring services. Students are matched online with tutors within minutes who can help them with more than 300 subjects. With live video chat, whiteboarding, and screen sharing, students can get the personalized help they need, in the subject they need, at a time that works for them. TutorMe optimizes the student learning journey and is a valuable-resources for high-school and college students. TutorMe is also offered as an employee benefit, providing an added benefit for parents of high-school students.
Reporting Segments
Prior to December 1, 2020, the Company operated in one segment for reporting purposes. Following the Sale Transaction on December 1, 2020, our business operates in two reportable segments, including the University Partners segment and the Zovio Growth segment. The Company’s reportable segments are determined based on (i) financial information reviewed by the chief operating decision maker, (“the CODM”), (ii) internal management and related reporting structure, and (iii) the basis upon which the CODM makes resource allocation decisions. University Partners includes the technology and services provided to colleges and universities to enable the online delivery of degree programs. The inaugural partner in the University Partners segment is Global Campus. University Partners also includes the tuition revenue related to the University prior to the Sale Transaction. The Zovio Growth segment includes our other subsidiaries, including Fullstack and TutorMe.
Key Financial Metrics
In evaluating our operating performance, our management focuses in large part on our revenue and operating income (loss). The following table, which should be read in conjunction with our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, presents our key operating data for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Revenue and other revenue
After December 1, 2020, revenue is now primarily derived from service revenue from our university partners. On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into the Services Agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain educational technology and support services, which has an initial term of fifteen years and seven months, subject to renewal options and certain early termination provisions. The amounts earned from the Services Agreement are denoted as revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). On December 1, 2020, the Company also entered into a transition services agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain temporary transition services (the “Transition Services Agreement”), which has a term of three years. The amounts earned from the Transition Services Agreement are denoted as other revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss).
Prior to December 1, 2020, the majority of the amounts earned by the Company were from tuition, technology fees, and digital materials related to students whose primary funding source is governmental funding. The amounts earned from these streams is denoted as university-related revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). Factors affecting this revenue include (i) the number of students who enroll and remain enrolled in courses, (ii) degree and program mix, (iii) changes in tuition rates and (iv) the amount of scholarships offered. Enrollments are a function of the number of continuing students at the beginning of each period and new enrollments during the period, offset by students who either graduated or withdrew during the period.
Costs and expenses
Technology and academic services costs consist primarily of costs related to ongoing maintenance of educational infrastructure, including online course delivery and management, student records, assessment, customer relations management and other internal administrative systems. This also includes costs to provide support for curriculum and new program development, support for faculty training and development and technical support. This expense category includes salaries, benefits and share-based compensation, information technology costs, curriculum and new program development costs (which are expensed as incurred), provision for bad debt and other costs associated with these support services. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services.
Counseling services and support costs consist primarily of costs including team-based counseling and other support to prospective and current students as well as financial aid processing. This expense category includes salaries, benefits and share-based compensation, and other costs such as dues, fees and subscriptions and travel costs. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services.
Marketing and communication costs consist primarily of lead acquisition, digital communication strategies, brand identity advertising, media planning and strategy, video, data science and analysis, marketing to potential students and other promotional and communication services. This category was primarily from our historical captions of advertising and marketing and promotional. This expense category includes salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for marketing and communication personnel, brand advertising, marketing leads and other promotional and communication expenses. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services. Advertising costs are expensed as incurred.
General and administrative costs consist primarily of compensation and benefit costs, including related stock-based compensation, for employees engaged in corporate management, finance, human resources, compliance, and other corporate functions. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services.
University-related expenses represent those costs that were transferred to Global Campus in the Sale Transaction and that are no longer incurred by the Company. These costs were previously primarily components of instructional costs and services, with some costs from admissions advisory and marketing and some general and administrative.
Legal expense is comprised of charges related to the amounts to resolve the previously disclosed investigation by the California Attorney General.
Restructuring and impairment expenses are primarily comprised of (i) severance costs related to headcount reductions made in connection with restructuring plans and (ii) estimated lease losses related to facilities vacated or consolidated under restructuring plans.
Loss on transaction amount represents the net assets transferred in the Sale Transaction, as well as other transaction-related expenses and costs to sell.
Factors Affecting Comparability
We believe the following factors have had, or can be expected to have, a significant effect on the comparability of recent or future results of operations:
Sale transaction
The results of operations prior to December 1, 2020 are not comparable to those following that date. On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into the Services Agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain educational technology and support services. On December 1, 2020, the Company also entered into the Transition Services Agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain temporary transition services. After December 1, 2020, revenue is primarily derived from service revenue from our university partners.
Seasonality
Our operations are generally subject to seasonal trends. Our university partners generally experience a seasonal increase in new enrollments during the first quarter of each year, subsequent to holiday break, as well as during the third quarter each year, when most other colleges and universities begin their fall semesters. While our university partners enroll students throughout the year, fourth quarter revenue is generally lower than other quarters due to the holiday break in December, with a relative increase in the first quarter of each year.
Trends and uncertainties regarding continuing operations
Restructuring and impairment charges
We have implemented various restructuring plans to better align our resources with our business strategy and the related charges are recorded in the restructuring and impairment charges line item on our consolidated statements of income (loss). Changes to these estimates could have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. For information regarding the restructuring and impairment charges recorded, refer to Note 4, “Restructuring and Impairment Charges” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Valuation allowance
We recognize deferred tax assets if realization of such assets is more-likely-than-not. In order to make this determination, we evaluate factors including the ability to generate future taxable income from reversing taxable temporary differences, and forecasts of financial and taxable income or loss. The cumulative loss incurred over the three-year period ended December 31, 2021 constituted significant negative objective evidence against our ability to realize a benefit from our federal deferred tax assets. Such objective evidence limited our ability to consider in our evaluation other subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. On the basis of our evaluation, we determined that our deferred tax assets were not more-likely-than-not to be realized and that a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets should continue to be maintained as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those policies that, in management’s view, are most important in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The footnotes to our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report include disclosure of significant accounting policies. The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. These critical accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain.
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our annual consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. These estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results of our analysis form the basis for making assumptions about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and the impact of such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Determining whether a valid customer contract exists includes an assessment of whether amounts due under the contract are collectible. We perform this assessment at the beginning of every contract and subsequently thereafter if new information indicates there has been a significant change in facts and circumstances.
On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into the Services Agreement with Global Campus, which has an initial term of fifteen years and seven months, subject to renewal options and certain early termination provisions. The amounts earned from the Services Agreement are within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), and are denoted as revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). On December 1, 2020, the Company also entered into a the Transition Services Agreement, which has a term of three years. The amounts earned from the Transition Services Agreement are denoted as other revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss).
The Services Agreement has a single performance obligation, as the promises to provide the identified services are not distinct within the context of these agreements. The single performance obligation constitutes a series of distinct services as the customer benefits as services are provided. Service revenue is recognized over time using the input method cost. The input method provides a faithful depiction of the performance toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation and can be tied to the direct cost incurred. The service fees received over the term of the agreement are variable in nature in that they are dependent upon the number of students attending the university and revenues generated from those students during the service period. The service fees are subject to certain adjustments, including performance-based adjustments, minimum profit level adjustments, and excess direct cost adjustments. These adjustments are all variable in nature in that they depend upon the Company’s performance during each service period. Such adjustments are presented as minimum residual liability within accounts payable and accrued liabilities in the consolidated financial statements. The Company allocates variable consideration to the distinct increments of service to which it relates, as the variability is directly related to the Company’s effort to satisfy the distinct increments of service provided. This is consistent with the allocation objective in ASC 606. The Company meets the criteria in the standard and exercises the practical expedient to not disclose the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the single performance obligation that is unsatisfied as of the end of the reporting period. The Company does not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations because the variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a service that forms part of a single performance obligation.
Fullstack offers both full-time and part-time technology bootcamps. The tuition fees for these programs are recognized as revenue as the services are provided to the student, which occurs over the applicable period of instruction. For most Fullstack programs, tuition is collected prior to the start of the cohort; however, for certain programs students can defer payment until completion of the program and for these students an accounts receivable balance is recorded.
TutorMe provides online on-demand tutoring services through hourly and access license contracts. Revenue for these contracts are recognized based on hours used or ratably over the contract period depending on the type of contract. For most TutorMe contracts, cash is collected at or near the onset of the contract. The collected cash is recognized as deferred revenue until recognized into revenue.
Prior to December 1, 2020, the majority of the amounts earned by the Company were from tuition, technology fees, and digital materials related to students whose primary funding source is governmental funding. The amounts earned from these streams are denoted as university-related revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss).
Goodwill and intangible assets
We test goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, testing annually in the third quarter of each fiscal year, or more frequently if events and circumstances warrant. Under ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, to evaluate the impairment of goodwill, we first assess qualitative factors, such as deterioration in general economic conditions or negative company financial performance, to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. To evaluate the impairment of the indefinite-lived intangible assets, we assess the fair value of the assets to determine whether they were greater or less than the carrying values. Determining the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and may include such items as growth rates used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions, and a determination of appropriate market comparables.
We have three distinct reporting units including (i) Zovio, (ii) Fullstack and (iii) TutorMe. The Fullstack and TutorMe reporting units have goodwill associated with them. During the third quarter of 2021, our quantitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets noted no impairment indicators in either the Fullstack or the TutorMe reporting unit, and noted a material amount of fair value in excess of the carrying amount. There were no additional triggering events noted during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and therefore there was no impairment of our goodwill amounts.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We assess potential impairment to our long-lived assets when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset is not recoverable. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. Any required impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds fair value, and is recorded as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset and an expense to operating results.
During 2021, we did note certain indicators of impairment during our qualitative assessments of long-lived assets under ASC 360, Property and Equipment. However, based upon the quantitative assessment, no impairment in long-lived assets is deemed necessary as of December 31, 2021.
Income taxes
We utilize the asset-liability method of accounting for income taxes. Significant judgments are required in determining the consolidated provision for income taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax settlement is uncertain. As a result, we recognize tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are supportable, we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that those positions may not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. We believe that our accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on our assessment of many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters differs from our expectations, such differences will impact income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
We evaluate and account for uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. Recognition (step one) occurs when we conclude that a tax position, based solely on its technical merits, is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination. Measurement (step two) determines the amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Derecognition of a tax position that was previously recognized would occur when we subsequently determine that a tax position no longer meets the more-likely-than- not threshold of being sustained.
In addition to estimates inherent in the recognition of current taxes payable, we estimate the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets each reporting period. Realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent upon future taxable income. To the extent we believe it is more-likely-than-not that all or some portion of our net deferred tax assets will not be realized, we establish a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies.
Stock-based compensation
We have granted options to purchase our common stock, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and performance stock units (“PSUs”) to eligible persons under our 2009 Stock Incentive Plan. We also awarded contingent shares of the Company’s common stock for future service during our acquisitions. The benefits provided by these awards are share-based payments and are recorded in our consolidated statements of income (loss) based upon their fair values.
Stock-based compensation cost is measured using the grant date fair value of the award and is expensed over the vesting period. The fair value of RSUs is the stock price on the date of grant multiplied by the number of units awarded. The fair value of PSUs was estimated based on our stock price as of the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model. We estimate the fair value of stock options on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Determining the fair value of stock options and PSUs at the grant date under these models requires judgment, including estimating our volatility, employee stock option exercise behaviors and forfeiture rates. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options and PSUs represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment.
Stock options awarded under our 2009 Stock Incentive Plan have an exercise price that equals or exceeds the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield of those maturities that are consistent with the expected term of the stock option or PSUs in effect on the date of grant. Dividend rates are based upon historical dividend trends and expected future dividends. As we have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, a zero-dividend rate is assumed in our calculation. We have sufficient historical stock option exercise information to compute an expected term for use as an assumption in the Black-Scholes option pricing and Monte Carlo simulation models, and as such, our computation of expected term was calculated using our own historical data. We also have sufficient historical data on the volatility of our stock to use as a direct assumption in the option pricing models.
The amount of stock-based compensation expense we recognize during a period is based on the portion of the awards that are ultimately expected to vest. We estimate stock option forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. The effect of a 10% change in estimates to any of the individual inputs to the Black-Scholes option pricing model or the Monte Carlo simulation model would not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Results of Operations
On December 1, 2020, the Company and AU LLC finalized the Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, AU LLC, the University of Arizona, and Global Campus. Accordingly, the results of operations discussed herein reflect both the Company’s operations prior to December 1, 2020, which was made up primarily of the operations of the University, as well as the Company’s operations commencing on December 1, 2020 as an education technology service provider.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income (loss) data as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Total revenue and other revenue. Our total revenue and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $263.0 million and $397.1 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $134.1 million, or 33.8%. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, University Partners segment revenue was $232.8 million and $376.2 million, respectively, representing a decrease of 38.1%, and the Zovio Growth segment revenue was $30.2 million and $20.9 million, respectively, representing an increase of 44.7%.
The decrease in revenue in the University Partners segment of $143.4 million between periods was primarily due to the decrease in university-related revenue of $356.1 million, or 89.7%, as compared to the prior year. This decrease was due to the sale of Global Campus on December 1, 2020 (see also Note 1, “Nature of Business,” included in Part II, Item 8, for further information). This decrease was also due to a decrease of 16.0% in average weekly enrollment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting the decrease in the University Partners segment was a $203.0 million increase of service revenue due to the Services Agreement entered into on December 1, 2020, as well as an increase in other revenue generated from the Transition Services Agreement of approximately $8.9 million.
The increase in revenue in the Zovio Growth segment between periods was primarily due to the growth in the new customer contracts experienced this year within our subsidiaries, Fullstack Academy and TutorMe.com.
Technology and academic services. Our technology and academic services for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $70.7 million and $74.4 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $3.7 million, or 5.0%. Specific decreases between periods primarily include consulting and outside services of $4.9 million, employee costs of $2.4 million, amortization of intangible assets of $1.0 million, professional fees of $0.7 million, and facility costs of $0.4 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in other technology and academic services expenses of $3.5 million, license fees of $1.8 million, and instructional supplies of $0.3 million. Our technology and academic services, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 26.9% and 18.7%, respectively, representing an increase of 8.2%. This increase primarily included increases in employee costs of 3.6%, other technology and academic services expenses of 1.9%, license fees of 1.7%, and instructional supplies of 0.8%. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in consulting and outside services of
0.5%. As a percentage of revenue, bad debt expense decreased to 0.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 3.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Counseling services and support. Our counseling services and support expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $89.5 million and $97.0 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $7.5 million, or 7.7%. Specific factors contributing to the overall decrease between periods were primarily due to decreases in employee costs of $3.8 million, facility costs of $2.4 million, and other counseling services and support expenses of $1.4 million. The overall decrease was partially offset by an increase in depreciation of $0.4 million. Our counseling services and support expenses, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 34.0% and 24.4%, respectively, representing an increase of 9.6%. This increase primarily included increases in employee costs of 8.6%, depreciation of 0.6%, human resources costs of 0.5%.
Marketing and communication. Our marketing and communication expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $85.3 million and $91.6 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $6.3 million, or 6.9%. Specific factors contributing to the overall decrease between periods were primarily due to decreases in advertising of $4.9 million, other marketing and communication expenses of $1.9 million and license fees of $1.2 million. The overall decrease was partially offset by increases in employee costs of $1.2 million and consulting and outside services of $0.7 million. Our marketing and communication expenses, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 32.4% and 23.1%, respectively, representing an increase of 9.3%. This increase primarily included increases in advertising of 7.1%, employee costs of 1.9%, and consulting and outside services of 0.8%. The overall increase was offset by a decrease in other marketing and communication expenses of 0.4%.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $43.2 million and $47.4 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $4.2 million, or 8.9%. The decrease between periods was primarily due to decreases in employee costs of $5.8 million, other general and administrative expenses of $3.8 million, professional fees of $3.0 million, consulting and outside services of $0.5 million, and legal settlements of $0.3 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in executive severance of $4.4 million, human resource costs of $1.6 million, non-recurring stock compensation of $1.3 million, insurance of $1.0 million, and legal fees of $0.9 million. Our general and administrative expenses, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 16.4% and 12.0%, respectively, representing an increase of 4.4%. This increase is mainly due to increases in other general and administrative expenses of 3.4%, legal fees of 1.2%, employee costs of 1.1%, insurance of 0.8%, and consulting and outside services of 0.4%, partially offset by decreases in executive severance of 1.7% and professional fees of 0.5%.
University-related expense. Our university-related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $89.0 million. The university-related expenses represent those costs that were transferred to Global Campus in the Sale Transaction and that are no longer incurred by the Company.
Legal expense. Legal expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $14.3 million, which represents the additional amounts necessary to get to the $22.4 million in statutory penalties relating to the California Attorney General’s lawsuit. There were no such legal expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Restructuring and impairment charges. Our restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2.6 million, as compared to $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $2.2 million. The charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 were comprised of $2.6 million relating to severance costs for wages and benefits resulting from a reduction in force.
Loss on transaction. The loss on transaction amount of $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the net assets transferred in the Sale Transaction, as well as other transaction-related expenses and costs to sell.
Other income (loss), net. The other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.1 million, as compared to other loss, net, of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The results for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily a result of increased interest income due to changes in the levels of average cash and cash equivalents and investment balances.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.1 million as compared to income tax benefit of $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or a decrease of $12.9 million in income tax benefit. Income tax benefit was recognized at effective tax rates of 0.3% and 21.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The income tax benefit at December 31, 2021 is mainly attributable to certain federal and state tax refund true-ups related prior years, whereas the income tax benefit at December 31, 2020 is mainly attributable to the tax refunds and interest related to CARES Act and IRS audit examination.
Net loss. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $42.3 million compared to net loss of $49.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a $6.6 million increase in net income as a result of the factors discussed above.
Segment Operating Results
Segment profitability represents net income (loss), before net interest income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization expense (“EBITDA”).
University Partners segment operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $26.6 million, or 11.4% of revenue, compared to a loss of $41.2 million, or 10.9% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020. This represents a $14.6 million increase in operating results. However, the operating results for the prior year ended December 31, 2020 include the loss on sale transaction of $54.8 million. The resulting decrease, excluding the loss on sale, is primarily due to the decrease in revenue in this segment.
Zovio Growth segment operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $7.7 million, or 25.5% of revenue, compared to a loss of $9.3 million, or 44.6% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020. This represents a $1.6 million increase in operating results, which was primarily driven by the continued demand seen within the Fullstack and TutorMe businesses in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We financed our operating activities and capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 primarily through cash on hand. Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $28.3 million and $35.5 million, respectively, which can be used for operating activities or capital expenditures. Additionally, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had restricted cash of $9.3 million and $20.0 million, respectively, as well as investments of $1.0 million and $1.5 million, respectively.
There was a slight decrease in the fair value of our investments at December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. We believe that any fluctuations we have experienced are temporary in nature and, while our securities are classified as available-for-sale, we have the ability and intent to hold them until maturity, if necessary, to recover their full value. Additionally, our income tax receivable decreased from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to tax refunds received from tax audit examinations.
On April 14, 2022, the Company entered into a Financing Agreement (the “Credit Facility”) among the Company, as borrower, each of its wholly-owned subsidiaries as subsidiary guarantors (the “Guarantors”), the lenders party thereto from time to time (the “Lenders”) and Blue Torch Finance LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent for the Lenders (the “Agent”). The Credit Facility provides for, among other things, a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $31.5 million (the “Term Loan”). The proceeds of the Term Loan will be used (i) to satisfy any final judgement in the California Attorney General lawsuit and (ii) to fund the working capital of the Company and the Guarantors. For additional information on financing obtained in April 2022, see Note 22, “Subsequent Events” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
In March 2022, the Company received a court order to pay $22.4 million in statutory penalties relating to the California Attorney General’s lawsuit. We are currently considering all options available and have filed a motion for a new trial on the Court’s decision. Regardless of the ultimate outcome, this decision could have a material impact on our financial condition. For additional information regarding this lawsuit, see Note 22, “Subsequent Events” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
We manage our cash pursuant to the quantitative and qualitative operational guidelines of our cash investment policy. Our cash investment policy, which is managed by our Chief Financial Officer, has the following primary objectives: (i) preserving principal, (ii) meeting our liquidity needs, (iii) minimizing market and credit risk, and (iv) providing after-tax returns. Under the policy’s guidelines, we invest our excess cash exclusively in high-quality, U.S. dollar-denominated financial instruments. For a discussion of the measures we use to mitigate the exposure of our cash investments to market risk, credit risk and interest rate risk, see Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.”
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $15.4 million for 2021, whereas the cash provided by operating activities was $25.3 million for 2020. The primary drivers of the decreased net cash provided by operations was the $51.9 million adjustment of the loss on transaction in 2020, as well as the net changes in operating assets and liabilities. These year over year changes include the accounts receivable of $14.0 million, deferred revenue of $5.1 million, a change in accounts payable and accrued
liabilities of $19.5 million, and a change in operating lease liabilities of $1.5 million, partially offset by a change of $11.1 million in prepaid and other current assets and a change in other liabilities of $2.5 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.4 million and $64.7 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2021, we purchased $1.1 million of investments and had $0.7 million of capitalized costs for intangible assets, partially offset by $1.8 million sales of investments. In 2020, we had $62.3 million of cash transferred in connection with the sale to Global Campus, as well as purchases of investments of $0.7 million, and had $0.3 million of capitalized costs for intangible assets.
Capital expenditures were $1.4 million and $3.2 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ending December 31, 2022, we expect our capital expenditures to be approximately $1.4 million, primarily in the areas of computer and software upgrades, as well as leasehold improvements.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.1 million for 2021, whereas net cash provided by financing activities was $2.3 million for 2020. During 2021, net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to the cash used for tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards of $1.2 million. During 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to borrowings from notes payable of $2.7 million and the cash provided by proceeds from the issuance of stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $0.2 million, partially offset by the cash used for the tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards of $0.5 million.
Agreements with Global Campus
Our largest university partner, Global Campus, derives the majority of its respective cash revenues from students who enroll and are eligible for various federal student financial assistance programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. An institution is subject to significant regulatory scrutiny as a result of numerous standards that must be satisfied in order to participate in Title IV programs. For additional information regarding Title IV programs and the regulation thereof, see “Business-Regulation” included in Part I, Item 1. The balance of revenues derived by Global Campus is from government tuition assistance programs for military personnel, including veterans, payments made in cash by individuals, reimbursement from corporate partnerships and private loans from third parties.
The majority of our cash comes from our Services Agreement with Global Campus. The service fees in the Services Agreement are subject to certain minimum residual liability adjustments, including performance-based adjustments, minimum profit level adjustments, and excess direct cost adjustments. These adjustments are all variable in nature in that they depend upon the Company’s performance, and to a certain extent the performance of Global Campus, during each service period. In connection with the Services Agreement, the minimum residual payment will be paid annually in June. If the Company's restructuring efforts and enrollment initiatives do not occur as planned, then the Company will need to find alternative sources to fund operations.
Future Contractual Obligations
We have future contractual obligations relating to operating lease obligations in the amount of $53.6 million, of which approximately $7.0 million is short-term in nature.
We also have contractual obligations in the amount of $16.3 million, of which $10.8 million is a short-term obligation. These obligations include agreements with vendors in the areas of software, facilities, telephony, licensing fees, consulting, marketing, among others.
Debt and Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a long-term notes payable valued at $2.7 million, including accrued interest. The counterparty advanced funds to the Company for certain program development costs, which the Company is obligated to repay out of future revenues from the developed program. The Company recognized these advances as a debt obligation, and expects to begin repayments from future program revenues four years from the contract start date.
The Company has issued letters of credit that are collateralized with cash, in the aggregate amount of $9.2 million as of December 31, 2021. The letters of credit relate primarily to the Company's leased facilities and insurance requirements. The collateralized cash is held in restricted cash on the Company's consolidated balance sheets.
The Company is required to provide surety bonds in certain states in which it does business. As a result, the Company had previously entered into a surety bond facility with an insurance company to provide such bonds when required. Although there are no remaining bonds on the Company’s behalf under this facility as of December 31, 2021, the Company still holds certain liability associated with any required collateral.
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements.