Item 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 30, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination. Additionally, we recognize non-cash gains and losses with other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our warrant liabilities at each reporting period.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $3,264,648, which consisted of changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $5,722,000 and interest earned on cash and marketable securities held in Trust Account of $34,876, offset by formation and operating costs of $2,002,829 and transaction costs incurred in connection with IPO of $489,399.
For the period from September 30, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $761, which consisted of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $25,000. Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On February 2, 2021, we consummated the offering of 23,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the offering, we consummated the sale of 4,733,333 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor and Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant generating gross proceeds of $7,100,000.
Following the offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $13,088,318 in transaction costs, including $4,600,000 of underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $438,318 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,213,969, which consisted of our net income of $3,264,648 and transaction costs incurred in connection with IPO of $489,399, offset by change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $5,722,000 and income on investments held in the Trust Account of $34,876. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $788,860 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $997,291 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until February 2, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after February 2, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than the administrative support agreement with our Sponsor, under which we began to incur monthly fees in connection with our initial public offering.
Administrative Services Agreement
Pursuant to the agreement, we pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $12,500 until the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or the Company’s liquidation (or its earlier termination), or $150,000 per year, $100,000 of which will be paid to our President, Chief Financial Officer, as an annual cash salary and $50,000 of which will be paid for additional support services expected to be sourced from Communitas Capital, a venture firm of which our Executive Co-Chairman is Managing Partner. We will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
Deferred Underwriters Fees
Additionally, the underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per share, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate of which $6.9 million is deferred and held in the Trust Account and $1.15 million was used to purchase warrants in connection with our initial public offering. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founders Shares, Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the offering and Private Placement warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and the securities underlying such securities) have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of our securities held by them. These holders may make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us, subject to certain limitations. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants (as defined herein) in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”), under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The Private Placement Warrants are valued using a Black Scholes Option Pricing Model. The Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.