ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements that are forward-looking, such as statements relating to plans for future organic growth and other business development activities, as well as the impact of reimbursement trends, other capital spending and financing sources. Such forward-looking information involves important risks and uncertainties that could significantly affect anticipated results in the future and, accordingly, such results may differ from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company. These risks include the ability to engage effective sales representatives, the need to obtain FDA clearance and CE marking of new products, the acceptance of new products as well as existing products by doctors and hospitals, our dependence on the reimbursement from insurance companies for products sold or leased to our customers, acceptance of our products by health insurance providers for reimbursement, larger competitors with greater financial resources, the need to keep pace with technological changes, our dependence on third-party manufacturers to produce key components of our products on time and to our specifications, implementation of our sales strategy including a strong direct sales force, and other risks described herein and included in “Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
OVERVIEW
We operate in one primary business segment, electrotherapy and pain management products. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s only active subsidiary is ZMI, a wholly-owned Colorado corporation, through which the Company conducts its U.S. electrotherapy and pain management operations. ZMS, a wholly-owned Colorado corporation, has developed a fluid monitoring system, which has received two utility patents and FDA approval in the U.S. ZMS also acquired Kestrel during 2021, which had two pulse-oximeter products they are developing and numerous patents. However, ZMS has achieved no revenues to date.
The following information should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained in this Annual Report.
HIGHLIGHTS
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company achieved the following:
ZMI
● Achieved an 89% increase in order growth, 63% growth in revenue and 88% growth in net income compared to the prior year;
● Due to strong results and related cash flow, we declared a $0.10 cash dividend and a 10% stock dividend in November 2021;
● We moved into a larger corporate office to accommodate order and revenue growth by increasing staffing at the corporate level; and
● Expanded our pain management product line by adding knee braces.
ZMS
● Filed for FDA approval of the CM-1600 laser-based fluid monitoring system; and
● Acquired Kestrel Labs, Inc. on December 22, 2021 for an approximate value of $30.5 million, consisting of $16.1 million in cash which is being financed through Bank of America N.A. and approximately $14.4 million in Zynex common stock.
SUMMARY
Net revenue increased 63% in 2021 to $130.3 million from $80.1 million in 2020. Net income was $17.1 million and $9.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
We generated cash flows from operating activities of $6.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Increased orders for our devices and supplies and the related receivables and cash flows, which allowed us to grow our working capital at December 31, 2021 to $59.8 million, compared to $52.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations in comparative format (in thousands).
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations reflected as a percentage of total revenue:
Net Revenue
Net revenues are comprised of device and supply sales, constrained by estimated third-party payer reimbursement deductions. The reserve for billing allowance adjustments and allowance for uncollectible accounts are adjusted on an ongoing basis in conjunction with the processing of third-party payer insurance claims and other customer collection history. Product device revenue is primarily comprised of sales and rentals of our electrotherapy products and also includes complementary products such as our cervical traction, lumbar support and hot/cold therapy products.
Supplies revenue is primarily comprised of sales of our consumable supplies to patients using our electrotherapy products, consisting primarily of surface electrodes and batteries. Revenue related to both devices and supplies is reported net, after adjustments for estimated third-party payer reimbursement deductions and estimated allowance for uncollectible accounts. The deductions are known throughout the health care industry as billing adjustments whereby the healthcare insurers unilaterally reduce the amount they reimburse for our products as compared to the sales prices charged by us. The deductions from gross revenue also take into account the estimated denials, net of resubmitted billings of claims for products placed with patients which may affect collectability. See our Significant Accounting Policies in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a more complete explanation of our revenue recognition policies.
We occasionally receive, and expect to continue to receive, refund requests from insurance providers relating to specific patients and dates of service. Billing and reimbursement disputes are very common in our industry. These requests are sometimes related to a few patients and other times include a significant number of refund claims in a single request. We review and evaluate these requests and determine if any refund is appropriate. We also review claims that have been resubmitted or where we are pursuing additional reimbursement from that insurance provider. We frequently have significant offsets against such refund requests which may result in amounts that are due to us in excess of the amounts of refunds requested by the insurance providers. Therefore, at the time of receipt of such refund requests we are generally unable to determine if a refund request is valid.
Net revenue increased $50.2 million or 63% to $130.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $80.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth in net revenue is primarily related to the 89% growth in device orders which led to an increased customer base and drove higher sales of consumable supplies.
Device Revenue
Device revenue is related to the purchase or lease of our electrotherapy products as well as complementary products including cervical traction, lumbar support and hot/cold therapy products. Device revenue increased $15.3 million or 72% to $36.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in device revenue is related to the growth in our device and complementary product orders of 89% from 2020 to 2021 as a result of greater sales representative productivity.
Supplies Revenue
Supplies revenue is related to the sale of supplies, typically electrodes and batteries, for our products. Supplies revenue increased $34.8 million or 59% to $93.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $58.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in supplies revenue is primarily related to growth in our customer base from higher device sales in 2021 and prior years.
Operating Expenses
Costs of Revenue -Devices and Supplies
Costs of revenue - devices and supplies consist primarily of device and supplies costs, operations labor and overhead, shipping and depreciation. Costs of revenue increased $9.9 million or 57% to $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in costs of revenue is directly related to the increase in device and supplies orders as well as our new production and inventory facility which opened in January 2021. As a percentage of revenue, cost of revenue -devices and supplies decreased to 21% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 22% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cost of revenue - devices and supplies as a percentage of revenue was due to expanding our supplier portfolio mix and reducing supply costs.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of employee-related costs, including commissions and other direct costs associated with these personnel including travel and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 59% to $54.3 million from $34.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expense is primarily due to increased payroll costs, related to increased average direct sales reps during the year and a full year of our regional sales managers which we began adding in 2020. We also increased our internal sales support functions to assist patients during the sales process. Increased orders resulted in higher sales commissions as well as travel expenses. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expense decreased to 42% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 43% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease as a percentage of revenue is primarily due to the increase in revenue and our sales force becoming more productive.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense primarily consists of employee related costs, facilities expense, professional fees and depreciation and amortization. General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 44% to $26.3 million from $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expense is primarily due to the following:
● an increase of $3.3 million in compensation and benefits expense, including non-cash stock compensation expense, related to headcount growth in ZMI and $0.7M in ZMS. During 2021, the Company increased its average employee headcount for its billing and patient support activities by approximately 55%, or 96 employees;
● an increase of $2.6 million in other expenses, including professional fees, research and development supplies, sales tax, temporary labor costs and other general and administrative costs associated with the increase in order volumes; and
● an increase of $1.1 million in rent and facilities expenses as we entered into a new corporate headquarters lease during 2021. Much of the increase in facilities was non-cash as we received 21 months of free rent on the new corporate headquarters but for GAAP purposes the rent over the lease term is expensed on a straight-line basis.
As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense decreased to 20% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 23% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease as a percentage of revenue is primarily due to increased revenue and leveraging our investment in general and administrative functions from prior years.
The Company expects that general and administrative expenses will continue to increase through 2022 as the Company continues to expand its corporate headcount to accommodate continued order growth.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $95,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $41,000 was related to interest on our finance lease obligations, $13,000 was related to interest on new debt. Other expense was $96,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded income tax expense of $5.2 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective income tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 24% and 10%, respectively. The increase in expense and effective rate during 2021 is primarily due to a decrease in deductions related to stock option exercises. During 2021, discrete items related to stock-based compensation was $0.2 million as compared with $1.7 million in 2020.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $59.8 million, compared to $52.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is primarily due to the Company’s profitability from increased orders and related revenue during 2021. The increase in working capital is net of a cash dividend declared of $3.6 million which was paid in January 2022. We generated $6.9 million in operating cash flows during 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have historically financed operations through cash flows from operations, debt and equity transactions. As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was $42.6 million in cash and $28.6 million in accounts receivables. The increased cash balance at December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the profitability during the year as a result of increased orders and improved sales rep productivity.
Upon closing on the Kestrel acquisition we entered into a loan and credit facility agreement with Bank of America, N.A. The credit facility includes a line of credit in the amount of $4.0 million available until December 1, 2024. The loan is a fixed rate term loan in the amount of $16.0 million and has an interest rate equal to 2.8% per year. The term loan is payable in equal principal installments of $444,444 per month through December 1, 2024 plus interest on the first day of each month beginning January 1, 2022. See Note 7.
Our anticipated uses of cash in the future will be to fund the expansion of our business. The Company does not anticipate any large expenditures for capital resources over the next 12 months.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $6.9 million and $0.8 million, respectively. The increase in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increased profitability in 2021 and an increase in non-cash lease expense and depreciation. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was partially offset by an increase in AR and Inventory. Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to profitability, which was offset by increased accounts receivable due to revenue growth.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $16.6 million and $1.0 million, respectively. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the acquisition of Kestrel and the purchase of computer, office and warehouse equipment.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the purchase of computer and office equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $13.1 million compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash provided by financing activities of $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to net proceeds from debt assumed in the Kestrel acquisition of $16.0 million, which is slightly offset by the purchase of treasury stock totaling $2.7 million.
The $25.3 million of cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an equity offering in July 2020 for net proceeds of $25.2 million along with net proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.1 million. During 2021 there was no equity offering. We believe our cash, together with anticipated cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital, and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. In making this assessment, we considered the following:
● Our cash balance at December 31, 2021 of $42.6 million;
● Our working capital balance of $59.8 million;
● Our accounts receivable balance of $28.6 million:
● Our increasing profitability over the last 6 years; and
● Our planned capital expenditures of less than $1.0 million during 2022.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the future cash disbursements to which we are contractually committed as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands).
We lease office and warehouse facilities under non-cancelable operating leases. The current office facility leases include our corporate headquarters and a production warehouse, both located in Englewood, Colorado. We also rent a small warehouse/office in Denmark. Rent expense was $3.5 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. A portion of the increase in facilities was non-cash as we received 21 months of free rent on the new corporate headquarters but for GAAP purposes the rent over the lease term is expensed on a straight-line basis.
The Company also leases office equipment for its corporate and warehouse facilities under non-cancelable finance lease agreements.
Off - Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements or obligations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations.
Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivable
Revenue is generated primarily from sales and leases of our electrotherapy devices and related supplies and complementary products. Sales are primarily made with, and shipped, direct to the patient with a small amount of revenue generated from sales to distributors.
In the healthcare industry there is often a third party involved that will pay on the patients’ behalf for purchased or leased devices and supplies. The terms of the separate arrangement impact certain aspects of the contract with patients covered by third party payers, such as contract type, performance obligations and transaction price, but for purposes of revenue recognition the contract with the customer refers to the arrangement between the Company and the patient.
The Company does not have any material deferred revenue in the normal course of business as each performance obligation is met upon delivery of goods to the patient.
Device Sales
Device sales can be in the form of a purchase or a lease.
Revenue for purchased devices is recognized in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 - “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (ASC 606) when the device is delivered to the patient.
Revenue related to devices out on lease is recognized in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. Using the guidance in ASC 842, we concluded our transactions should be accounted for as operating leases based on the following criteria below:
● The lease does not transfer ownership of the underlying asset to the lessee by the end of the lease term.
● The lease does not grant the lessee an option to purchase the underlying asset that the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise.
● The lease term is month to month, which does not meet the major part of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset. However, if the commencement date falls at or near the end of the economic life of the underlying asset, this criterion shall not be used for purposes of classifying the lease.
● There is no residual value guaranteed and the present value of the sum of the lease payments does not equal or exceed substantially all of the fair value of the underlying asset
● The underlying asset is expected to have alternative uses to the lessor at the end of the lease term.
Lease commencement occurs upon delivery of the device to the patient. The Company retains title to the leased device and those devices are classified as property and equipment on the balance sheet. Since our leases are month-to-month and can be returned by the patient at any time, revenue is recognized monthly for the duration of the period in which the patient retains the device.
Supplies
Supplies revenue is recognized once delivered to the patient. Supplies needed for the device can be set up as a recurring shipment or ordered through the customer support team or online store as needed.
Variable consideration
A significant portion of the Company’s revenues are derived, and the related receivables are due, from patients with commercial or government health insurance plans. Revenues are estimated using the portfolio approach by third party payer type based upon historical rates of collection, the aging of receivables, trends in the historical reimbursement rates by third-party payer types and current relationships and experience with the third-party payers, which includes estimated constraints for third-party payer refund requests, deductions and adjustments. Inherent in these estimates is the risk that they will have to be revised as additional information becomes available and constraints are released. Specifically, the complexity of third-party billing arrangements and the uncertainty of reimbursement amounts for certain products from third-party payers or unanticipated requirements to refund payments previously received may result in adjustments to amounts originally recorded. Due to continuing changes in the health care industry and third-party payer reimbursement, it is possible our forecasting model to estimate collections could change, which could have an impact on our results of operations and cash flows. Any differences between estimated settlements and final determinations are reflected as an increase or a reduction to revenue in the period when such final determinations are known. Historically these differences have been immaterial and the Company has not had to go back and reassess the adjustments of future periods for past billing adjustments.
The Company monitors the variability and uncertain timing over third-party payer types in our portfolios. If there is a change in our third-party payer mix over time, it could affect our net revenue and related receivables. We believe we have a sufficient history of collection experience to estimate the net collectible amounts by third-party payer type. However, changes to constraints related to billing adjustments and refund requests have historically fluctuated and may continue to fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation through recognition of the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments, which is measured based on the grant date fair value of the award that is ultimately expected to vest during the period. The stock-based compensation expenses are recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award (the requisite service period, which in the Company’s case is the same as the vesting period). For awards subject to the achievement of performance metrics, stock-based compensation expense is recognized when it becomes probable that the performance conditions will be achieved.
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax asset will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance. We consider future taxable income projections, historical results and ongoing tax planning strategies in assessing the recoverability of deferred tax assets. However, adjustments could be required in the future if we determine that the amount to be realized is less or greater than the amount that we recorded. Such adjustments, if any, could have a material impact on our results of our operations.
We use a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities.
Acquisition Method of Accounting for Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over these fair values is recorded as goodwill. We engage independent third-party valuation specialists to assist us in determining the fair values of certain assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Such valuation require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Different valuations approaches are used to value different types of intangible assets. Under the income approach, the relief from royalty method is a valuation technique which is used to estimate the value of certain intangible assets. This method utilizes projected financial information and hypothetical royalty rates to estimate the cost savings associated with asset ownership. The estimated cost savings are discounted for risk and the time value of money to estimate an intangible asset’s fair value. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. If we do not achieve the results reflected in the assumptions and estimates, our goodwill impairment evaluations could be adversely affected, and we may impair a portion or all of our intangible assets, which would adversely affect our operating results in the period of impairment.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets, including Goodwill
We assess impairment of goodwill annually and other long-lived assets when events or changes in circumstances indicates that their carrying value amount may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets consist of property and equipment, net and goodwill and intangible assets. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: (i) significant decreases in the market price of the asset; (ii) significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal or regulatory factors; (iii) or expectations that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. If the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, excluding interest charges, from the use of an asset are less than the carrying value, a write-down would be recorded to reduce the related asset to its estimated fair value.
Contingent considerations
We classify contingent consideration liabilities related to business acquisitions within Level 3 as factors used to develop the estimated fair value are unobservable inputs that are not supported by market activity. We estimate the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities using a Monte Carlo simulation which is based on equity volatility, the risk-free rate, the normal variate, projected milestone dates, discount rates, and probabilities of payment.