ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. References to the “Company,” “us” or “we” refer to Armada Acquisition Corp. I.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on November 5, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On August 17, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 15,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $150 million.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 459,500 Private Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $4,595,000.
Upon the closing of the IPO on August 17, 2021, $150,000,000 ($10.00 per unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the IPO and the sale of Private Shares were placed in the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us but net of taxes payable (and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
For the period from November 5, 2020 (inception) through September 30, 2021, we incurred a loss from operations of $469,951, including franchise tax of $26,113. Net loss for the Company of $468,899 included the loss from operations, partially offset by interest income from the Trust Account of $1,052. Through September 30, 2021, our efforts have been limited to organizational activities, activities relating to the Public Offering, activities relating to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates and activities relating to general corporate matters. We have not generated any revenues, other than interest income earned on the investments held in the Trust Account. As of September 30, 2021, $150,001,052 was held in the Trust Account and we had cash outside of trust of $657,590 and $93,467 in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We will have 15 months (or 18 months if extended) from the closing of the IPO to complete the initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company but net of taxes payable (and less up to $50,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and the Company’s board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We have also agreed to reimburse the Sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the period from November 5, 2020 (inception) through September 30, 2021, the Company paid $20,000 under this agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2021, we had cash outside our Trust Account of $657,590, available for working capital needs. All remaining cash was held in the Trust Account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
On August 17, 2021, we completed the sale of 15,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, the Company consummated the private placement of 459,500 shares of common stock (“Private Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $4,595,000.
In connection with the IPO, the underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the prospectus for the IPO to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any. On October 1, 2021 this option expired unused.
Following our IPO and the sale of the Private Shares, a total of $150,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $3,537,515 in IPO related costs, including $1,500,000 of underwriting fees and $2,037,515 of other costs.
As of September 30, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $150,001,052 (including $1,052 of interest income) consisting of mutual funds. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes.
For the year ended September 30, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $525,829. Net loss of $468,899 was impacted primarily by $506,520 in payments for prepaid expenses partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $119,138 and the amortization of prepaid expenses.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes and liquidation expenses if we are unsuccessful in completing a business combination. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from the Public Offering held outside of the Trust Account or from interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and released to us for this purpose. Our 2021 franchise tax was calculated using a partial year proration and amounted to $25,671. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account reduced by our operating expense and franchise taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, or converted upon consummation of a business combination into additional Private Shares at a price of $10.00 per Private Share. As of September 30, 2021, no Working Capital Loans have been issued.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business for the 15 month period from the closing of our initial public offering (or 18 months from such date if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination). However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we and Cayman NewCo entered into certain subscription agreements, each dated December 17, 2021 (the “Subscription Agreements”), with certain investors, pursuant to which such investors have agreed to purchase an aggregate of 2,050,000 ordinary shares (the “PIPE Shares”) of Cayman NewCo (together, the “Subscriptions”), for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $20.5 million to be issued substantially concurrently with the consummation of the Business Combination. The obligations of each party to consummate the Subscriptions are conditioned upon, among other things, customary closing conditions. Under the Business Combination Agreement, either we or Rezolve may termination the Business Combination Agreement if the aggregate transaction proceeds (excluding any amount pursuant to the Subscription Agreement to which Apeiron Investment Group Limited is party and any other amounts invested by the investors specified in the Business Combination Agreement) provided or committed to be provided are not more than $50 million If we are unable to complete a business combination (including the Business Combination) because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of these unaudited condensed financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the unaudited condensed financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A-“Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the IPO. We incurred offering costs amounting to $3,537,515 as a result of the IPO consisting of a $1,500,000 underwriting commissions, and $2,037,515 of other offering costs.
Redeemable Shares of Common Stock
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 15,000,000 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
All of the common stock sold as part of the Units in the IPO contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s certificate of incorporation. In accordance with ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity.
Net Loss per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. Remeasurement adjustments associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the IPO because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 7,500,000 shares of common stock in the aggregate. As of September 30, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common stock is the same as basic net income (loss) per common stock for the period presented.
Accretion of the carrying value of common stock subject to redemption value is excluded from net income per common stock because the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an administrative agreement to reimburse our sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services not to exceed $10,000 per month from the date of closing of the Public Offering. Upon completion of a business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
Financial Advisory Fee
We engaged Cohen & Company Capital Markets, a division of J.V.B. Financial Group, LLC (“CCM”), an affiliate of a member of the Sponsor, to provide consulting and advisory services in connection with the IPO, for which it received an advisory fee equal to one (1.0) percent of the aggregate proceeds of the IPO, or $1,500,000, upon closing of the IPO. Affiliates of CCM have and manage investment vehicles with a passive investment in the Sponsor. On August 18, 2021, we paid to CCM in aggregate of $1,500,000. CCM has agreed to defer the payment of the portion of the advisory fee attributable to over-allotment option until the consummation of the initial Business Combination. CCM is engaged to represent our interests only. We have also engaged CCM as an advisor in connection with the initial Business Combination for which it will earn an advisory fee of 2.25% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $3,375,000, payable at closing of the Business Combination. On October 1, 2021 the underwriters’ over-allotment option expired unused resulting in no additional fees and commissions related to the over-allotment option to be not payable to CCM by the Company.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
We engaged the representative of the underwriter as an advisor in connection with Business Combination to assist in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the initial Business Combination and assist us with press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay the representative a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of the initial Business Combination in an amount equal to 2.25% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $3,375,000. We will also pay the representative a separate capital market advisory fee of $2,500,000 upon completion of the initial Business Combination. Additionally, we will pay the representative a cash fee equal to 1.0% of the total consideration payable in the proposed Business Combination if the representative introduces us to the target business with which the Company completes a Business Combination.
Right of First Refusal
If we determine to pursue any equity, equity-linked, debt or mezzanine financing relating to or in connection with an initial Business Combination, then Northland Securities, Inc. shall have the right, but not the obligation, to act as book running manager, placement agent and/or arranger, as the case may be, in any and all such financing or financings. This right of first refusal extends from the date of the IPO until the earlier of the consummation of an initial Business Combination or the liquidation of the Trust Account if the Company fails to consummate a Business Combination during the required time period.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares issued and outstanding on the date of the IPO, as well as the holders of the representative shares, Private Shares and any shares the sponsor, officers, directors or their affiliates may issue in payment of Working Capital Loans made to us, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to an agreement to be signed prior to or on the effective date of the IPO. The holders of a majority of these securities (other than the holders of the representative shares) are entitled to make up to two demands that we register such securities. The holders of the majority of the Founder Shares can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time commencing three months prior to the date on which these shares of common stock are to be released from escrow. The holders of a majority of the Private Shares and shares issued to the Sponsor, officers, directors or their affiliates in payment of Working Capital Loans made to us can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time after we consummate a business combination. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of a business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the IPO to purchase up to an additional 2,250,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any. On October 1, 2021 the underwriters’ over-allotment option expired unused .
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of 1.0% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $1,500,000 .