Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations of Aerpio Pharmaceuticals, Inc. should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ending December 31, 2020. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risk, uncertainties and assumptions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also refer to the section under the heading “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Operating Overview
Aerpio Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing compounds that activate Tie2 as well as other indications in which the Company believes that activation of Tie2 may have therapeutic potential. Our product candidates include razuprotafib (formerly known as AKB-9778), a small molecule VE-PTP inhibitor.
In March 2019, we announced topline results from our Phase 2b (“TIME-2b”) clinical trial of AKB-9778 for the treatment of non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Although the results did not meet the study’s primary endpoint, we believe that the TIME-2b study further supported the reduction of intraocular pressure (“IOP”) seen with subcutaneous razuprotafib in the previous TIME-2 study. Based on these findings, we developed a topical ocular formulation of razuprotafib, and observed in preclinical studies activation of Tie2 in Schlemm’s canal, IOP reduction via enhanced outflow facility and favorable tolerability.
In June 2019, we initiated a double-masked, multiple-ascending dose Phase 1b clinical trial for open angle glaucoma (“OAG”). We enrolled four cohorts of 12 subjects each and subjects received increasing daily doses of a topical ocular formulation of razuprotafib or placebo for seven days. The primary endpoint of the trial was ocular safety and tolerability, with IOP lowering as the key pharmacodynamic endpoint. In October 2019, we announced interim results from our Phase 1b clinical trial. The unmasked interim analysis, limited to the first three cohorts, showed the topical ocular administration of razuprotafib was well tolerated. Compared to placebo, there was a dose dependent increase in minimal to mild conjunctival hyperemia with razuprotafib, which was transient and generally considered non-adverse, and a time and dose dependent reduction in IOP that, in the highest once daily (“QD”) dose cohort peaked at 4 hours post-dose and was sustained through eight hours on day 7, returning to baseline levels at 24 hours post-dose. Based on these data, a cohort of 43 patients with ocular hypertension (“OHT”)/OAG (hypertensive eyes) was added to the ongoing study to assess safety and pilot efficacy in the target patient population.
In January 2020, we announced the results of the fifth cohort of subjects noting subjects in cohort five randomized to the active arm exhibited statistically significant decreases in IOP at all post razuprotafib administration time points on both days 1 and 7 compared with day -1 baseline values when they were being treated with prostaglandin alone. When the change is placebo-corrected, razuprotafib plus prostaglandin versus prostaglandin alone produced a statistically significant decrease in IOP on Day 7 at 0, 4 and 8 hours post dose as compared to placebo. We believe these results suggest a persistent IOP-lowering activity from adding razuprotafib to standard-of-care prostaglandin therapy. Topical ocular administration of razuprotafib was well tolerated over seven days in cohort five. There were no reports of conjunctival hemorrhage or pain on instillation during the seven days of dosing and no systemic/non-ocular AEs were observed.
Based on the preclinical proof of concept and the results of the Phase 1b trial showing a reduction in IOP in patients with OHT and OAG, we initiated a Phase 2 clinical trial in June 2020 designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a topical formulation of razuprotafib in approximately 195 patients followed over a 28-day period. Patients enrolled in the trial will be administered a baseline of latanoprost ophthalmic solution 0.005%, and then randomized in a 1:1:1 fashion to receive adjunctive therapy consisting of placebo, 40 mg/ml razuprotafib once-daily, or 40 mg/ml razuprotafib twice-daily. The primary endpoint of the study is mean diurnal IOP at 28 days in the razuprotafib treated groups compared to the latanoprost monotherapy group
In December 2020, we reported that razuprotafib met the primary efficacy endpoint at Day 28 with the twice-daily (“BID”) dose group in our double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 trial in patients with elevated IOP associated with OAG or OHT. The change from baseline in diurnal mean IOP at Day 28 of study eyes treated with razuprotafib BID plus latanoprost showed a statistically significant improvement, or drop in IOP, (two-sided p-value 0.0130 and LS mean difference of -0.92 mm Hg) compared to those treated with latanoprost monotherapy. The razuprotafib once-daily (“QD”) dose group did not show a statistically significant improvement at Day 28. Further analysis of the results demonstrated that razuprotafib had a larger IOP reduction after longer duration dosing (28 days versus 14 days) consistent with its potential mechanism of repairing Schlemm’s canal. Razuprotafib also produced larger IOP reductions in patients with higher starting IOP, or a 1.6 mmHg IOP reduction in patients with post wash-out IOP’s of >26 mmHg and the topical drops were well tolerated in this trial. While the trial met the primary efficacy endpoint at Day 28 with the BID group, the IOP decrease was not at a level deemed sufficient to move to Phase 3 development. Therefore, following the announcement regarding the topline results from the Phase 2 clinical trial of razuprotafib in patients with elevated IOP associated with OAG or OHT, we initiated a process to explore a range of strategic alternatives focused on maximizing stockholder value from our clinical assets and cash resources. As part of this process, we are exploring strategic options for partnering our programs, as well as the potential for an acquisition, company sale, merger, business combination, asset sale, in-license, out-license or other strategic transaction. There can be no assurance that this exploration of strategic alternatives will result in the Company entering or completing any transaction.
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc. and Duane Nash, M.D., J.D., M.B.A, have been retained with respect to the strategic review process.
In January 2021, we executed a realignment plan to reduce operating costs and better align our workforce with the needs of our ongoing business. The realignment plan reduces our current workforce by 7 employees, representing approximately 58% of our workforce. As a result of this realignment plan, we estimate that we will incur one-time employee related severance expenses of approximately $1.2 million in the first quarter of 2021. We anticipate the majority of the one-time employee severance liability to be paid during 2021. The charges that we expect to incur in connection with the realignment plan are subject to a number of assumptions, and actual results may differ from our original estimate. We may also incur additional costs not currently contemplated due to events that may occur as a result of, or that are associated with, the realignment plan.
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Based on results in preclinical studies and observations in patients in TIME-2 and TIME-2b trials, we believe that a vascular endothelial receptor, Tie2, may play a pivotal role in the defense against microvascular breach in ARDS. We hypothesize that razuprotafib, our lead Tie2 activator, may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of COVID-19 associated ARDS and initiated two Phase 2 trials during 2020.
In May 2020, we were selected by Quantum Leap Healthcare Collaborative to participate in the I-SPY COVID Trial (Investigation of Serial studies to Predict Your COVID Therapeutic Response with biomarker Integration and Adaptive Learning) to evaluate subcutaneous razuprotafib for the treatment of COVID-19 related ARDS in adult patients with critical COVID-19 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04488081). The trial was initiated during the third quarter of 2020 but in January 2021, the Data Monitoring Committee recommended discontinuation of razuprotafib after 21 patients due to the complexity of monitoring patients in the setting of a surge in ICU patients. There were no apparent safety signals associated with razuprotafib in these 21 patients and we believe the scientific basis is sound for continuing to evaluate the drug in patients presenting with ARDS across a broader array of infections.
In August 2020, we announced the receipt of funding to evaluate subcutaneous razuprotafib in a new randomized, investigational trial for the prevention and treatment of ARDS in adult patients with moderate to severe COVID-19 (“RESCUE” trial; ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04511650). The RESCUE trial will evaluate subcutaneous razuprotafib for the prevention and treatment of ARDS in adult patients with moderate to severe COVID-19 as part of the MTEC-20-09-COVID-19 Treatment Military Infectious Disease Research Program (“MIDRP”). The Medical Technology Enterprise Consortium (“MTEC”), a non-profit organization primarily funded by the U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command, will provide up to $5.1 million of reimbursement related to qualified internal and external spending of the Company, as it relates to the clinical trial. The RESCUE clinical trial was initiated during the third quarter of 2020 but we decided to stop recruiting in February 2021 after the first 31 patients were enrolled based on challenges recruiting and monitoring patients in the current pandemic environment.
There were no apparent safety signals associated with dosing COVID-19 patients in the RESCUE trial and we plan to further analyze the data to assess trends in efficacy and biomarkers. We expect to report top-line data in the second quarter of 2021.
Diabetic Kidney Disease
In two consecutive trials, TIME-2 and TIME-2b, subcutaneous razuprotafib showed reduction in Urine Albumin-Creatinine Ratio (“UACR”), a measure of progression of diabetic kidney disease. In a post-hoc analysis of the earlier TIME-2 clinical trial, there was a 21% reduction (geometric mean) in UACR from baseline in the razuprotafib treatment arms, but an overall increase in UACR in the placebo arm. The prospective UACR analyses from the recently completed TIME-2b trial largely replicated the results from the previous trial and reinforced the potential beneficial effects of Tie2 activation in diabetic kidney disease. We believe that systemic treatment with razuprotafib could have the potential to change the treatment paradigm for diabetics in the future and potentially address a major societal problem by lowering the cost of care associated generally with diabetes.
ARP-1536 and Bi-specific Antibody
ARP-1536, our humanized monoclonal antibody directed at the same target as subcutaneous razuprotafib, is in preclinical development. We are evaluating development options for ARP-1536, including subcutaneous injection for the treatment of diabetic vascular complications, e.g., diabetic nephropathy and intravitreal injection as an adjunctive therapy for diabetic macular edema. We are also developing a bispecific antibody that binds both vascular endothelial growth factor (“VEGF”) and vascular endothelial protein tyrosine phosphatase (“VE-PTP”) which is designed to inhibit VEGF activation and activate Tie2. We believe this bispecific antibody has the potential to be an improved treatment for wet AMD and diabetic macular edema via intravitreal injection.
Gossamer License Agreement
In June 2018, we licensed AKB-4924, a selective stabilizer of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (“HIF-1 alpha”) to Gossamer Bio, Inc. (“Gossamer”) AKB-4924, (now called GB004), is being developed for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (“IBD”). HIF-1 alpha is involved in mucosal wound healing and the reduction of inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract. Gossamer has completed the Phase 1 multiple ascending dose (“MAD”) clinical study and is currently running a Phase 1b clinical study in ulcerative colitis (“UC”) patients. Gossamer has progressed GB004 during 2019 by completing the Phase 1 trial in healthy volunteers and initiating a Phase 1b study in ulcerative colitis patients of 28-day duration. Gossamer reported topline results from the Phase 1b study in the second quarter of 2020 and announced that, subject to developments in the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, it initiated a 12-week Phase 2 study of GB004 in patients with mild-to-moderate UC in the second half of 2020. Gossamer is responsible for all remaining development and commercial activities for GB004.
Our primary source of liquidity to date has been through public and private sales of our common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock, convertible debt and the proceeds from a license agreement entered into with Gossamer (the “Gossamer License Agreement”), as amended by that certain Amendment No. 1 to the Gossamer License Agreement (“Amendment No. 1” and together with the Gossamer License Agreement, as amended by Amendment No. 1, the “Amended Gossamer License Agreement”). For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $15.0 million in revenue pursuant to Amendment No. 1.
We will need to raise additional funds to further advance our clinical research programs, commence additional clinical trials and commercialize our products, if approved. While we continue to pursue financing alternatives, which may include equity financing, business development arrangements, licensing arrangements and business combination transactions, financing may not be available to us in the necessary time frame, in the amounts that we need, on terms that are acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise the necessary funds when needed or reduce spending on currently planned activities, we may not be able to continue the development of our product candidates or we could be required to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our development programs and other operations and will materially harm our business and consolidated financial position.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as a result of our ongoing activities. We are subject to a number of risks similar to other life science companies in the current stage of our life cycle, including, but not limited to, the need to obtain adequate additional funding, possible failure of preclinical testing or clinical trials, competitors developing new technological innovations, and protection of
proprietary technology. If we do not successfully mitigate any of these risks, we will be unable to generate revenue or achieve profitability.
Except for the Amended Gossamer License Agreement that we entered into with Gossamer in June 2018 and amended in May 2020, our operations to date have been limited to organizing and staffing our Company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring and developing our technology, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking preclinical and clinical studies. There can be no assurance of future revenues either from future payments related to the Amended Gossamer License Agreement, transition services or from our product candidates. Our product candidates are subject to long development cycles, and there is no assurance we will be able to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for, or market our product candidates. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $146.6 million and anticipate incurring additional losses for the next several years.
The Company’s inability to obtain required funding in the near future could have a material adverse effect on its operations and strategic development plan for future growth. If the Company cannot successfully raise additional capital and implement its strategic development plan, its liquidity, financial condition and business prospects will be materially and adversely affected, and the Company may have to cease operations. Based on the Company’s current cash reserves of $42.6 million at December 31, 2020 and financial condition as of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalent will be sufficient to fund currently planned operations through the fourth quarter of 2022. The Company is currently evaluating a range of strategic alternatives focused on maximizing stockholder value from our clinical assets and cash resources. As part of this process, we are exploring strategic options for partnering our programs, as well as the potential for an acquisition, company sale, merger, business combination, asset sale, in-license, out-license or other strategic transaction. There can be no assurance that this exploration of strategic alternatives will result in the Company entering or completing any transaction.
COVID-19 Considerations:
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, as a global pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States and around the world. The COVID-19 pandemic is evolving, and to date has led to the implementation of various responses, including government-imposed quarantines, stay-at-home orders, travel restrictions, mandated business closures and other public health safety measures. In addition, in response to the spread of COVID-19, we have continued to keep our executive offices closed with our employees continue to work outside of our offices. We are closely monitoring the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business, including how it may impact our planned Phase 2 clinical trial for our glaucoma program, expected timelines and costs on an ongoing basis. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or the impact on our business, our planned clinical trial, our research programs, healthcare systems or the global economy and we cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions. The extent to which COVID-19 ultimately impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which remain highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 or the effectiveness of actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. While some states and jurisdictions have started to rollback stay-at-home orders, quarantines and similar restrictions and reopened in phases, the regulations vary on a state by state basis and the impact of loosening of those restrictions is not yet known. If we or any of the third parties with whom we engage were to experience additional shutdowns or other prolonged business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operation and financial condition. In addition, a recurrence of COVID-19 cases could cause other widespread or more severe impacts depending on where infection rates are highest. We continue to monitor developments as we deal with the disruptions and uncertainties relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Basis of Presentation
The following discussion highlights our results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the consolidated balance sheets and the consolidated statements of operation and comprehensive loss presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on our consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP” or “GAAP”). You should read the discussion and analysis together with such consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
License Revenue, and Other
License revenue relates to the Gossamer License Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of (i) employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and stock-based compensation expense, (ii) external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations (“CRO’s”) and consultants, (iii) the cost of acquiring, developing, and manufacturing clinical study materials, and (iv) costs associated with preclinical, clinical and regulatory activities.
Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and clinical sites.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related costs for our finance, human resources and other administrative personnel, including stock-based compensation, employee benefits and travel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include third-party consulting, legal, patent, audit, accounting services and facilities costs. We expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses due to additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs associated with being a public company, as well as other costs associated with our business.
Restructuring Expense
Restructuring expense consists primarily of severance related expenses of employees terminated as a result of our restructuring efforts. Expenses include continued payroll, benefits and outplacement services (collectively “severance”) as defined and agreed upon by the respective employees’ severance agreement. Severance is recognized as restructuring expense when employees are notified of the restructuring event with a corresponding restructuring accrual which was reduced as payments are made to the employees.
Other Income
Other income represents reimbursed internal and external qualified expenses, per the terms of the MTEC arrangement, related to the ARDS RESCUE clinical trial. Other income is recorded, and generally received, in the period the internal or external qualified clinical trial as we incur and pay expenses.
Grant Income
Grant income is recognized as earned based on contract work performed.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income received on cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Consolidated Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
License Revenue
License revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $15.0 million related to payment received as consideration pursuant to Amendment No. 1 of the Gossamer License Agreement. This revenue was recognized when cash was received upon execution of Amendment No. 1 on May 12, 2020. There were no milestones achieved related to the Gossamer License Agreement in 2020 or 2019.
No such license agreement amendment was executed in 2019.
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth our operating expenses:
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $0.2 million, or 1.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was the result of decreased spending on clinical trials during 2020, specifically the Phase 2 program for glaucoma, and the I-SPY and RESCUE clinical trials, compared to the spending related to the completion of razuprotafib TIME-2b and glaucoma Phase 1b clinical trial during 2019.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $1.0 million, or 10.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in employee related expenses of $0.7 million, legal expenses of $0.3 million and general office expenses of $0.8 million related to the Company’s restructuring efforts in 2019, offset by an increase in liability insurance of $0.3 million, consulting expense of $0.3 million and stock-based compensation of $0.2 million.
Restructuring Expense
Restructuring expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.9 million and result of a reduction of headcount during 2019. No such actions were taken during 2020.
Other Income
The following table sets forth our other income:
Other Income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1.8 million represents reimbursed internal and external qualified expenses related to the ARDS RESCUE clinical trial, per the terms of the MTEC arrangement. No such arrangement existed in 2019.
Grant Income
Grant income is recognized as earned based on contract work performed. Grant income amounts can vary greatly from period to period depending on the funding and work performed. Grant income decreased in year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a grant awarded during 2019, and completed the middle of 2020, for development of ARP-1536. No new grants were awarded during 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, reflects interest earned on short term money market instruments. The net proceeds from our underwritten public offering in June 2018, sale of Company stock and payments received in conjunction with the execution of the Gossamer License Agreement in June 2018 and Amendment No. 1 in May 2020, less cash used in operations, were available for investment. The decrease in interest income in the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to lower interest rates compared to prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net losses of $4.3 million and $23.3 million, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of $146.6 million and $142.2 million, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $42.6 million. To date, we have financed our operations principally through private and public offerings of our equity securities, private placements of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, common stock, issuances of secured convertible promissory notes and proceeds from the Amended Gossamer License Agreement and Amendment No. 1. Based on our current plans, we expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents, will enable us to conduct our planned operations through the fourth quarter of 2022.
In February 2018, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC which was declared effective by the SEC on April 11, 2018 (the “Form S-3”). The shelf registration statement allows us to sell from time-to-time up to $150.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, or units comprised of any combination of these securities, for our own account in one or more offerings. The shelf registration statement is intended to provide us flexibility to conduct registered sales of our securities, subject to market conditions and our future capital needs. The terms of any offering under the shelf registration statement will be established at the time of such offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC prior to the completion of any such offering.
Additionally, on February 21, 2018, and pursuant to the Form S-3, we entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”), pursuant to which we may issue and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million through Cantor as our sales agent. Cantor may sell our common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act, including sales made directly on or through the Nasdaq Capital Market or any other existing trade market for our common stock, in negotiated transactions at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to prevailing market prices, or any other method permitted by law. The shares of our common stock to be sold under the Sales Agreement will be sold and issued pursuant to the Form S-3 and the related prospectus and one or more prospectus supplements. We will pay Cantor 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, 6,523,655 shares of common stock had been sold under this Sales Agreement and received net proceeds of $9.3 million, after deducting expenses of approximately $403,000 (including sales agent compensation of approximately $292,000) that were direct and incremental to the sale of the Company’s common stock.
In January 2021, the Company initiated a process to explore a range of strategic alternatives focused on maximizing stockholder value from our clinical assets and cash resources. As part of this process, we are exploring strategic options for partnering our programs, as well as the potential for an acquisition, company sale, merger, business combination, asset sale, in-license, out-license or other strategic transaction. There can be no assurance that this exploration of strategic alternatives will result in the Company entering or completing any transaction.
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc. and Duane Nash, M.D., J.D., M.B.A, have been retained with respect to the strategic review process.
We could potentially use our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect, and we may incur additional indebtedness to meet future operation liquidity. We continuously evaluate our needs for additional capital and consider opportunities on an ongoing basis, including capital from many different sources including equity capital, strategic alliances, business development debt, collaborations and business combinations. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Market volatility resulting from COVID-19 or other factors could also adversely impact our ability to access capital as and when needed. In addition, although we anticipate being able to obtain additional financing through non-dilutive means, we may be unable to do so. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have significant negative consequences for our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years presented:
Operating Activities
We have historically experienced negative operating cash outflows as we developed razuprotafib and our pipeline programs. Our net cash used in operating activities primarily results from our net loss adjusted for non-cash expenses, changes in working capital components, amounts due to contract research organizations to conduct our clinical programs and employee-related expenditures for research and development and general and administrative activities. Our cash flows from operating activities will continue to be affected by spending to advance and support our product candidates in the clinic and other operating and general administrative activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $5.4 million in cash primarily as a result of a net loss of $4.3 million, which includes $15.0 million of revenue earned from Amendment No. 1 to the Gossamer License Agreement, offset by $2.5 million in working capital and $1.4 million in non-cash expenses related to stock-based compensation and depreciation expense. We do not expect revenue will reoccur unless milestones outlined in the Gossamer License Agreement are achieved.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $23.9 million in cash primarily as a result of the net loss of $23.3 million offset by $1.9 million in working capital and $1.3 million in non-cash expenses related to stock-based compensation and depreciation expense.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was related to capital expenditures to support operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $9.3 million net proceeds from the sale of our common stock sold under the Sales Agreement with Cantor. No such activity occurred in 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
During 2019, the Company leased 7,580 square feet of office space in Cincinnati, Ohio, 4,000 square feet of office space in Lexington, Massachusetts and 687 square feet of office space in Dexter Michigan. During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company terminated the Lexington and Dexter leases, without penalty. The Cincinnati property lease includes one month of free rent, escalating rent payments and expires in July 2021. Total rent expense for all operating leases was $0.2 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We also have contracts with various organizations to conduct research and development activities, including clinical trial organizations to manage clinical trial activities. The scope of the services under these research and development contracts can be modified and the contracts cancelled by us upon written notice. In the event of a cancellation, we would be liable for the cost and expenses incurred to date as well as any close out costs of the service arrangement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial position and results of consolidated operations are based on consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to prepaid and accrued research and development expenses, revenue recognition and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
At the inception of an arrangement, the Company evaluates if a counterparty to a contract is a customer, if the arrangement is within the scope of revenue from contracts with customers guidance and the term of the contract. The Company recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services in a contract for an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. For contracts with customers, the Company applies the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the
contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. As part of the accounting for contracts with customers, the Company must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price of each performance obligation identified in the contract. The Company then allocates the total transaction price to each performance obligation based on the estimated standalone selling prices of each performance obligation. The Company recognizes the amount of the transaction price as revenue that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied.
The Company enters into collaboration arrangements, under which it licenses certain rights to its intellectual property to third parties. The terms of these agreements may include payment to the Company of one or more of the following: nonrefundable upfront license fees; development, sale and commercial milestone payments and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Each of these types of payments are classified as license revenue except for revenue from royalties on net sales of licensed products, which are classified as royalty revenue.
For each collaboration agreement that results in revenues, the Company identifies all material promised goods and services, which may include a license to intellectual property, research and development activities and/or transition activities. Promised goods or services are considered to be separate performance obligations if they are distinct. In order to determine the transaction price to be allocated to each performance obligation, in addition to any upfront payment, the Company estimates the amount of variable consideration at the outset of the contract either utilizing the expected value or most likely amount method, depending on the facts and circumstances relative to the contract. The Company constrains (reduces) the estimates of variable consideration such that it is probable that a significant reversal of previously recognized revenue will not occur throughout the life of the contract. When determining if variable consideration should be constrained, management considers whether there are factors outside the Company’s control that could result in a significant reversal of revenue. In making these assessments, the Company considers the likelihood and magnitude of a potential reversal of revenue. These estimates are re-assessed each reporting period as required.
Once the estimated transaction price is established, amounts are allocated to the performance obligations that have been identified. The transaction price is generally allocated to each separate performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The Company must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price (“SSP”) in order to account for these agreements. To determine the standalone selling price the Company’s assumptions may include (i) assumptions regarding the probability of obtaining marketing approval for the drug candidate; (ii) estimates regarding the timing of and the expected costs to develop and commercialize the drug candidate; (iii) estimates of future cash flows from potential product sales with respect to the drug candidate; and (iv) appropriate discount and tax rates. Standalone selling prices used to perform the initial allocation are not updated after contract inception. The Company does not include a financing component to its estimated transaction price at contract inception unless it estimates that certain performance obligations will not be satisfied within one year.
Upfront License and Amendment License Fees: If a license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenues from nonrefundable, upfront license and amendment license fees based on the relative value prescribed to the license compared to the total value of the arrangement. The revenue is recognized when the license is transferred to the collaborator and the collaborator is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are not distinct from other obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time. If the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time, the Company applies an appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from nonrefundable, upfront license fees. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Development Milestone Payments: Depending on facts and circumstances, the Company may conclude it is appropriate to include the milestone in the estimated transaction price using the most likely amount method or it is appropriate to fully constrain the milestone. A milestone payment is included in the transaction price in the reporting period the Company concludes that it is probable that recording revenue in the period will not result in a significant reversal in amounts recognized in future periods. The Company may record revenues from certain milestones in a reporting period before the milestone is achieved if the Company concludes that achievement of the milestone is probable and that recognition of revenue related to the milestone will not result in a significant reversal in amounts recognized in future periods. The Company records a corresponding contract asset when this conclusion is reached. Milestone payments that have not been included in the transaction price to date are fully constrained. These milestones remain fully constrained until the Company concludes that achievement of the milestone is probable and recognition of revenue related to the milestone will not result in a significant reversal in amounts recognized in future periods. The Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint each reporting period. The Company adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price, including the amount of collaborative revenue that it has recorded, if necessary.
Sales-based Milestone and Royalty Payments: The Company’s collaborators may be required to pay the Company sales-based milestone payments or royalties on future sales of commercial products. The Company recognizes revenues related to sales-based milestone and royalty payments upon the later to occur of (i) achievement of the collaborator’s underlying sales or (ii) satisfaction of any performance obligation(s) related to these sales, in each case assuming the license to the Company’s intellectual property is deemed to be the predominant item to which the sales-based milestones and/or royalties relate.
Prepaid and Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our prepaid and accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our prepaid and accrued research and development expenses as of each consolidated balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time. We confirm the accuracy of estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated prepaid and accrued research and development expenses include expenses for:
•
CROs in connection with clinical studies;
•
Investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•
Vendors in connection with preclinical development activities; and
•
Vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical materials.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. The scope of services under these contracts can be modified and some of the agreements may be cancelled by either party upon written notice. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical study milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates and amounts actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We issue stock-based awards generally in the form of stock options and restricted stock. We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, (“ASC 718”). ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options and restricted stock and modifications to existing stock awards to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their fair values. Described below is the methodology we have utilized in measuring stock-based compensation expense.
We estimate the fair value of our options to purchase shares of common stock to employees using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected stock price volatility, (b) the calculation of the expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate and (d) expected dividends. Due to the lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption. The computation of expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of a representative group of companies with similar characteristics to our company, including stage of product development and life science industry focus. We are a development stage company in an early stage of product development with no revenues and the representative group of companies has certain similar characteristics. We believe the group selected has sufficient similar economic and industry characteristics and includes companies that are most representative of our company. We use the simplified method as prescribed by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, to calculate the expected term for options granted to employees and non-employees as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. The expected term is applied to the stock option grant group as a whole, as we do not expect substantially different exercise or post-vesting termination behavior among our employee population. The risk-free interest rate is based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected life of the stock options. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock, similar to our peer group. The grant date fair value of restricted stock award grants is based on the estimated value of our common stock at the date of grant.
Our stock-based awards are subject to service-based vesting conditions. Compensation expense related to awards to employees with service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the associated service period of the award. Awards to non-employees are adjusted through share-based compensation expense as the award vests to reflect the current fair value of such awards and are expensed using an accelerated attribution model.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, stock-based compensation expense was $1.3 million and $1.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.5 million of total unrecognized stock-based compensation costs for stock options, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 1.66 years.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company” within the meaning of the JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.