ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Forward Looking Statement Notice
This Current Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These include statements about our expectations, beliefs, intentions or strategies for the future, which we indicate by words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “will,” “we believe,” “believes,” “management believes” and similar language. Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and elsewhere in this report are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The factors listed in the section captioned “Risk Factors,” as well as any cautionary language in this report; provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those projected. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this Form 10-K.
History and Organization
America Great Health, formerly Crown Marketing, is a Wyoming corporation (the “Company”). A change of control of the Company was completed on January 19, 2017 from Jay Hooper, the former officer and director of the Company and its former majority shareholder. Control was obtained by the sale of 16,155,746,000 shares of Company common stock from Mr. Hooper to an investor group led by Mike Q. Wang. In connection with the change of control, the Company sold to its former majority shareholder a subsidiary for $100 and another subsidiary in exchange for the cancellation of all payables and accrued expenses. After December 31, 2016, the Company’s operations are determined and structured by the new investor group. As such, the Company accounted for all of its assets, liabilities and results of operations up to January 1, 2017 as discontinued operations.
On March 1, 2017, the Company filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Wyoming an Articles of Amendment to change the corporate name from Crown Marketing to America Great Health.
On March 9, 2017, the Company formed a wholly owned subsidiary, America Great Health, under the laws of the State of California.
On June 14, 2019, the Company registered a wholly owned subsidiary in China, Meizhong Health Industry Development Co., Ltd. The subsidiary is mainly engaged in merger and acquisition, investment and financing, and marketing of medical equipment and health products in China.
Overview of Business
Prior to the change of controlling ownership of the common stock, the Company sold consumer products. It acquired electronic products from manufactures and then sold them directly to consumers so as to be more competitive in price. As of December 31, 2016, the Company ceased operations in this line of business.
The Company under the new management will focus its business in the health related industry. The Company’s Chairman and president, Mike Wang, is the owner of several health related businesses below with which The Company is evaluating the possibilities of forming several JVs. The Company might effectuate the JVs using stocks.
1.
H&BG. It is a California company in the business of R &D and sale of vitamins and nutritional supplements. It owns more than 20 formulas and engages contract manufacturers to make these products. The company has built up sales records both in the US as well as in China. On January 4, 2018, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with H&BG (the “Seller”) to purchase 51% of common shares of the Seller, for $765,000, which consisted of 63,750,000 outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock at $0.012 per share. On April 5, 2018, the Company entered into a Rescission Agreement (the “Rescission Agreement”) with the seller to rescind the transactions set forth in the Stock Purchase Agreement prior to the transaction closing.
2.
Pro Health Inc., a Tennessee company organized in 2016. It entered into a Sales Agreement with Provision Healthcare , LLC, a Tennessee limited liability company, in the selling of ProNova Equipment, which is a Proton Treatment device used in the treatment of cancer. Other than the sale of equipment, Pro Health will also provide Total Solution Services related with the use of the Equipment.
3.
Sales Agreement between Mike Wang and Dr. William Fang for the marketing and sales of Dr. Fang’s early detection system of Cardio Vascular diseases. The device provides unique 3D imaging for the Cardio Vascular conditions for patients and has already won approval of US FDA. It has very positive significance in helping preventing heart attacks, which are the number one killer in the US as well as in the world.
On March 5, 2018, America Great Health, a California Corporation (“AAGH CA”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a Sino-foreign Co-operative Joint Venture Contract (the “JV Agreement”) with Guangzhou Bona Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (“Bona”) to establish a JV, Pomeikang Biotechnology (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd. (“Pomeikang”), to promote and develop sales channels for health and cosmetics related products supplied by AAGH CA in the mainland of the People’s Republic of China, the Hong Kong Special Administration Region and the Macau Special Administration Region (together, the “China Market”).
Pursuant to the JV Agreement, AAGH CA and Bona each own 49% and 51% of Pomeikang, respectively, and AAGH California has the veto right to stop the majority shareholder’s decision. AAGH CA will contribute the initial products supply in equivalent of cash amount of RMB 2.45 million ($368,000) to Pomeikang and Bona will contribute any required operating capital, experienced sales team, promotional effort, and customer services to ensure normal day to day operation of Pomeikang. Bona will also be responsible for acquiring any required government permits, sales permits, and business licenses for Pomeikang.
At December 31, 2018, the Company decided to no longer participate in Pomeikang’s operations. On April 1, 2019, AAGH California transferred its 49% ownership to Bona for $1.
On May 21, 2018, the Company, entered into an Exclusive Oversea Distribution Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Foshan Wanshunbao Technology Co., Ltd. (“Wanshunbao”), a mainland China based company. According to the Agreement, Wanshunbao wishes to promote and develop overseas sales channels for its unique “Mysteries Fruit” tea and related products worldwide. The Company is appointed as Wanshunbao’s exclusive distributor to market and sell the “Mysteries Fruit” herbal tea and related products in geographic areas covers all over the world except mainland China.
In the past 20 years, Wangshunbao has dedicated to improve its R&D, and production of the unique “Mysteries Fruit” and related supplemental products, currently, Wangshunbao has developed a leading role in this industry, and is in the process of expanding its business model worldwide to a 10 billion RMB ($1.5 billion) industry chain. To achieve that goal, Wangshunbao’s management team had been actively seeking a qualified international distributor and business partner to execute its expansion plan.
The Company’s management team was invited to Foshan, China in early May, 2018 to visit Wangshunbao and its production facilities, upon extensive discussion and negotiation, the Company was granted with exclusive distribution rights worldwide for “Mysteries Fruit” tea and related products. The Company believes by introducing “Mysteries Fruit” products to oversee consumers would have a huge beneficial effect; and the management is confident about this business opportunity, as the Company’s core team members all have been in health and supplemental related industry for over 20 years, and has substantial nutrient products sales experiences and marketing channels. The Company is currently conducting preliminary sales campaigns for “Mysteries Fruit” products.
The company and Blue Sea International Holdings Co., Ltd. signed a letter of intent on August 28, 2018. According to the letter of intent, Blue Sea International Holdings Co., Ltd. Intends to invest $50 million for the Company's marketing, product development, and merger and acquisition activities. The two parties also signed a marketing contract for 10,000 cardio vascular device after the Company obtains the necessary permit in China.
HuaHengJian (Beijing) Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Zhengzhou RuiBoSi Medical Devices Co., Ltd. and other companies have agreed to sell or lease more than 10,000 cardio vascular device in China after the Company obtains the necessary permit in China.
The company is negotiating an acquisition intention with Hongkong Pure Aesthetics Biotechnology Limited, which holds several patents in stem cell. The patents are valued at nearly $59 million.
The Company is discussing the possibility of establishing a joint venture in California with an individual who has nearly ten years experiences in health products market.
The Company is also planning to conduct additional acquisitions. Mike Wang has approached several health related companies in China and met the management of potential acquisition targets. Rapid economic advances in China in the last 30 years have greatly improved the living standards in China. This in turn brings demand in healthcare products and services. The Company feels strongly that despite the challenges of cross border business, it might be able to acquire some good growth companies and bring good values to our stockholders.
As inherent with any new business development, there are risks involved in such endeavor. For all the healthcare related businesses afore-mentioned, the Company is evaluating what kind of risks we are facing. The Company notices that vitamin and nutrition supplement business is a highly competitive market and faces multiple regulatory monitoring. The compliance challenge is constant. Regarding proton treatment sales, the device is very expensive and for such large ticket item, the procurement process can be long and arduous. The sale of cardio vascular device also has its challenges. The device is not well known and the acceptance of the use requires major efforts in educating not only the medical professionals but also consumers. This would demand financial as well as other resources. Although the Company is making some progress in its Merger and Acquisition efforts, any results, are still not certain.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements (“CFS”) in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reported periods. Actual results may differ from those estimates and such differences may be material to the financial statements. The more significant estimates and assumptions by management include among others, the fair value of shares of common stock issued for services. The current economic environment has increased the degree of uncertainty inherent in these estimates and assumptions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Footnote 2 of the financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the year ended June 30, 2019 compared to the year ended June 30, 2018.
There was no revenue and cost of sales for the year ended June 30, 2019.
Operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2019 and June 30, 2018 was $46,771 and $58,149, respectively. The decrease in the year ended June 30, 2019 was mainly due to the lower professional fee.
Our net loss for the year ended June 30, 2019 and 2018 was $65,043 and $59,386, respectively. The increase in net loss in the year ended June 30, 2019 was mainly due to the loss on disposal of JV investment, partly offset by lower professional fee.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
The accompanying CFS were prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying CFS, the Company has incurred recurring net losses. For the year ended June 30, 2019, the Company recorded a net loss of $ $65,043, used cash to fund operating activities of $27,792, and at June 30, 2019, had a shareholders’ deficit of $168,002. For the year ended June 30, 2018, the Company recorded a net loss of $59,386, used cash to fund operating activities of $46,830. These factors create substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The new management’s plans to continue as a going concern revolve around its ability to achieve profitable operations, as well as raise necessary capital to pay ongoing general and administrative expenses of the Company. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on securing additional sources of capital and the success of the Company’s plan. There is no assurance that the Company will be successful in raising the additional capital or in achieving profitable operations.
Our cash needs for the year ended June 30, 2019 were primarily met by loans and advances from current majority shareholder. As of June 30, 2019, we had cash of $102. Our new majority shareholders will need to provide all of our working capitals going forward.
Primarily as a result of our recurring losses and our lack of liquidity, we received a report from our independent registered public accounting firm for our financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2019 that includes an explanatory paragraph describing the uncertainty as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Financial Position
As of June 30, 2019, we had $102 in cash, negative working capital of $168,002 and an accumulated deficit of $3,234,726.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any contractual obligations or off balance sheet arrangements.