Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated historical financial statements and the notes to those statements that appear elsewhere in this report. Our discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the section titled “Part 1. Item 1A. Risk Factors” elsewhere in this report.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
During the COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to prioritize the health, safety and wellbeing of our Team Members and customers; worked to drive financial performance by preserving our cash position, scrutinized planned spending and the prioritization of various initiatives; and worked to help ensure that when the current period of crisis passes, our team will emerge even stronger.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to take additional measures to help ensure the health, safety and wellbeing of our Team Members and customers. Such measures include retro-fitting our stores with plexiglass care shields, the continuation of certain labor-related benefits for Team Members, social distancing practices, sanitation practices, the use of health check screenings and offering contactless delivery.
Government imposed restrictions and stay at home orders related to the pandemic occurred during our first quarter of 2020. These contributed to negative impacts to demand, primarily during the last six weeks of the sixteen weeks ended April 18, 2020. However, as the second and third quarters of 2020 progressed, we experienced a significant improvement in demand, particularly in our DIY omnichannel business. While government restrictions began to tighten again in the fourth quarter of 2020, we still experienced increased demand, resulting in increased comparable store sales.
In addition to external factors, we believe the execution of prioritized internal initiatives, including our new marketing campaign and providing a variety of shopping choices for customers with our Advance Same Day options, contributed to driving demand and the improvement in our results. We have also continued to make progress on the execution of our key supply chain initiatives, including cross-banner replenishment and our single warehouse management system.
Despite the increase in Net sales during the fifty-three weeks ended January 2, 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic remains an evolving situation. We continue to actively monitor developments that may cause us to take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our Team Members, customers, suppliers and stockholders.
Management Overview
Net sales increased 4.1% in 2020 as compared to 2019, which was primarily driven by an increase in comparable store sales of 2.4% resulting from growth in our DIY omnichannel business, with the remaining increase attributable to 2020 including a 53rd week of operations versus only 52 weeks of operations in 2019. We experienced positive comparable store sales across every region, with Southeast, Florida and Central having the strongest growth. Our West, Mid Atlantic and Northeast regions had the lowest comparable sales growth.
We generated Diluted earnings per share (“Diluted EPS”) of $7.14 during 2020 compared to $6.84 in 2019. When adjusted for the following non-operational items, our Adjusted diluted earnings per share (“Adjusted EPS”) in 2020 was $8.51 compared to $8.19 during 2019:
Refer to “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further details of our comparable adjustments and the usefulness of such measures to investors.
A high-level summary of our financial results and other highlights from 2020 includes:
•Net sales during 2020 were $10.1 billion, an increase of 4.1% as compared to 2019, primarily driven by an increase in comparable store sales of 2.4%, led by growth in our DIY omnichannel business, as well as $158.5 million of Net sales attributable to the additional week in 2020.
•Gross profit margin for 2020 was 44.3% of Net sales, an increase of 52 basis points as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to favorable channel mix, growth in our DIY omnichannel business, supply chain leverage, inventory management, including decrease in inventory shrink and favorable pricing actions.
•Operating income for 2020 was $749.9 million, an increase of $72.7 million from 2019. As a percentage of total sales, operating income was 7.4%, an increase of 45 basis points as compared to 2019. The favorable impact in Gross profit was offset by deleveraging SG&A costs compared to prior year due to increased marketing spend on advertising, lease termination costs as we optimize our real estate footprint and higher supplies and cleaning costs related to COVID-19.
•We generated cash flow from operations of $969.7 million during 2020, an increase of 11.9% compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in Net income, as well as improvements related to working capital.
Refer to “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further details on our results.
Business Update
We continue to make progress on the various elements of our strategic business plan, which is focused on improving the customer experience and driving consistent execution for both Professional and “do-it-yourself” (“DIY”) customers. To achieve these improvements, we have undertaken planned strategic initiatives to help build a foundation for long-term success across the organization, which include:
•Continued development of a demand-based assortment, leveraging purchase and search history from our common catalog, versus our existing push-down supply approach.
•Advancement towards optimizing our footprint by market, including consolidating our Worldpac and Autopart International businesses, to drive share, repurpose our in-market store and asset base and streamline our distribution network.
•Continued evolution of our marketing campaigns, which focus on our customers and how we serve them every day with care and speed and the launch of the iconic DieHard® brand.
•Progress in the implementation of a more efficient end-to-end supply chain to deliver our broad assortment.
•Enhancement of ‘Advance Same Day’ Curbside Pick Up, ‘Advance Same Day’ Home Delivery and our mobile application and eCommerce performance.
•Actively pursuing new store openings in 2021, including through lease acquisition opportunities as available and appropriate, in existing markets and new markets, as well as expansion of our independent Carquest network.
Industry Update
Operating within the automotive aftermarket industry, we are influenced by a number of general macroeconomic factors, many of which are similar to those affecting the overall retail industry. In addition to the “Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business” section included within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, these factors include, but are not limited to:
•Fuel costs
•Unemployment rates
•Consumer confidence
•Competition
•Changes in new car sales
•Miles driven
•Vehicle manufacturer warranties
•Average age of vehicles in operation
•Economic and political uncertainty
•Deferral of elective automotive maintenance and improvements in new car quality
While these factors tend to fluctuate, we remain confident in the long-term growth prospects for the automotive parts industry.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain of our operating data expressed as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated.
Note 1: Table amounts may not foot due to rounding.
Note 2: Fiscal year 2020 includes 53 weeks. Fiscal years 2019 and 2018 include 52 weeks.
2020 Compared to 2019
Net Sales
The year ended January 2, 2021 consisted of 53 weeks compared to 52 weeks in 2019. Net sales for 2020 were $10.1 billion, an increase of $397.3 million, or 4.1%, from Net sales in 2019. This increase primarily reflected the impact of our positive comparable store sales 2.4% resulting from growth in our DIY omnichannel business, as well as $158.5 million of Net sales attributable to the additional week in 2020. We experienced positive comparable store sales across every region, with Southeast, Florida and Central having the strongest growth. Our West, Mid Atlantic and Northeast regions had the lowest comparable sales growth.
We calculate comparable store sales based on the change in store or branch sales starting once a location has been open for 13 complete accounting periods (approximately one year) and by including e-commerce sales. Sales to independently owned Carquest stores are excluded from our comparable store sales. Acquired stores are included in our comparable store sales once the stores have completed 13 complete accounting periods following the acquisition date. We include sales from relocated stores in comparable store sales from the original date of opening. Net sales for the 53rd week in a year are not included in the comparable sales calculation for that year. For example, our comparable sales results for 2020 compare weeks 1 through 52 in 2020 to the 52-week period reported for 2019. Comparable sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for Net sales presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
Gross Profit
Gross profit for 2020 was $4.5 billion, or 44.3% of net sales, as compared to $4.3 billion, or 43.8% of net sales, in 2019, an increase of 52 basis points. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to favorable channel mix, growth in our DIY omnichannel business, operational productivity relating to our ability to leverage our supply chain, inventory management including a decrease in inventory shrink and favorable pricing actions.
As a result of changes in our last in, first out (“LIFO”) reserve, a benefit of $13.8 million, an expense of $101.3 million and a benefit of $39.8 million were included in Cost of Sales in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”)
SG&A for 2020 was $3.7 billion, or 36.9% of net sales, as compared to $3.6 billion, or 36.8% of net sales, for 2019, an increase of 8 basis points. This increase as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to increased marketing spend on advertising, lease termination costs as we optimize our real estate footprint and higher supplies and cleaning costs related to COVID-19. The additional week in 2020 contributed $53.5 million to SG&A.
Interest expense
Interest expense for 2020 was $46.9 million, an increase of $7.0 million when compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to the issuance of our $500.0 million 2030 senior unsecured notes on April 16, 2020 and our $350.0 million 2027 senior unsecured notes on September 29, 2020. Refer to Note 6, Long-term Debt and Fair Value of Financial Instruments of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for further details.
Loss on early redemptions of senior unsecured notes
During the fifty-three weeks ended January 2, 2021, we incurred charges of $48.0 million related to the early redemption of our 2022 and 2023 senior unsecured notes. During the fifty-two weeks ended December 28, 2019, we incurred charges of $10.8 million related to the early redemption of our 2020 senior unsecured notes. Refer to Note 6, Long-term Debt and Fair Value of Financial Instruments of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for further details.
Provision for income taxes
Our Provision for income taxes for 2020 was $158.0 million, as compared to $150.9 million for 2019, an increase of $7.1 million primarily due to an increase in taxable income. Our effective tax rate was 24.3% for 2020 and 23.7% for 2019. During 2019, the driver of the lower tax expense resulted from a benefit relating to a release of a valuation allowance that was previously established against the deferred tax asset related to our federal foreign tax credit carryforward.
2019 Compared to 2018
A discussion of changes in our results of operations in 2019 compared to 2018 has been omitted from this Form10-K, but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 18, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov and at www.AdvanceAutoParts.com, by clicking “Investor Relations” located at the bottom of the home page.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” includes certain financial measures not derived in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted net income and Adjusted EPS, should not be used as a substitute for GAAP financial measures, or considered in isolation, for the purpose of analyzing our operating performance, financial position or cash flows. We have presented these non-GAAP financial measures as we believe that the presentation of our financial results that exclude transformation expenses under our strategic business plan and non-cash amortization related to the acquired GPI intangible assets and other non-recurring adjustments are useful and indicative of our base operations because the expenses vary from period to period in terms of size, nature and significance and/or relate to store closure and consolidation activity in excess of historical levels. These measures assist in comparing our current operating results with past periods and with the operational performance of other companies in our industry. The disclosure of these measures allows investors to evaluate our performance using the same measures management uses in developing internal budgets and forecasts and in evaluating management’s compensation. Included below is a description of the expenses we have determined are not normal, recurring cash operating expenses necessary to operate our business and the rationale for why providing these measures is useful to investors as a supplement to the GAAP measures.
Transformation Expenses - Costs incurred in connection with our business plan that focuses on specific transformative activities that relate to the integration and streamlining of our operating structure across the enterprise, that we do not view to be normal cash operating expenses. These expenses will include, but not be limited to the following:
•Restructuring costs - Costs primarily relating to the early termination of lease obligations, asset impairment charges, other facility closure costs and Team Member severance in connection with our 2018 Store Rationalization plan and 2017 Store and Supply Chain Rationalization plan.
•Third-party professional services - Costs primarily relating to services rendered by vendors for assisting us with the development of various information technology and supply chain projects in connection with our enterprise integration initiatives.
•Other significant costs - Costs primarily relating to accelerated depreciation of various legacy information technology and supply chain systems in connection with our enterprise integration initiatives and temporary off-site workspace for project teams who are primarily working on the development of specific transformative activities that relate to the integration and streamlining of our operating structure across the enterprise.
GPI Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets - As part of our acquisition of GPI, we obtained various intangible assets, including customer relationships, non-compete contracts and favorable leases agreements, which we expect to be subject to amortization through 2025.
We have included a reconciliation of this information to the most comparable GAAP measures in the following table.
(1)During the sixteen weeks ended April 20, 2019, we made an out-of-period correction, which increased Cost of sales by $13.0 million, related to received not invoiced inventory.
(2)During the twelve weeks ended October 3, 2020, we incurred charges relating to a make-whole provision and tender premiums of $46.3 million and debt issuance costs of $1.7 million resulting from the early
redemption of our 2022 and 2023 Notes. During the sixteen weeks ended April 20, 2019, we incurred charges relating to a make-whole provision and debt issuance costs of $10.1 million and $0.7 million resulting
from the early redemption of our 2020 senior unsecured notes.
(3)The income tax impact of non-GAAP adjustments is calculated using the estimated tax rate in effect for the respective non-GAAP adjustments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary cash requirements necessary to maintain our current operations include payroll and benefits, inventory purchases, contractual obligations, capital expenditures, payment of income taxes, funding of initiatives under our strategic business plan and other operational priorities. Historically, we have used available funds to repay borrowings under our credit facility, to periodically repurchase shares of our common stock under our stock repurchase program, to pay our quarterly cash dividends and for acquisitions; however, given uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, our future uses of cash may differ if our relative priorities, including the weight we place on the preservation of cash and liquidity change. Typically, we have funded our cash requirements primarily through cash generated from operations, supplemented by borrowings under our credit facilities and notes offerings as needed. We believe funds generated from our expected results of operations, available cash and cash equivalents, and available borrowings under our credit facility will be sufficient to fund our obligations for the next year.
Share Repurchases
On November 8, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized a $700.0 million share repurchase program as an addition to the previous $400.0 million share repurchase program that was authorized by our Board of Directors in August 2019.
During 2020, we repurchased 3.0 million shares of our common stock at an aggregate cost of $458.5 million, or an average price of $150.65 per share, in connection with our share repurchase program. We had $432.2 million remaining under our share repurchase program as of January 2, 2021. During 2019, we repurchased 3.4 million shares of our common stock at an aggregate cost of $487.4 million, or an average price of $144.23 per share, under our share repurchase program.
Capital Expenditures
Our primary capital requirements have been the funding of our investments in supply chain and information technology, e-commerce and maintenance of existing stores and branches. We lease approximately 84% of our stores and branches.
Our capital expenditures were $267.6 million in 2020, a decrease of $2.6 million from 2019. Our capital expenditures were primarily related to several information technology projects, including our Finance enterprise resource planning system, as well as investments in supply chain and store improvements.
Our future capital requirements will depend in large part on the timing or number of the investments we make in information technology and supply chain network initiatives and existing stores and new store development (leased and owned locations) within a given year. In 2021, we anticipate that our capital expenditures related to such investments will range from $275 million to $325 million, but may vary with business conditions.
Analysis of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Operating Activities
For 2020, net cash provided by operating activities increased $102.8 million to $969.7 million. The net increase in cash flows provided by operating activities compared to the prior year was primarily driven by an increase in Net income, improvements in working capital and the deferral of payroll taxes under the CARES Act. In the current year, working capital included an increase in cash provided by Accrued expenses, partially offset by a decrease in cash provided by Accounts payable and an increase in cash used by Inventories. Refer to “Results of Operations” for further details on our results.
For 2019, net cash provided by operating activities increased $55.9 million to $866.9 million. The net increase in operating cash flows compared to the prior year was primarily driven by an increase in Net income, which was partially offset by a decrease in working capital.
Investing Activities
For 2020, net cash used in investing activities decreased by $196.0 million to $266.9 million compared to 2019. Cash used in investing activities for 2020 consisted primarily of purchases of property and equipment, which was comparable to capital expenditures in 2019. The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2020 is attributable to the DieHard® brand acquisition on December 23, 2019, which we purchased for a cash purchase price of $200.0 million.
For 2019, net cash used in investing activities increased by $271.1 million to $462.9 million compared to 2018. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily driven by the acquisition of the DieHard® brand on December 23, 2019 for a cash purchase price of $200.0 million. This purchase gave us the right to sell DieHard® batteries and enables us to extend the DieHard® brand into other automotive and vehicular categories. Additionally, the remaining increase was in capital expenditures related to several IT projects, including our Finance enterprise resource planning system, as well as investments in supply chain, e-commerce and store improvements.
Financing Activities
For 2020, net cash used in financing activities decreased by $596.2 million to $286.0 million compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily a result of the net proceeds of $244.5 million received in 2020 that resulted from the issuance of our $500.0 million 2030 senior unsecured notes on April 16, 2020 and our $350.0 million 2027 senior unsecured notes on September 29, 2020, offset by the redemption of all of our $300.0 million 2022 senior unsecured notes on September 16, 2020 and the cash tender offer on September 29, 2020 for a portion of the 2023 senior secured notes. In 2019, we used $310.0 million to redeem all $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2020 senior unsecured notes.
For 2019, net cash used in financing activities increased by $618.2 million to $882.2 million compared to 2018. This increase was primarily a result of returning cash to shareholders in the form of share repurchases and dividends, as well as on February 28, 2019, we redeemed all $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2020 Notes. We incurred charges relating to a make-whole provision and debt issuance costs of $10.1 million and $0.7 million resulting from the early redemption of our 2020 Notes.
Our Board of Directors has declared a quarterly cash dividend since 2006. Any payments of dividends in the future will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon our results of operations, cash flows, capital requirements and other factors deemed relevant by our Board of Directors. On February 10, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share to be paid on April 2, 2021 to all common shareholders of record as of March 19, 2021.
Long-Term Debt
As of January 2, 2021, we had a credit rating from Standard & Poor’s of BBB- and from Moody’s Investor Service of Baa2. The current outlooks by Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s are both stable. The current pricing grid used to determine our borrowing rate under our revolving credit facility is based on our credit ratings. If these credit ratings decline, our interest rate on outstanding balances may increase and our access to additional financing on favorable terms may be limited. In addition, it could reduce the attractiveness of certain vendor payment programs whereby third-party institutions finance arrangements to our vendors based on our credit rating, which could result in increased working capital requirements. Conversely, if these credit ratings improve, our interest rate may decrease.
For additional information on transactions entered into relating to Long-term debt during the fifty-three weeks ended January 2, 2021, refer to Note 6, Long-term Debt and Fair Value of Financial Instruments of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
As of January 2, 2021, other than as disclosed in Note 6, Long-term Debt and Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Note 8, Leases and Other Commitments, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein, we had no other off-balance-sheet arrangements. We include other off-balance-sheet arrangements in our Contractual Obligations table including interest payments on our senior unsecured notes, revolving credit facility and letters of credit outstanding.
Contractual Obligations
In addition to our senior unsecured notes and revolving credit facility, we utilize operating leases as another source of financing. The amounts payable under these operating leases are included in our Contractual Obligations table. Our future contractual obligations related to long-term debt, operating leases and other contractual obligations as of January 2, 2021 were as follows:
Note: For additional information refer to Note 6, Long-term Debt and Fair Value of Financial Instruments; Note 8, Lease and other Commitments; Note 12, Income Taxes; Note 13, Contingencies; and Note 14, Benefit Plans, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
(1)Long-term debt represents the principal amount of our senior unsecured notes, which become due in 2023, 2027 and 2030.
(2)We lease certain store locations, distribution centers, office space, equipment and vehicles. Our property leases generally contain renewal and escalation clauses and other concessions. These provisions are considered in our calculation of our minimum lease payments that are recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the applicable lease term. Any lease payments that are based upon an existing index or rate are included in our minimum lease payment calculations.
(3)Includes the long-term portion of deferred income taxes and other liabilities, including self-insurance reserves for which no contractual payment schedule exists. As we expect the payments to occur beyond 12 months from January 2, 2021, the related balances have not been reflected in the “Payments Due by Period” section of the table.
(4)Purchase commitments include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, legally binding and specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Included in the table above is the lesser of the remaining obligation or the cancellation penalty under the agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on these financial statements. The preparation of these financial statements requires the application of accounting policies in addition to certain estimates and judgments by our management. Our estimates and judgments are based on currently available information, historical results and other assumptions we believe are reasonable. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
The preparation of our financial statements included the following significant estimates and exercise of judgment.
Vendor Incentives
We receive incentives in the form of reductions to amounts owed and/or payments from vendors related to volume rebates and other promotional considerations. Many of these incentives are under agreements with terms in excess of one year, while others are negotiated on an annual basis or less. Volume rebates and vendor promotional allowances are earned based on inventory purchases and initially recorded as a reduction to inventory, except for amounts that are offset in SG&A when circumstances exist as described below. These deferred amounts are recorded as a reduction to cost of sales as the inventory is sold.
Vendor promotional allowances provided as a reimbursement of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to promote a vendor’s products are included as an offset to SG&A when the cost is incurred if the fair value of that benefit can be reasonably estimated. Certain of our vendor agreements contain purchase volume incentives that provide for increased funding when graduated purchase volumes are met. Amounts accrued throughout the year could be impacted if actual purchase volumes differ from projected annual purchase volumes.
Similarly, we recognize other promotional incentives earned under long-term agreements as a reduction to Cost of sales. However, these incentives are recognized based on the cumulative net purchases as a percentage of total estimated net purchases over the life of the agreement. Short-term incentives with terms less than one year are generally recognized as a reduction to cost of sales over the duration of the agreements.
Amounts received or receivable from vendors that are not yet earned are reflected as deferred revenue. Our estimate of the portion of deferred revenue that will be realized within one year of the balance sheet date is included in Other current liabilities. Earned amounts that are receivable from vendors are included in Receivables, net except for that portion expected to be received after one year, which is included in Other assets, net. We regularly review the receivables from vendors to ensure they are able to meet their obligations. Historically, the change in our reserve for receivables related to vendor funding has not been significant.
Self-Insurance Reserves
Our self-insurance reserves consist of the estimated exposure for claims filed, claims incurred but not yet reported and projected future claims, and are established using actuarial methods followed in the insurance industry and our historical claims experience. Specific factors include, but are not limited to, assumptions about health care costs, the severity of accidents and the incidence of illness and the average size of claims. Generally, claims for automobile and general liability and workers’ compensation take several years to settle. We classify the portion of our self-insurance reserves that is not expected to be settled within one year in long-term liabilities.
While we do not expect the amounts ultimately paid to differ significantly from our estimates, our self-insurance reserves and corresponding SG&A could be affected if future claim experience differs significantly from historical trends and actuarial assumptions. A 10% change in our self-insurance liabilities at January 2, 2021 would result in a change in expense of approximately $14.4 million for 2020.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently adopted and issued accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see “Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The following is a description of the terms and conditions of the guarantees with respect to all senior unsecured notes for which Advance Auto Parts, Inc. (“Issuer”) is an issuer or provides full and unconditional guarantee.
Certain 100% wholly owned domestic subsidiaries of the Issuer, including our Material Subsidiaries (as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement) serve as guarantors (“Guarantor Subsidiaries”) of our senior unsecured notes. The subsidiary guarantees related to our senior unsecured notes are full and unconditional and joint and several, and there are no restrictions on the ability of the Issuer to obtain funds from its Guarantor Subsidiaries. Certain of our wholly owned subsidiaries, including all of our foreign subsidiaries and captive insurance subsidiary, do not serve as guarantors of our senior unsecured notes (“Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”).
The following tables present summarized financial information for the Issuer and Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Issuer and the Guarantor Subsidiaries and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiaries that are a Non-Guarantor Subsidiary.
Summarized Financial Information
(1)Current assets includes $4,318.6 million and $4,234.2 million of Inventories as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019.
(2)Non-current assets includes $1,585.9 million and $1,613.8 million of Goodwill and Intangible assets, net as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019.