ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following information should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Financial Statements and the Notes thereto included in this report.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) In connection with the preparation of the financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumption and estimate on historical experience and other factors that management believes are relevant at the time our financial statements are prepared. On a periodic basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions and estimates to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from the estimates and assumptions, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Financial Statements. The following accounting policies are most critical in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and assumptions made by management include, but are not limited to, the determination of the provision for income taxes and the fair value of stock-based compensation. The Company bases the estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair value of financial instruments
Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. An entity is required to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 assets and liabilities include financial instruments whose value is determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, or similar techniques, as well as instruments for which the determination of fair value requires significant management judgment or estimation.
Inputs are used in applying the various valuation techniques and broadly refer to the assumptions that market participants use to make valuation decisions, including assumptions about risk. An investment’s level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement. However, the determination of what constitutes “observable” requires significant judgment by the Company. Management considers observable data to be market data which is readily available, regularly distributed or updated, reliable and verifiable, not proprietary, provided by multiple, independent sources that are actively involved in the relevant market. The categorization of an investment within the hierarchy is based upon the pricing transparency of the investment and does not necessarily correspond to the Company’s perceived risk of that investment.
At December 31, 2020, and 2019, the carrying amount of prepaid, accounts payable and accrued liability, accounts payable and accrued liability-related parties, due to related parties and notes payable and accrued interest payable-related parties approximate fair value because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Revenue
The Company has no revenue.
Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share excludes any dilutive effects of options, warrants and convertible securities. Basic earnings per share is computed using the weighted-average number of outstanding common shares during the applicable period. Diluted earnings per share is computed using the weighted average number of common and dilutive common stock equivalent shares outstanding during the period. Common stock equivalent shares are excluded from the computation if their effect is antidilutive.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The Company believes there was no new accounting guidance adopted but not yet effective that either has not already been disclosed in prior reporting periods or is relevant to the readers of the Company’s financial statements.
OVERVIEW OF CURRENT OPERATIONS
On October 18, 2016, the Company completed the closing of the Transfer Agreement for the sale and transfer of the Company’s 51% interest in All American Golf Center, Inc. (“AAGC”), which constituted substantially all of the Company’s assets. As a result of the closing of the Transfer Agreement, the Company now has no or nominal operations and no or nominal assets and is therefore considered to be a “Shell Company” as that term is defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”).
At this time, our purpose is to seek, investigate and, if such investigation warrants, acquire an interest in business opportunities presented to us by persons or firms who or which desire to seek the perceived advantages of a corporation whose securities are registered pursuant to the Exchange Act. We will not restrict our search to any specific business or geographical location.
This discussion of our proposed business is purposefully general and is not meant to be restrictive of our discretion to search for and enter into potential business opportunities.
Management anticipates that we may be able to participate in only one potential business venture because we have nominal assets and limited financial resources. This lack of diversification should be considered a substantial risk to our shareholders because it will not permit us to offset potential losses from one venture against gains from another.
We may seek a business opportunity with entities that have recently commenced operations, or that wish to utilize the public marketplace in order to raise additional capital in order to expand into new products or markets, to develop a new product or service, or for other corporate purposes. We may acquire assets and establish wholly-owned subsidiaries in various businesses or acquire existing businesses as subsidiaries.
The Company has not entered into any definitive or binding agreements and there are no assurances that such transactions will occur. Such a combination would normally take the form of a merger, stock-for-stock exchange or stock-for-assets exchange. The Company may determine to structure any business combination to be within the definition of a tax-free reorganization under Section 351 or Section 368 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
It is anticipated that any securities issued in any such business combination would be issued in reliance upon an exemption from registration under applicable federal and state securities laws. In some circumstances, however, as a negotiated element of its transaction, the Company may agree to register all or a part of such securities immediately after the transaction is consummated or at specified times thereafter. If such registration occurs, it will be undertaken by the surviving entity after the Company has entered into an agreement for a business combination or has consummated a business combination. The issuance of additional securities and their potential sale into any trading market in the Company's securities may depress the market value of the Company's securities in the future.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 VERSUS YEAR ENDING DECEMBER 31, 2019.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE (“G&A”)
G&A expenses consist principally of administrative payroll, professional fees, and other corporate costs. These expenses decreased by $12,998 to $70,828 in 2020 from $83,826 in 2019. The decrease is attributed to the elimination of the share-based expense in 2020.
IMPAIRMENT ON PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
In 2020 and 2019 there was no impairment on property and equipment.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
In 2020 and 2019 there was no depreciation and amortization
OTHER INCOME AND INTEREST EXPENSE
There was no interest expense in 2020 or 2019.
NET LOSS
In 2020, the net loss from operations was $70,828 as compared to net loss of $83,826 in 2019. The decrease in the net loss was due to the elimination of the share-based expense in 2020.
CASH FLOW
The net cash used for operating activities increased from $63,954 in 2019 compared to $81,008 in 2020. The Company was still dependent on related parties to fund its operation.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We currently have no cash and do not have an ongoing source of revenue sufficient to cover our operating costs. We intend to obtain funding from related parties to cover our expenses; however, there is no assurance that such funding will continue to be available. Our ability to continue as a going concern on a long term basis is dependent upon our ability to find a suitable business opportunity and acquire or enter into a merger with such company.
During the next 12 months we anticipate incurring additional costs related to the filing of Exchange Act reports. We believe we will be able to meet these costs through advances and loans provided by management. We may also rely on the issuance of our common stock in lieu of cash to convert debt or pay for expenses.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This document contains “forward-looking statements.” All statements other than statements of historical fact are “forward-looking statements” for purposes of federal and state securities laws, including, but not limited to, any projections of earnings, revenue or other financial items; any statements of the plans, strategies and objections of management for future operations; any statements concerning proposed new services or developments; any statements regarding future economic conditions or performance; any statements or belief; and any statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing.
Forward-looking statements may include the words “may,” “could,” “estimate,” “intend,” “continue,” “believe,” “expect” or “anticipate” or other similar words. These forward-looking statements present our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this report. Accordingly, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the dates on which they are made. We do not undertake to update forward-looking statements to reflect the impact of circumstances or events that arise after the dates they are made. You should, however, consult further disclosures we make in future filings of our Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in any of our forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results could differ materially from those projected or assumed in any of our forward-looking statements. Our future financial condition and results of operations, as well as any forward-looking statements, are subject to change. The factors affecting these risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to:
the inability of management to effectively implement our strategies and business plan;
the willingness of management to pay for our ongoing expenses; and
the other risks and uncertainties detailed in this report.
COVID-19 IMPACT
The COVID-19 outbreak and pandemic has resulted in a widespread health crisis that could materially and adversely affect the economies and financial markets worldwide. In addition, the operations and financial position of any potential target business with which we consummate a business combination could be materially and adversely affected. Furthermore, we may be unable to complete a business combination if continued concerns relating to COVID-19 restrict travel limit the ability to have meetings with the personnel and representatives of potential target companies and may adversely affect our ability to negotiate and consummate a transaction in a timely manner. The extent to which COVID-19 may impact our search for a business combination will depend on future developments which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the disruptions posed by COVID-19 or other matters of global concern continue for an extensive period, our ability to consummate a business combination, or the operations of a target business with which we ultimately consummate a business combination may be materially adversely affected.