ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto contained herein.
We are one of the largest global pharmaceutical sourcing and distribution services companies, helping both healthcare providers and pharmaceutical and biotech manufacturers improve patient access to products and enhance patient care. We deliver innovative programs and services designed to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the pharmaceutical supply chain in both human and animal health. We are organized based upon the products and services we provide to our customers. Our operations are comprised of the Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment and other operating segments that are not significant enough to require separate reportable segment disclosure and, therefore, have been included in Other for the purpose of our reportable segment presentation.
Pharmaceutical Distribution Services Segment
The Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment distributes a comprehensive offering of brand-name, specialty brand-name and generic pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter healthcare products, home healthcare supplies and equipment, and related services to a wide variety of healthcare providers, including acute care hospitals and health systems, independent and chain retail pharmacies, mail order pharmacies, medical clinics, long-term care and alternate site pharmacies, and other customers. Through a number of operating businesses, the Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment provides pharmaceutical distribution (including plasma and other blood products, injectable pharmaceuticals, vaccines, and other specialty pharmaceutical products) and additional services to physicians who specialize in a variety of disease states, especially oncology, and to other healthcare providers, including hospitals and dialysis clinics. Additionally, the Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment provides data analytics, outcomes research, and additional services for biotechnology and pharmaceutical manufacturers. The Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment also provides pharmacy management, staffing and additional consulting services, and supply management software to a variety of retail and institutional healthcare providers. Additionally, it delivers packaging solutions to institutional and retail healthcare providers.
Other
Other consists of operating segments that focus on global commercialization services, animal health (MWI Animal Health or "MWI"), and international pharmaceutical wholesale and related service operations (Alliance Healthcare). The operating segments that focus on global commercialization services include AmerisourceBergen Consulting Services ("ABCS") and World Courier.
Alliance Healthcare supplies pharmaceuticals, other healthcare products, and related services to healthcare providers, including pharmacies, doctors, health centers and hospitals in 10 countries, primarily in Europe. MWI is a leading animal health distribution company in the United States and in the United Kingdom. MWI sells pharmaceuticals, vaccines, parasiticides, diagnostics, micro feed ingredients, and various other products to customers in both the companion animal and production animal markets. Additionally, MWI offers demand-creating sales force services to manufacturers. ABCS, through a number of operating businesses, provides a full suite of integrated manufacturer services that range from clinical trial support to product post-approval and commercialization support. World Courier, which operates in over 50 countries, is a leading global specialty transportation and logistics provider for the biopharmaceutical industry.
Recent Developments
Alliance Healthcare Acquisition
On June 1, 2021, we acquired a majority of Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc.'s ("WBA") Alliance Healthcare businesses ("Alliance Healthcare") for $6,602.0 million in cash, subject to certain purchase price adjustments, $229.1 million of our common stock (2 million shares at the Company's June 1, 2021 opening stock price of $114.54 per share), $96.9 million of estimated accrued consideration, and $6.1 million of other equity consideration. The net cash payment was $5,536.7 million, as we acquired $922.0 million of cash and cash equivalents and $143.3 million of restricted cash (see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for the allocation of the purchase price). The shares issued were from our treasury stock on a first-in, first-out basis and were originally purchased for $149.1 million. We funded the cash purchase price through a combination of cash on hand and new debt financing (see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). The acquisition expands our reach and solutions in pharmaceutical distribution and adds to our depth and breadth of global manufacturer services.
Other Strategic Transactions with Walgreens
We agreed to a three-year extension of our existing pharmaceutical distribution agreement with WBA and the arrangement pursuant to which we have access to generic drugs and related pharmaceutical products through Walgreens Boots Alliance Development GmbH (both through 2029), as well as a distribution agreement pursuant to which we will supply branded and generic pharmaceutical products to WBA’s Boots UK Ltd. subsidiary (through 2031). In January 2021, we also entered into an agreement with WBA to pursue a series of strategic initiatives designed to create incremental growth and efficiencies in sourcing, logistics, and distribution.
See Item 1A. Risk Factors beginning on page 11 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional risk factors related to our strategic transactions with WBA.
Opioid Litigation
On July 21, 2021, it was announced that we and the two other national pharmaceutical distributors have negotiated a comprehensive proposed settlement agreement that, if all conditions are satisfied, would result in the resolution of a substantial majority of opioid lawsuits filed by state and local governmental entities (see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
New Reporting Structure
Recently, we undertook a strategic evaluation of our reporting structure to reflect our expanded international presence as a result of the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare. As a result of this review, beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we have re-aligned our reporting structure under two reportable segments: U.S. Healthcare Solutions and International Healthcare Solutions. U.S. Healthcare Solutions will consist of the legacy Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment (excluding Profarma Distribuidora de Produtos Farmacêuticos S.A. ("Profarma")), MWI Animal Health, Xcenda, Lash Group, and ICS 3PL. International Healthcare Solutions will consist of Alliance Healthcare, World Courier, Innomar, Profarma, and Profarma Specialty. Profarma had previously been included in the Pharmaceutical Distribution Services reportable segment. Profarma Specialty had previously been reported in Other. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we will report our results under this new structure.
Executive Summary
This executive summary provides highlights from the results of operations that follow:
•Revenue increased by 12.7% from the prior fiscal year, primarily due to the revenue growth in our Pharmaceutical Distribution Services segment and our June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare. The Pharmaceutical Distribution Services segment grew its revenue 8.6% from the prior fiscal year, primarily due to increased sales of specialty products (which generally have higher selling prices), including COVID-19 treatments and overall market growth principally driven by unit volume growth. Revenue in Other increased by 112.3% from the prior fiscal year, primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare;
•Total gross profit increased 33.7% from the prior fiscal year. Gross profit was favorably impacted by increases in gross profit in Other of 63.4% and Pharmaceutical Distribution Services of 12.3% from the prior fiscal year, a last-in, first-out ("LIFO") credit in the current fiscal year in comparison to a LIFO expense in the prior fiscal year, and an increase in gains from antitrust litigation settlements. Pharmaceutical Distribution Services' gross profit increased from the prior fiscal year primarily due to revenue growth, including an increase in specialty product
sales. Gross profit in Other increased from the prior fiscal year primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare and revenue growth at World Courier and MWI;
•Total operating expenses declined by 55.6% from the prior fiscal year primarily due to a decrease in legal accruals primarily related to our proposed opioid litigation settlement and related obligations and other opioid-related litigation and a decrease in the impairment of assets. These expense reductions were offset in part by a 29.9% increase in distribution, selling, and administrative expenses compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare and increases in payroll-related operating costs to support current and future revenue growth;
•Operating income increased by 145.8%, from the prior fiscal year due to the decrease in total operating expenses and the increase in total gross profit; and
•Our effective tax rates were 30.5% and 35.8% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective tax rate in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was higher than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to U.K. Tax Reform (see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021 compared to the Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2020
Revenue
We expect our revenue growth percentage to be in the high-single to low-double digits in fiscal 2022. Our future revenue growth will continue to be affected by various factors, such as industry growth trends, including drug utilization, the introduction of new, innovative brand therapies, the likely increase in the number of generic drugs and biosimilars that will be available over the next few years as a result of the expiration of certain drug patents held by brand-name pharmaceutical manufacturers and the rate of conversion from brand products to those generic drugs and biosimilars, price inflation and price deflation, general economic conditions in the United States and Europe, competition within the industry, customer consolidation, changes in pharmaceutical manufacturer pricing and distribution policies and practices, increased downward pressure on government and other third-party reimbursement rates to our customers, changes in government rules and regulations, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenue increased by 12.7% from the prior fiscal year primarily due to the revenue growth of our Pharmaceutical Distribution Services segment and our June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare.
The Pharmaceutical Distribution Services segment grew its revenue by 8.6%, or $15.7 billion, from the prior fiscal year, primarily due to increased sales of specialty products (which generally have higher selling prices) including COVID-19 treatments and overall market growth principally driven by unit volume growth.
More specifically, the increase in the Pharmaceutical Distribution Services segment revenue was largely attributable to the following (in billions):
Revenue in Other increased 112.3%, or $8.4 billion, from the prior fiscal year primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare and due to growth in the other operating segments: MWI, ABCS, and World Courier.
A number of our contracts with customers, including group purchasing organizations, are typically subject to expiration each year. We may lose a significant customer if an existing contract with such customer expires without being extended, renewed, or replaced. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, no significant contracts expired. The only significant customer contract scheduled to expire in the next twelve months is our contract with Express Scripts, which expires in September 2022. Additionally, from time to time, significant contracts may be terminated in accordance with their terms or extended, renewed, or replaced prior to their expiration dates. If those contracts are extended, renewed, or replaced at less favorable terms, they may also negatively impact our revenue, results of operations, and cash flows.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased 33.7%, or $1,751.3 million, from the prior fiscal year. Gross profit in the current fiscal year was favorably impacted by increases in gross profit in Other and Pharmaceutical Distribution Services, a LIFO credit in the current year period in comparison to a LIFO expense in the prior year period, and an increase in gains from antitrust litigation settlements.
Pharmaceutical Distribution Services gross profit increased 12.3%, or $470.9 million, from the prior fiscal year due to revenue growth, including an increase in specialty product sales. As a percentage of revenue, Pharmaceutical Distribution Services gross profit margin of 2.17% in the current fiscal year increased 7 basis points compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to an increase in specialty product sales, including COVID-19 treatments.
Gross profit in Other increased 63.4%, or $887.5 million, from the prior fiscal year primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare and revenue growth at World Courier and MWI. As a percentage of revenue, gross profit margin in Other of 14.32% in the current fiscal year decreased from 18.60% in the prior fiscal year. The decline in gross profit margin in the current fiscal year was primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare, which has a lower gross profit margin than the other operating segments within Other.
We recognized gains from antitrust litigation settlements with pharmaceutical manufacturers of $168.8 million and $9.1 million in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The gains were recorded as reductions to Cost of Goods Sold (see Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Our cost of goods sold includes a LIFO provision that is affected by manufacturer pricing practices, which may be impacted by market and other external influences, changes in inventory quantities, and product mix, many of which are difficult to predict. Changes to any of the above factors may have a material impact to our annual LIFO provision. The LIFO credit in the current fiscal year was largely driven by an increase in generic pharmaceutical deflation.
In the prior fiscal year, we incurred remediation costs in connection with the suspended production activities at PharMEDium. We also incurred shutdown costs in connection with permanently exiting the PharMEDium compounding business.
New York State ("NYS") enacted the Opioid Stewardship Act ("OSA"), which went into effect on July 1, 2018. The OSA established an annual $100 million Opioid Stewardship Fund (the "Fund") and required manufacturers, distributors, and importers licensed in NYS to ratably source the Fund. The ratable share of the assessment for each licensee was to be based upon opioids sold or distributed to or within NYS. In December 2018, the OSA was ruled unconstitutional by the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. In September 2020, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed the District Court’s decision, and, as a result, we accrued $14.8 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 related to our ratable share of the assessment.
Operating Expenses
Distribution, selling, and administrative expenses increased 29.9%, or $827.0 million, from the prior fiscal year. The increase from the prior fiscal year was primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare and an increase in payroll-related operating costs to support current and future revenue growth. As a percentage of revenue, distribution, selling, and administrative expenses were 1.68% in the current fiscal year and represents a 22-basis point increase compared to the prior fiscal year. The increase in distribution, selling, and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare.
Depreciation expense increased 16.6% from the prior fiscal year primarily due to depreciation of property and equipment originating from the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare. Amortization expense increased 60.9% from the prior fiscal year primarily due to amortization of intangible assets originating from the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare.
Employee severance, litigation, and other in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 included a $147.7 million accrual related to opioid litigation settlements and $124.9 million of legal fees and opioid related costs in connection with opioid lawsuits and investigations, $117.0 million of acquisition-related deal and integration costs primarily related to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare, $46.1 million of severance and other restructuring initiatives primarily related to the disposal of assets related to our return to office plan, and $36.3 million related to our business transformation efforts.
Employee severance, litigation, and other in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 included a $6.6 billion legal accrual (see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) and $115.4 million of legal fees in connection with opioid lawsuits and investigations, $34.4 million of severance costs primarily related to position eliminations resulting from our decision to permanently exit the PharMEDium compounding business, $38.0 million related to our business transformation efforts, and $12.6 million of acquisition-related deal and integration costs and other restructuring initiatives.
We recorded a goodwill impairment of $6.4 million in our Profarma reporting unit in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 in connection with our fiscal 2021 annual impairment test (see Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). We recorded an $11.3 million loss on the remeasurement of a disposal group held for sale to fair value less cost to sell in Impairment of Assets in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 (see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
We recorded a $361.7 million impairment of PharMEDium's assets in Impairment of Assets in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 (see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Operating Income (Loss)
Segment operating income is evaluated before gains from antitrust litigation settlements; LIFO credit (expense); acquisition-related intangibles amortization; employee severance, litigation, and other; goodwill impairment; impairment of assets; PharMEDium remediation costs; PharMEDium shutdown costs; New York State Opioid Stewardship Act; and contingent consideration adjustment.
Pharmaceutical Distribution Services operating income increased 13.0%, or $234.1 million, from the prior fiscal year primarily due to the increase in gross profit, as noted above, and was offset in part by an increase in operating expenses. As a percentage of revenue, Pharmaceutical Distribution Services operating income margin was 1.03% and represented an increase of 4 basis points compared to the prior fiscal year. The increase from the prior year fiscal year was primarily due to the increase in specialty product sales, including COVID-19 treatments.
Operating income in Other increased 53.7%, or $214.8 million, from the prior fiscal year primarily due to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare and the increases in operating income at MWI and World Courier.
One of our non-wholly-owned subsidiaries, Profarma, which we consolidate based on certain governance rights (see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), adjusted its previous estimate of contingent consideration in the prior fiscal year related to the purchase price of one of its prior business acquisitions.
Other Income
We recorded a $64.7 million gain on the remeasurement of an equity investment, a $14.0 million impairment of a non-customer note receivable related to a start-up venture, and a foreign currency loss of $3.4 million on the remeasurement of deferred tax assets relating to Swiss tax reform in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net and the respective weighted average interest rates were as follows:
Interest expense, net increased 26.2%, or $36.2 million, from the prior fiscal year due to the issuance of our $1,525 million of 0.737% senior notes, $1,000 million of 2.700% senior notes in March 2021, and the $500 million variable-rate term loan that was issued in June 2021, all of which were used to finance a portion of the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance
Healthcare, the incremental interest expense associated with Alliance Healthcare's debt in certain countries, and the decrease in interest income resulting from a decrease in investment interest rates. The increase in interest expense as a result of the above-mentioned debt issuances was offset in part by a lower weighted-average borrowing interest rate and the repayment of our $400 million term loan upon its maturity in October 2020.
Our interest expense in future periods may vary significantly depending upon changes in net borrowings, interest rates, amendments to our current borrowing facilities, and strategic decisions to deploy our invested cash.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Our effective tax rates were 30.5% and 35.8% in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective tax rate in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was higher than the U.S. statutory rate due to U.K. Tax Reform (see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). Our effective tax rate in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was higher than the U.S. statutory rate due to our operating loss, the tax benefits associated with our decision to permanently exit the PharMEDium compounding business, Swiss Tax Reform, the CARES Act, and other discrete items and offset in part by the tax impact of the portion of the opioid legal accrual that is not expected to be tax deductible.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to AmerisourceBergen Corporation and Diluted Earnings Per Share
Net income attributable to AmerisourceBergen and diluted earnings per share were significantly lower in the prior fiscal year primarily due to the legal accrual recognized in connection with opioid lawsuits.
Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2020 compared to the Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2019
For a discussion of the comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, refer to the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section in our previously filed Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those policies that involve accounting estimates and assumptions that can have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations and require the use of complex and subjective estimates based upon past experience and management's judgment. Actual results may differ from these estimates due to uncertainties inherent in such estimates. Below are those policies applied in preparing our financial statements that management believes are the most dependent upon the application of estimates and assumptions. For a complete list of significant accounting policies, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowances for Returns and Credit Losses
Trade receivables are primarily comprised of amounts owed to us for our pharmaceutical distribution and services activities and are presented net of an allowance for customer sales returns and an allowance for credit losses. Our customer sales return policy generally allows customers to return products only if the products can be resold at full value or returned to suppliers for full credit. We record an accrual for estimated customer sales returns at the time of sale to the customer based upon historical customer return trends. The allowance for returns as of September 30, 2021 and 2020 was $1,271.6 million and $1,344.6 million, respectively.
We evaluate our receivables for risk of loss by grouping our receivables with similar risk characteristics. Expected losses are determined based on a combination of historical loss trends, current economic conditions, and forward-looking risk factors. Changes in these factors, among others, may lead to adjustments in our allowance for credit losses. The calculation of the required allowance requires judgment by management as to the impact of those and other factors on the ultimate realization of our trade receivables. Each of our business units performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers' financial condition and maintains reserves for expected credit losses and specific credit problems when they arise. We write off balances against the reserves when collectability is deemed remote. Each business unit performs formal, documented reviews of the allowance at least quarterly, and our largest business units perform such reviews monthly. There were no significant changes to this process during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019 bad debt expense was computed in a consistent manner during these periods. The bad debt expense for any period presented is equal to the changes in the period end allowance for credit losses, net of write-offs, recoveries, and other adjustments.
Bad debt expense for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $12.1 million, $11.9 million, and $25.2 million respectively. An increase or decrease of 0.1% in the 2021 allowance as a percentage of trade receivables would result in an increase or decrease in the provision on accounts receivable of approximately $18.3 million. The allowance for credit losses was $85.1 million and $72.7 million as of September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Schedule II of this Form 10-K sets forth a rollforward of allowances for returns and credit losses.
Business Combinations
The assets acquired and liabilities assumed upon the acquisition or consolidation of a business are recorded at fair value, with the residual of the purchase price allocated to goodwill. We engage third-party appraisal firms to assist management in determining the fair values of certain assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Such valuations require management to make significant judgments, estimates, and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Management makes estimates of fair value based upon assumptions it believes to be reasonable. These estimates are based upon historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets include, but are not limited to: discount rates and expected future cash flows from and economic lives of customer relationships, trade names, existing technology, and other intangible assets. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions or estimates.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill arises from acquisitions or consolidations of specific operating companies and is assigned to the reporting unit in which a particular operating company resides. We identify our reporting units based upon our management reporting structure, beginning with our operating segments. We aggregate two or more components within an operating segment that have similar economic characteristics. We evaluate whether the components within our operating segments have similar economic characteristics, which include the similarity of long-term gross margins, the nature of the components' products, services, and production processes, the types of customers and the methods by which products or services are delivered to customers, and the components' regulatory environment. Our reporting units include Pharmaceutical Distribution Services, Profarma, ABCS, World Courier, MWI, and Alliance Healthcare.
Goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite lives, such as certain trademarks and trade names, are not amortized; rather, they are tested for impairment at least annually. For the purpose of these impairment tests, we can elect to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair values of its reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets are less than the respective carrying values of those reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets, respectively. Such qualitative factors can include, among others, industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, and relevant entity-specific events. If we conclude based on its qualitative assessment that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, it performs a quantitative analysis. We elected to perform a qualitative impairment assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, with the exception of our testing of goodwill in the ABCS and Profarma reporting units. We elected to perform a qualitative impairment assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, with the exception of our testing of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles in the MWI and Profarma reporting units. We elected to perform a qualitative impairment assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, with the exception of our testing of goodwill in the Profarma reporting unit.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires us to compare the carrying value of the reporting unit's net assets to the fair value of the reporting unit. If the fair value exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is required, and no impairment loss is recognized. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, the difference between the carrying value and the fair value is recorded as an impairment loss, the amount of which may not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
When performing a quantitative impairment assessment, we utilize an income-based approach to value our reporting units, with the exception of the Profarma reporting unit, the fair value of which is based upon its publicly-traded stock price, plus an estimated control premium. The income-based approach relies on a discounted cash flow analysis, which considers forecasted cash flows discounted at an appropriate discount rate, to determine the fair value of each reporting unit. We generally believe that market participants would use a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the fair value of our reporting units in a sale transaction. The annual goodwill impairment test requires us to make a number of assumptions and estimates concerning future levels of revenue growth, operating margins, depreciation, amortization, capital expenditures, and working capital requirements, which are based upon our long-range plan. The discount rate is an estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by a market participant whose weighted average cost of capital includes both debt and equity, including a risk premium. While we use the best available information to prepare our cash flows and discount rate assumptions, actual future cash flows and/or market conditions could differ significantly resulting in future impairment charges related to recorded goodwill balances. While there are always changes in assumptions to reflect changing business and market conditions, our overall methodology and the population of assumptions used have remained unchanged.
The quantitative impairment test for indefinite-lived intangibles other than goodwill (certain trademarks and trade names) consists of a comparison of the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset to the carrying value of the asset as of
the impairment testing date. We estimate the fair value of its indefinite-lived intangibles using the relief from royalty method. We believe the relief from royalty method is a widely used valuation technique for such assets. The fair value derived from the relief from royalty method is measured as the discounted cash flow savings realized from owning such indefinite-lived trademarks and trade names and not having to pay a royalty for their use.
We completed our required annual impairment tests relating to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019. We recorded a goodwill impairment of $6.4 million in our Profarma reporting unit in connection with its fiscal 2021 annual impairment test (see Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). No indefinite-lived intangible asset impairments were recorded in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019 and no goodwill impairments were recorded in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019.
Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. We perform a recoverability assessment of our long-lived assets when impairment indicators are present.
After U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") inspections of PharMEDium Healthcare Holdings, Inc.'s ("PharMEDium") compounding facilities, we voluntarily suspended production activities in December 2017 at its largest compounding facility located in Memphis, Tennessee pending execution of certain remedial measures.
As a result of the suspension of production activities at PharMEDium's compounding facility located in Memphis, Tennessee and the regulatory matters, we performed a recoverability assessment of PharMEDium's long-lived assets and recorded a $570.0 million impairment loss in the quarter ended March 31, 2019 for the amount that the carrying value of the PharMEDium asset group exceeded its fair value. Prior to the impairment, the carrying value of the asset group was $792 million. The fair value of the asset group was $222 million as of March 31, 2019.
As a result of the continued suspension of the production activities at PharMEDium's compounding facility located in Memphis, Tennessee, certain regulatory matters, ongoing operational challenges, and lower-than-expected operating results, we updated our recoverability assessment of PharMEDium’s long-lived assets as of December 31, 2019. The recoverability assessment was based upon comparing PharMEDium's forecasted undiscounted cash flows to the carrying value of its asset group. Using forecasted undiscounted cash flows that were based on the weighted average of multiple strategic alternatives, we concluded that the carrying value of the PharMEDium long-lived asset group was not recoverable as of December 31, 2019 and recorded an impairment loss of $138.0 million in the three months ended December 31, 2019. We allocated $123.2 million of the impairment to finite-lived intangibles, $11.6 million of the impairment to property and equipment, and $3.2 million to ROU assets.
In January 2020, we decided to permanently exit the PharMEDium compounding business, and, as a result, we ceased all commercial and administrative operations related to this business in fiscal 2020. The decision to permanently exit the PharMEDium business was due to a number of factors including, but not limited to, ongoing operational, regulatory, and commercial challenges, such as PharMEDium's decision in January 2020 to suspend production at the compounding facility in New Jersey pending facility upgrades related to the air handling and filtration systems. In connection with the decision to exit the PharMEDium business, we recorded an impairment of PharMEDium's assets of $223.7 million in the three months ended March 31, 2020, which included impairments of the remaining finite-lived intangible assets and the majority of the remaining tangible assets.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and uncertain tax positions reflect management's assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid on items in the financial statements. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between financial reporting and tax reporting bases of assets and liabilities, as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards for tax purposes.
We have established a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets for which the ultimate realization of future benefits is uncertain. Expiring carryforwards and the required valuation allowances are adjusted annually. After application of the valuation allowances described above, we anticipate that no limitations will apply with respect to utilization of any of the other deferred income tax assets described above.
We prepare and file tax returns based upon our interpretation of tax laws and regulations and record estimates based upon these judgments and interpretations. In the normal course of business, our tax returns are subject to examination by various taxing authorities. Such examinations may result in future tax and interest assessments by these taxing authorities. Inherent uncertainties exist in estimates of tax contingencies due to changes in tax law resulting from legislation, regulation, and/or as concluded through the various jurisdictions' tax court systems. Significant judgment is exercised in applying complex tax laws and regulations across multiple global jurisdictions where we conduct our operations. We recognize the tax benefit
from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based upon the technical merits of the position.
We believe that our estimates for the valuation allowances against deferred tax assets and the amount of benefits recognized in our financial statements for uncertain tax positions are appropriate based upon current facts and circumstances. However, others applying reasonable judgment to the same facts and circumstances could develop a different estimate and the amount ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised may differ from the amounts accrued.
The significant assumptions and estimates described in the preceding paragraphs are important contributors to the ultimate effective tax rate in each year. If any of our assumptions or estimates were to change, an increase or decrease in our effective tax rate by 1% on income before income taxes would have caused income tax expense to change by $22.2 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
For a complete discussion of the tax impact of UK Tax Reform, Swiss Tax Reform, the legal accrual related to opioid litigation, the CARES Act, and the PharMEDium worthless stock deduction, refer to Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost for approximately 66% and 70% of our inventories as of September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, has been determined using the LIFO method. If we had used the first-in, first-out method of inventory valuation, which approximates current replacement cost, inventories would have been approximately $1,316.2 million and $1,519.2 million higher than the amounts reported as of September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We recorded LIFO credits of $203.0 million and $22.5 million in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2019, respectively. We recorded a LIFO expense of $7.4 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The annual LIFO provision is affected by manufacturer pricing practices, which may be impacted by market and other external influences, changes in inventory quantities, and product mix, many of which are difficult to predict. Changes to any of the above factors can have a material impact to our annual LIFO provision.
Loss Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we become involved in lawsuits, administrative proceedings, government subpoenas, government investigations, stockholder demands, and other disputes, including antitrust, commercial, product liability, intellectual property, regulatory, employment discrimination, and other matters. Significant damages or penalties may be sought in some matters, and some matters may require years to resolve. We record a liability when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. We also perform an assessment of the materiality of loss contingencies where a loss is either not probable or it is reasonably possible that a loss could be incurred in excess of amounts accrued. If a loss or an additional loss has at least a reasonable possibility of occurring and the impact on the financial statements would be material, we provide disclosure of the loss contingency and whether a reasonable estimate of the loss or the range of the loss can made in the footnotes to our financial statements. We review all contingencies at least quarterly to determine whether the likelihood of loss has changed and to assess whether a reasonable estimate of the loss or the range of the loss can be made. Among the loss contingencies we considered in accordance with the foregoing in connection with the preparation of the accompanying financial statements were the opioid matters described in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operating results have generated cash flows, which, together with availability under our debt agreements and credit terms from suppliers, have provided sufficient capital resources to finance working capital and cash operating requirements, and to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions, repayment of debt, the payment of interest on outstanding debt, dividends, and purchases of shares of our common stock.
Our primary ongoing cash requirements will be to finance working capital, fund the repayment of debt, fund the payment of interest on debt, fund the payment of dividends, fund purchases of our common stock, finance acquisitions, and fund capital expenditures and routine growth and expansion through new business opportunities. Future cash flows from operations and borrowings are expected to be sufficient to fund our ongoing cash requirements, including the opioid litigation payments that are expected to be made over 18 years (see below).
Cash Flows
As of September 30, 2021 and 2020, our cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries were $725.4 million and $675.9 million, respectively. We have the ability to repatriate the majority of our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries without incurring significant additional taxes upon repatriation.
We have increased seasonal needs related to our inventory build during the December and March quarters that, depending on our cash balance, may require the use of our credit facilities to fund short-term capital needs. Our cash balances in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were supplemented by intra-period credit facility borrowings to cover short-term working capital needs. The largest amount of intra-period borrowings under our revolving and securitization credit facilities that was outstanding at any one time during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 was $637.7 million and $39.6 million, respectively. We had $4,730.5 million, $117.4 million, and $606.0 million of cumulative intra-period borrowings that were repaid under our credit facilities during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, our operating activities provided cash of $2,666.6 million and $2,207.0 million, respectively. Cash provided by operations in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was principally the result of an increase in accounts payable of $2,049.2 million, net income of $1,544.6 million, and non-cash items of $754.7 million, offset in part by an increase in inventories of $1,116.3 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $930.1 million. The increase in accounts payable was primarily driven by the increase in inventories and the timing of scheduled payments to suppliers. Non-cash items were primarily comprised of the provision for deferred income taxes of $334.9 million, depreciation expense of $326.7 million, amortization expense of $188.1 million, and a LIFO credit of $203.0 million. The increase in inventories reflects the increase in business volume. The increase in accounts receivable was the result of our revenue growth and the timing of payments from our customers.
During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, our operating activities provided cash of $2,207.0 million and $2,344.0 million, respectively. Cash provided by operations in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was principally the result of an increase in the accrued litigation liability of $6,198.9 million, an increase in accounts payable of $3,300.8 million, and an increase in accrued expenses of $524.0 million, largely offset in part by a net loss of $3,399.6 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $1,629.0 million, an increase in inventories of $1,621.1 million, non-cash items of $662.4 million, and an increase in income taxes receivable of $482.6 million. The increases in the accrued litigation liability and accrued expenses were primarily due to a legal accrual for litigation relating to the distribution of prescription opioid pain medications (see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). The increase in accounts payable was primarily driven by the increase in inventories and the timing of scheduled payments to suppliers. The increase in accounts receivable was the result of our revenue growth and the timing of payments from our customers. The increase in inventories was due to an increase in business volume. Non-cash items were comprised primarily of a deferred income tax benefit of $1,545.0 million primarily related to a legal accrual in connection with opioid lawsuits and Swiss Tax Reform, offset in part by a $361.7 million impairment of PharMEDium's long-lived assets (see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), $290.7 million of depreciation expense, and $117.3 million of amortization expense. The increase in income taxes receivable was the result of a benefit recorded in connection with certain discrete items (see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
We use days sales outstanding, days inventory on hand, and days payable outstanding to evaluate our working capital performance. The below financial metrics are calculated based upon a quarterly average and can be impacted by the timing of cash receipts and disbursements, which can vary significantly depending upon the day of the week in which the month ends.
Our cash flows from operating activities can vary significantly from period to period based upon fluctuations in our period-end working capital account balances. Additionally, any changes to payment terms with a significant customer or manufacturer supplier could have a material impact to our cash flows from operations. The acquisition of Alliance Healthcare increased our days sales outstanding and days payable outstanding as it has longer payment terms with customers and manufacturers. Our ratios could increase in fiscal 2022 as a result of a full year's impact of Alliance Healthcare. Operating cash flows during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 included $170.9 million of interest payments and $93.5 million of income tax payments, net of refunds. Operating cash flows during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 included $150.7 million of interest payments and $139.4 million of income tax payments, net of refunds. Operating cash flows during the fiscal
year ended September 30, 2019 included $167.4 million of interest payments and $117.7 million of income tax payments, net of refunds.
Capital expenditures in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019 were $438.2 million, $369.7 million, and $310.2 million, respectively. Significant capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 and 2020 included costs associated with facility expansions, and various technology initiatives, including costs related to enhancing and upgrading our primary information technology operating systems. Significant capital expenditures in fiscal 2019 included costs associated with the construction of a new support facility and technology initiatives, including costs related to enhancing and upgrading our information technology systems.
We currently expect to spend approximately $500 million for capital expenditures during fiscal 2022. Larger 2022 capital expenditures will include investments relating to various technology initiatives, including technology investments at Alliance Healthcare.
Net cash used in investing activities in the fiscal year ended 2021 included $5,563.0 million of costs to acquire companies, which principally related to the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare, net of cash acquired, and $162.6 million for equity investments. We acquired a business to support our animal health business for $54.0 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019.
Net cash used in financing activities in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 principally resulted from the issuance of senior notes and the February 2021 Term Loan (see above) and $198.8 million of exercises of stock options, offset in part by $650 million of repayments of our term loans, $366.6 million in cash dividends paid on our common stock, and $82.2 million in purchases of our common stock.
Net cash used in financing activities in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 principally related to $420.4 million in purchases of our common stock and $343.6 million in cash dividends paid on our common stock.
Net cash used in financing activities in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019 principally related to $674.0 million in purchases of our common stock and $339.0 million in cash dividends paid on our common stock.
Debt and Credit Facility Availability
The following illustrates our debt structure as of September 30, 2021, including availability under the multi-currency revolving credit facility, the receivables securitization facility, the revolving credit note, the 364-day revolving credit facility, Alliance Healthcare debt, and the overdraft facility:
In May 2020, we issued $500 million of 2.80% senior notes due May 15, 2030 (the "2030 Notes"). The 2030 Notes were sold at 99.71% of the principal amount and have an effective yield of 2.81%. Interest on the 2030 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears and commenced on November 15, 2020.
We used the proceeds from the 2030 Notes to finance the early retirement of the $500 million of 3.50% senior notes that were due in 2021 and made a $21.4 million prepayment premium in connection with this early retirement.
In March 2021, we issued $1,525 million of 0.737% senior notes due March 15, 2023 (the "2023 Notes"). The 2023 Notes were sold at 100.00% of the principal amount. Interest on the 2023 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears, commencing on September 15, 2021. In March 2021, we issued $1,000 million of 2.700% senior notes due March 15, 2031 (the "2031 Notes"). The 2031 Notes were sold at 99.79% of the principal amount and have an effective yield of 2.706%. Interest on the 2031 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears, commencing on September 15, 2021. The 2023 Notes and 2031 Notes rank pari passu to our other senior notes, the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility, the Revolving Credit Note, and the Overdraft Facility. We used the proceeds from the 2023 Notes and 2031 Notes to finance a portion of the June 2021 Alliance Healthcare acquisition.
In addition to the 2023 Notes, the 2030 Notes, and the 2031 Notes, we have $500 million of 3.40% senior notes due May 15, 2024, $500 million of 3.25% senior notes due March 1, 2025, $750 million of 3.45% senior notes due December 15, 2027, $500 million of 4.25% senior notes due March 1, 2045, and $500 million of 4.300% senior notes due December 15, 2047 (collectively, the "Notes"). Interest on the Notes is payable semiannually in arrears.
We have a $1.4 billion multi-currency senior unsecured revolving credit facility ("Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility"), which was scheduled to expire in September 2024, with a syndicate of lenders. In November 2021, we increased the capacity of the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility by $1.0 billion to $2.4 billion and extended the expiration to November 2026. Interest on borrowings under the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility accrues at specified rates based upon our debt rating and ranges from 70 basis points to 112.5 basis points over CDOR/LIBOR/EURIBOR/Bankers Acceptance Stamping Fee, as applicable (101.5 basis points over CDOR/LIBOR/EURIBOR/Bankers Acceptance Stamping Fee as of September 30, 2021) and from 0 basis points to 12.5 basis points over the alternate base rate and Canadian prime rate, as applicable. We pay facility fees to maintain the availability under the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility at specified rates based upon our debt rating, ranging from 5 basis points to 12.5 basis points, annually, of the total commitment (11 basis points as of September 30, 2021). We may choose to repay or reduce our commitments under the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility at any time. The Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility contains covenants, including compliance with a financial leverage ratio test, as well as others that impose limitations on, among other things, indebtedness of subsidiaries and asset sales, with which we were compliant as of September 30, 2021.
We have a commercial paper program whereby we may from time to time issue short-term promissory notes in an aggregate amount of up to $1.4 billion at any one time. Amounts available under the program may be borrowed, repaid, and re-borrowed from time to time. The maturities on the notes will vary, but may not exceed 365 days from the date of issuance. The notes will bear interest, if interest bearing, or will be sold at a discount from their face amounts. The commercial paper program does not increase our borrowing capacity as it is fully backed by our Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility. There were no borrowings outstanding under our commercial paper program as of September 30, 2021 and 2020.
We have a $1,450 million receivables securitization facility ("Receivables Securitization Facility"), which was scheduled to expire in September 2022. In November 2021, we amended the Receivables Securitization Facility to extend the maturity to November 2024. We have available to us an accordion feature whereby the commitment on the Receivables Securitization Facility may be increased by up to $250 million, subject to lender approval, for seasonal needs during the December and March quarters. Interest rates are based upon prevailing market rates for short-term commercial paper or LIBOR plus a program fee. We pay a customary unused fee at prevailing market rates, annually, to maintain the availability under the Receivables Securitization Facility.
In connection with the Receivables Securitization Facility, AmerisourceBergen Drug Corporation and a specialty distribution subsidiary sell on a revolving basis certain accounts receivable to Amerisource Receivables Financial Corporation, a wholly-owned special purpose entity, which in turn sells a percentage ownership interest in the receivables to financial institutions and commercial paper conduits sponsored by financial institutions. AmerisourceBergen Drug Corporation is the servicer of the accounts receivable under the Receivables Securitization Facility. As sold receivables are collected, additional receivables may be sold up to the maximum amount available under the facility. We use the facility as a financing vehicle because it generally offers an attractive interest rate relative to other financing sources. We securitize our trade accounts, which are generally non-interest bearing, in transactions that are accounted for as borrowings. The Receivables Securitization Facility contains similar covenants to the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility, with which we were compliant as of September 30, 2021.
In April 2019, we elected to repay $150.0 million of our outstanding Receivables Securitization Facility balance prior to the scheduled maturity date.
We have an uncommitted, unsecured line of credit available to us pursuant to a revolving credit note ("Revolving Credit Note"). The Revolving Credit Note provides us with the ability to request short-term unsecured revolving credit loans from time to time in a principal amount not to exceed $75 million. The Revolving Credit Note may be decreased or terminated by the bank or us at any time without prior notice. We also have an uncommitted U.K. overdraft facility ("Overdraft Facility") to fund short-term normal trading cycle fluctuations related to its MWI business. In February 2021, we extended the Overdraft Facility to February 2024 and reduced the borrowing capacity from £30 million to £10 million.
In February 2021, we entered into an agreement pursuant to which we obtained a $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility ("364-Day Revolving Credit Facility") with a syndicate of lenders, which is scheduled to expire 364 days after June 1, 2021, the closing of the Alliance Healthcare acquisition. In November 2021, we terminated the 364-Day Revolving Credit Facility.
In October 2018, we refinanced $400 million of outstanding term loans by issuing a new $400 million variable-rate term loan ("October 2018 Term Loan"). Our $400 million Term Loan matured and was repaid in October 2020.
In February 2021, we entered into a $1.0 billion variable-rate term loan (“February 2021 Term Loan”), which was available to be drawn on the closing date of the acquisition of Alliance Healthcare. In April 2021, we reduced our commitment under the February 2021 Term Loan to $500 million. In June 2021, we borrowed $500 million under the February 2021 Term Loan to finance a portion of the Alliance Healthcare acquisition. The February 2021 Term Loan matures in June 2023. In September 2021, we elected to make a principal payment, prior to the scheduled repayment date, of $250 million on the February 2021 term loan. The February 2021 Term Loan bears interest at a rate equal either to a base rate plus a margin, or LIBOR, plus a margin. The margin is based on the public debt ratings of us and ranges from 87.5 basis points to 137.5 basis points (112.5 basis points as of September 30, 2021) over LIBOR and 0 basis points to 37.5 basis points (12.5 basis points as of September 30, 2021) over a base rate. The February 2021 Term Loan contains similar covenants to the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility, with which we were compliant as of September 30, 2021.
Alliance Healthcare debt is comprised of uncommitted revolving credit facilities in various currencies with various rates. A vast majority of the outstanding borrowings were held in Egypt (which is 50% owned) as of September 30, 2021. These facilities are used to fund its working capital needs.
Nonrecourse debt is comprised of short-term and long-term debt belonging to the Brazil subsidiaries and is repaid solely from the Brazil subsidiaries' cash flows and such debt agreements provide that the repayment of the loans (and interest thereon) is secured solely by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts, and cash flows of the Brazil subsidiaries.
Share Purchase Programs and Dividends
In November 2016, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program allowing us to purchase up to $1.0 billion in shares of our common stock, subject to market conditions. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, we purchased $125.8 million of our common stock under this program, which excluded $24.0 million of September 2018 purchases that cash settled in October 2018, to complete our authorization under this program.
In October 2018, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program allowing us to purchase up to $1.0 billion of our shares of common stock, subject to market conditions. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, we purchased $538.9 million of our common stock under this program, which included $14.8 million of September 2019 purchases that cash settled in October 2019. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, we purchased $405.6 million of our common stock, which excluded $14.8 million of September 2019 purchases that cash settled in October 2019. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we purchased $55.5 million of our common stock to complete our authorization under this program.
In May 2020, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program allowing us to purchase up to $500 million of our outstanding shares of common stock, subject to market conditions. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we purchased $26.6 million of our common stock. As of September 30, 2021, we had $473.4 million of availability remaining under this program.
Our board of directors approved the following quarterly dividend increases:
We anticipate that we will continue to pay quarterly cash dividends in the future. However, the payment and amount of future dividends remain within the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon our future earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, and other factors.
Commitments and Obligations
As discussed in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, with regard to litigation relating to our proposed global opioid settlement as well as other opioid-related litigation, we recorded a $6.6 billion liability ($5.5 billion, net of an income tax benefit). On July 21, 2021, it was announced that we and the two other national pharmaceutical distributors have negotiated a comprehensive proposed settlement agreement that, if all conditions are satisfied, would result in the resolution of a substantial majority of opioid lawsuits filed by state and local governmental entities. The proposed settlement agreement includes a cash component, pursuant to which we would pay up to approximately
$6.4 billion over 18 years, including a $288.4 million payment into escrow that was made in September 2021. The $288.4 million that was paid into escrow did not reduce our short-term liability as it was recorded as restricted cash in Prepaid Expense and Other on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of September 30, 2021. The escrow payment related to the proposed settlement agreement will be disbursed following the effective date of the settlement, or returned to us if the settlement does not become effective. The payment of the aforementioned litigation liability has not and is not expected to have an impact on our ability to pay dividends.
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations for future principal and interest payments on our debt, minimum rental payments on our noncancellable operating leases, and minimum payments on our other commitments as of September 30, 2021:
The 2017 Tax Act required a one-time transition tax to be recognized on historical foreign earnings and profits. We expect to pay $175.6 million, net of overpayments and tax credits, related to this transition tax, as of September 30, 2021, which is payable in installments over a six-year period that commenced in January 2021. The transition tax commitment is included in "Other Commitments" in the above table.
Our liability for uncertain tax positions was $522.8 million (including interest and penalties) as of September 30, 2021. This liability represents an estimate of tax positions that we have taken in our tax returns which may ultimately not be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. Since the amount and timing of any future cash settlements cannot be predicted with reasonable certainty, the estimated liability has been excluded from the above contractual obligations table. Our liability for uncertain tax positions as of September 30, 2021 primarily includes an uncertain tax benefit related to the $6.7 billion legal accrual for litigation related to the distribution of prescription opioid pain medications, as disclosed in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Market Risk
We have market risk exposure to interest rate fluctuations relating to our debt. We manage interest rate risk by using a combination of fixed-rate and variable-rate debt. The amount of variable-rate debt fluctuates during the year based on our working capital requirements. We had $0.9 billion of variable-rate debt outstanding as of September 30, 2021. We periodically evaluate financial instruments to manage our exposure to fixed and variable interest rates. However, there are no assurances that such instruments will be available in the combinations we want and/or on terms acceptable to us. There were no such financial instruments in effect as of September 30, 2021.
We also have market risk exposure to interest rate fluctuations relating to our cash and cash equivalents. We had $2,547.1 million in cash and cash equivalents as of September 30, 2021. The unfavorable impact of a hypothetical decrease in interest rates on cash and cash equivalents would be partially offset by the favorable impact of such a decrease on variable-rate debt. For every $100 million of cash invested that is in excess of variable-rate debt, a 10-basis point decrease in interest rates would increase our annual net interest expense by $0.1 million.
We have exposure to foreign currency and exchange rate risk from our non-U.S. operations. Our largest exposure to foreign exchange rates exists primarily with the Euro, the U.K. Pound Sterling, the Turkish Lira, the Egyptian Pound, the Brazilian Real, and the Canadian Dollar. With the June 2021 acquisition of Alliance Healthcare, our foreign currency and exchange rate risk increased; therefore, we now use foreign currency denominated forward contracts to hedge against changes in foreign exchange rates. We may use derivative instruments to hedge our foreign currency exposure, but not for speculative or trading purposes. Revenue from our foreign operations during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was approximately five percent of our consolidated revenue and included four months of revenue from Alliance Healthcare. We expect revenue from foreign operations to increase in the future as Alliance Healthcare's revenue will comprise a larger portion of our total revenue.
Deterioration of general economic conditions, among other factors, could adversely affect the number of prescriptions that are filled and the amount of pharmaceutical products purchased by consumers and, therefore, could reduce purchases by our customers. In addition, volatility in financial markets may also negatively impact our customers' ability to obtain credit to finance their businesses on acceptable terms. Reduced purchases by our customers or changes in the ability of our customers to remit payments to us could adversely affect our revenue growth, our profitability, and our cash flow from operations.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain of the statements contained in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and elsewhere in this report are "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Securities Exchange Act"). Words such as "expect," "likely," "outlook," "forecast," "would," "could," "should," "can," "project," "intend," "plan," "continue," "sustain," "synergy," "on track," "believe," "seek," "estimate," "anticipate," "may," "possible," "assume," variations of such words, and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements are based on management's current expectations and are subject to uncertainty and changes in circumstances and speak only as of the date hereof. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are based on assumptions and estimates that could prove incorrect or could cause actual results to vary materially from those indicated. Among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected, anticipated, or implied are the following: unfavorable trends in brand and generic pharmaceutical pricing, including in rate or frequency of price inflation or deflation; competition and industry consolidation of both customers and suppliers resulting in increasing pressure to reduce prices for our products and services; changes in the United States healthcare and regulatory environment, including changes that could impact prescription drug reimbursement under Medicare and Medicaid; increasing governmental regulations regarding the pharmaceutical supply channel; declining reimbursement rates for pharmaceuticals; continued federal and state government enforcement initiatives to detect and prevent suspicious orders of controlled substances and the diversion of controlled substances; continued prosecution or suit by federal, state and other governmental entities of alleged violations of laws and regulations regarding controlled substances, including due to failure to achieve a global resolution of the multi-district opioid litigation and other related state court litigation, and any related disputes, including shareholder derivative lawsuits; increased federal scrutiny and litigation, including qui tam litigation, for alleged violations of laws and regulations governing the marketing, sale, purchase and/or dispensing of pharmaceutical products or services, and associated reserves and costs; failure to comply with the Corporate Integrity Agreement; material adverse resolution of pending legal proceedings; the retention of key customer or supplier relationships under less favorable economics or the adverse resolution of any contract or other dispute with customers or suppliers; changes to customer or supplier payment terms, including as a result of the COVID-19 impact on such payment terms; the integration of the Alliance Healthcare businesses into the Company being more difficult, time consuming or costly than expected; the Company's or Alliance Healthcare's failure to achieve expected or targeted future financial and operating performance and results; the effects of disruption from the acquisition and related strategic transactions on the respective businesses of the Company and Alliance Healthcare and the fact that the acquisition and related strategic transactions may make it more difficult to establish or maintain relationships with employees, suppliers and other business partners; the acquisition of businesses, including the acquisition of the Alliance Healthcare businesses and related strategic transactions, that do not perform as expected, or that are difficult to integrate or control, or the inability to capture all of the anticipated synergies related thereto or to capture the anticipated synergies within the expected time period; risks associated with the strategic, long-term relationship between WBA and the Company, including with respect to the pharmaceutical distribution agreement and/or the global generic purchasing services arrangement; managing foreign expansion, including non-compliance with the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, anti-bribery laws, economic sanctions and import laws and regulations; financial market volatility and disruption; changes in tax laws or legislative initiatives that could adversely affect the Company's tax positions and/or the Company's tax liabilities or adverse resolution of challenges to the Company's tax positions; substantial defaults in payment, material reduction in purchases by or the loss, bankruptcy or insolvency of a major customer, including as a result of COVID-19; the loss, bankruptcy or insolvency of a major supplier, including as a result of COVID-19; financial and other impacts of COVID-19 on our operations or business continuity; changes to the customer or supplier mix; malfunction, failure or breach of sophisticated information systems to operate as designed; risks generally associated with data privacy regulation and the international transfer of personal data; natural disasters or other unexpected events, such as additional pandemics, that affect the Company’s operations; the impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets (including any additional impairments with respect to foreign operations), resulting in a charge to earnings; the acquisition of businesses that do not perform as expected, or that are difficult to integrate or control, or the inability to capture all of the anticipated synergies related thereto or to capture the anticipated synergies within the expected time period; the Company's ability to manage and complete divestitures; the disruption of the Company’s cash flow and ability to return value to its stockholders in accordance with its past practices; interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations; declining economic conditions in the United States and abroad; and other economic, business, competitive, legal, tax, regulatory and/or operational factors affecting the Company’s business generally. Certain additional factors that management believes could cause actual outcomes and results to differ materially from those described in forward-looking statements are set forth (i) elsewhere in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, (ii) in Item 1A (Risk Factors), (iii) Item 1 (Business), (iv) elsewhere in this report, and (v) in other reports filed by the Company pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act. The Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, except as required by the federal securities laws.