ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Form 10-K.
Abeona is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing gene and cell therapies for life-threatening rare genetic diseases. Our lead clinical programs consist of: (i) EB-101, an autologous, gene-corrected cell therapy for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (“RDEB”), (ii) ABO-102, an adeno-associated virus (“AAV”)-based gene therapy for Sanfilippo syndrome type A (“MPS IIIA”), and (iii) ABO-101, an AAV-based gene therapy for Sanfilippo syndrome type B (“MPS IIIB”). We continue to develop additional AAV-based gene therapies designed to treat ophthalmic and other diseases and next-generation AAV-based gene therapies using the novel AIM™ capsid platform that we have exclusively licensed from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and internal AAV vector research programs.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON OUR BUSINESS
We continue to assess the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and take appropriate actions to manage our spending activities and preserve our cash resources. We continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions to adjust our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our patients, employees, suppliers and stockholders. While we are unable to determine or predict the extent, duration or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, operations, financial condition or liquidity, we believe it is important to keep our stakeholders informed about how our response to COVID-19 is progressing and how our operations and financial condition may change.
Clinical Program Activities
We remain committed to advancing our clinical programs and have implemented measures to minimize disruption. We also are regularly reassessing plans along with associated processes and policies to ensure our patients and employees are safe, and that continuity in our operations remains.
All current clinical trial sites are active. We are also providing virtual and remote follow-up to ensure compliance with safety oversight. In June 2020, we resumed patient enrollment in our Phase 3 VIITAL™ study of EB-101 after the study was paused in March 2020 to ensure the safety of study participants and site staff during the pandemic. The ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trials of our investigational AAV-based gene therapies for MPS IIIA and IIIB (ABO-102 and ABO-101, respectively) have continued to treat patients.
Manufacturing Activities
Operations at our Cleveland manufacturing facility were significantly scaled back from March 2020 until early June 2020 to ensure the safety of employees and those around them, and to accommodate reduced manufacturing and clinical development activities. We had paused our manufacturing activities for EB-101 clinical material, pending patient enrollment, as well as our AAV manufacturing and process development activities. During this pause period, we took the opportunity to complete maintenance and monitoring projects.
In June 2020, we resumed our EB-101 manufacturing activities, including process development for the internal production of retrovirus as well as our AAV process development and manufacturing activities.
Business Operations
Many of the additional protective measures we instituted during the first quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic remain in place, and we continue to regularly assess and improve our safety practices and policies.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, and clinical trials continues to evolve and will depend on certain developments, including: (i) the duration of the declared health emergencies; (ii) future actions taken by governmental authorities and regulators with respect to the pandemic, including reinstituting state and local lockdowns; (iii) the impact on our partners, collaborators, and suppliers; and (iv) actions being taken by us in response to this crisis. We remain dedicated to communicating regularly and openly with our stakeholders as more information becomes available, including updates on material changes to prior guidance as we continue to follow applicable government, regulatory and institutional guidelines.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
License and other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $10.0 million, as compared to nil for the same period of 2019. The increase in revenue was due to sublicense and inventory purchase agreements we entered into with Taysha Gene Therapies (“Taysha”) in August 2020 for ABO-202, an AAV gene therapy for CLN1 disease (also known as infantile Batten disease) and a sublicense agreement we entered into with Taysha in October 2020 for a gene therapy for Rett syndrome and MECP2 gene constructs and regulation of their expression. The agreements grant to Taysha worldwide exclusive rights to intellectual property developed by scientists at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of Edinburgh and us, and our know-how relating to the research, development and manufacture of the gene therapies for CLN1 and Rett syndrome.
Total research and development spending for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $30.1 million, as compared to $48.6 million for the same period of 2019, a decrease of $18.5 million. The decrease in expenses was primarily due to:
● decreased clinical and development work for our gene and cell therapy product candidates ($16.3 million), due to scaled back manufacturing, clinical and non-clinical development activities resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as cost savings from the decision to internally manufacture retrovirus for the EB-101 program;
● decreased salary and related costs ($1.7 million);
● decreased employee travel and related expenses ($0.3 million); and
● decreases in net other research and development spending ($0.2 million).
Total general and administrative expenses were $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $20.7 million for the same period of 2019, an increase of $3.1 million. The increase in expenses was due primarily to the following:
● increased salary and related costs ($1.8 million), including severance costs associated with management changes;
● increased professional fees ($1.0 million); and
● increases in net other general and administrative expenses ($0.3 million).
Depreciation and amortization was $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $7.8 million for the same period in 2019, a decrease of $3.2 million. The decrease was driven primarily by decreased amortization expense on licensed technology due to the write-off of the REGENXBIO licensed technology in the first quarter of 2020.
Our license agreement with REGENXBIO terminated on May 2, 2020. Since our impairment testing indicated that the carrying value of the license agreement with REGENXBIO exceeded its fair value, we recorded a $32.9 million non-cash impairment charge during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest and miscellaneous income was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.2 million of the same period in 2019.
Interest and other expense was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $0.4 million for the same period of 2019. The increase results primarily from accrued interest on the amounts that we may owe to REGENXBIO under the prior license agreement, which amount is subject to the arbitration discussed in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. As described in more detail in Note 4, we have filed an arbitration claim alleging that REGENXBIO materially breached the license agreement and seeking, among other things, a declaration that we are not responsible for such payments.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $84.2 million, or a $0.91 basic and diluted loss per common share as compared to a net loss of $76.3 million, or a $1.51 basic and diluted loss per common share, for the same period in 2019. The increase in the net loss results primarily from the licensed technology impairment charge of $32.9 million, partially offset by increased license and other revenues along with decreased clinical and development expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically funded our operations primarily through sales of common stock. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economy and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. An extended period of economic disruption could negatively affect our business, financial condition, and access to sources of liquidity.
Our principal source of liquidity is cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $95.0 million and $129.3 million, respectively. Based upon our current operating plans, we believe that we have sufficient resources to fund operations through at least the next 12 months with our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. We will need to secure additional funding in the future, to carry out all our planned research and development activities. If we are unable to obtain additional financing or generate license or product revenue, the lack of liquidity and sufficient capital resources could have a material adverse effect on our future prospects.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our working capital was $55.8 million and $93.7 million, respectively. The decrease in working capital resulted primarily from $35.0 million of cash used for operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
On May 2, 2020, we received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $1.8 million (the “PPP Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, as amended (“CARES Act”), and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for loan forgiveness. The potential loan forgiveness for all or a portion of PPP loans is determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds over the 24 weeks after the loan proceeds are disbursed. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if PPP loan recipients terminate employees or reduce salaries during the covered period. The unforgiven portion of our PPP Loan, if any, is payable over two years at an interest rate of 1%, with a deferral of principal and interest payments to either (i) the date that the SBA remits the borrower’s loan forgiveness amount to the lender or (ii) if the borrower does not apply for forgiveness, 10 months after the end of the borrower’s loan forgiveness covered period. We believe that we have used the proceeds from our PPP Loan for purposes consistent with the PPP. While we currently believe that our use of the loan proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness of our PPP Loan, there can be no assurance that forgiveness for any portion of the PPP Loan will be obtained.
On December 24, 2019, we closed an underwritten public offering of 32,382,945 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $2.50 per share. In addition, as part of the offering, we sold “pre-funded” warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 9,017,055 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $2.4999 per pre-funded warrant, which equals the public offering price per share of the common stock less the $0.0001 per share exercise price of each pre-funded warrant. The gross proceeds to the Company were approximately $103.5 million, before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. In October 2020, all of the pre-funded warrants were exercised and converted into shares of common stock.
On August 17, 2018, we entered into an open market sale agreement with Jefferies LLC. Pursuant to the terms of this agreement, we may sell from time to time, through Jefferies LLC, shares of our common stock for an aggregate sales price of up to $150 million. Any sales of shares pursuant to this agreement are made under our effective “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 that is on file with and has been declared effective by the SEC. We did not sell any shares of our common stock under this agreement during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold 3,086,950 shares of our common stock under this agreement and received $17.0 million of proceeds.
License Agreement
On November 4, 2018, we entered into a license agreement with REGENXBIO to obtain rights to an exclusive worldwide license (subject to certain non-exclusive rights previously granted for MPS IIIA), with rights to sublicense, to REGENXBIO’s NAV AAV9 vector for gene therapies for treating MPS IIIA, MPS IIIB, CLN1 Disease and CLN3 Disease. Consideration for the rights granted under the original agreement included fees totaling $180 million and a running royalty on net sales, including: (i) an initial fee of $20 million, $10 million of which was due to REGENXBIO shortly after the effective date of the agreement, and $10 million of which was to be due on the first anniversary of the effective date of the agreement in November 2019, (ii) annual fees totaling up to $100 million, payable in $20 million annual installments beginning on the second anniversary of the effective date (the first of which was to remain payable if the agreement were terminated before the second anniversary in November 2020), (iii) sales milestone payments totaling $60 million, and (iv) royalties payable in the low double digits to low teens on net sales of products covered under the agreement. The license was being amortized over the life of the patent of eight years. On November 1, 2019, we entered into an amendment of the original license agreement. The amended agreement replaced the $10 million payment due on November 4, 2019 with a $3 million payment due on November 4, 2019 and an additional $8 million payment (which included $1 million of interest) that would have been due no later than April 1, 2020. That $8 million payment had been scheduled to be paid by April 1, 2020 and the $20 million that had been due to be paid on November 4, 2020, and both were recorded as payable to licensor on the consolidated balance sheet. The Company has disputed that it is responsible for the $8 million and $20 million payments, and those payments are the subject of a current arbitration between the Company and REGENXBIO.
Prior to the April 1, 2020 deadline, we engaged REGENXBIO in discussions in an attempt to renegotiate the financial terms of the agreement, but we were unable to reach a mutual understanding that we believed would have been favorable for the Company or our programs, and we did not make the $8 million payment due by April 1, 2020. On April 17, 2020, REGENXBIO sent us a written demand for the $8 million fee, payable within a 15-day cure period after receipt of the demand letter. The license terminated on May 2, 2020, when the 15-day period expired. There were no penalties for early termination of the license. On May 25, 2020, we filed an arbitration claim with the American Arbitration Association (“AAA”) alleging that REGENXBIO materially breached the license agreement prior to termination and seeking, among other things, a declaration that as a result of REGENXBIO’s material breach, we are not responsible for payments totaling $28 million (which would otherwise have been due in 2020) plus accrued interest (of $3.5 million as of December 31, 2020). REGENXBIO disputes our arbitration claim and has filed a counterclaim seeking payment of the $28 million plus interest, which REGENXBIO argues remains due. An arbitration hearing before a tribunal of three AAA arbitrators was held on March 8 and March 9, 2021. The tribunal has not yet issued its opinion, and based on the post-hearing schedule an opinion is expected in late second quarter 2021 or early third quarter 2021. For additional information, refer to Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings of this Form 10-K.
Since our inception, we have incurred negative cash flows from operations and have expended, and expect to continue to expend, substantial funds to complete our planned product development efforts. We have not been profitable since inception and to date have received limited revenues from the sale of products. We expect to incur losses for the next several years as we continue to invest in product research and development, preclinical studies, clinical trials, and regulatory compliance and cannot provide assurance that we will ever be able to generate sufficient product sales or royalty revenue to achieve profitability on a sustained basis, or at all.
If we raise additional funds by selling additional equity securities, the relative equity ownership of our existing investors will be diluted, and the new investors could obtain terms more favorable than previous investors. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financing when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
We are carefully and continually reassessing key business activities and all associated spending decisions as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. Nonetheless, we are spending necessary funds on manufacturing activities and preclinical studies and clinical trials of potential products, including research and development with respect to our acquired and developed technology. Our future capital requirements and adequacy of available funds depend on many factors, including:
● the evolving impact to our business, operations, and clinical programs from the COVID-19 pandemic and related effects on the U.S. and global economy;
● the successful development and commercialization of our gene and cell therapy and other product candidates;
● the ability to establish and maintain collaborative arrangements with corporate partners for the research, development, and commercialization of products;
● continued scientific progress in our research and development programs;
● the magnitude, scope and results of preclinical testing and clinical trials;
● the costs involved in filing, prosecuting, and enforcing patent claims;
● the costs involved in conducting clinical trials;
● competing technological developments;
● the cost of manufacturing and scale-up;
● the ability to establish and maintain effective commercialization arrangements and activities; and
● the successful outcome of our regulatory filings.
Due to uncertainties and certain of the risks described above, including those relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to successfully commercialize our product candidates, our ability to obtain applicable regulatory approval to market our product candidates, our ability to obtain necessary additional capital to fund operations in the future, our ability to successfully manufacture our products and our product candidates in clinical quantities or for commercial purposes, government regulation to which we are subject, the uncertainty associated with preclinical and clinical testing, intense competition that we face, market acceptance of our products, the potential necessity of licensing technology from third parties and protection of our intellectual property, it is not possible to reliably predict future spending or time to completion by project or product category or the period in which material net cash inflows from significant projects are expected to commence. If we are unable to timely complete a particular project, our research and development efforts could be delayed or reduced, our business could suffer depending on the significance of the project and we might need to raise additional capital to fund operations, as discussed in the risks above.
We plan to continue our policy of investing any available funds in suitable certificates of deposit, money market funds, government securities and investment-grade, interest-bearing securities. We do not invest in derivative financial instruments.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of the payment due date by period as of December 31, 2020:
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations for clinical trials and clinical manufacturing organizations for supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contractual obligations are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon prior written notice to the vendor, and are thus not included in the contractual obligations table.
Operating lease amounts represent future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating lease agreements. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
On November 4, 2018, we entered into a license agreement with REGENXBIO to obtain rights to an exclusive worldwide license (subject to certain non-exclusive rights previously granted for MPS IIIA), with rights to sublicense, to REGENXBIO’s NAV AAV9 vector for gene therapies for treating MPS IIIA, MPS IIIB, CLN1 Disease and CLN3 Disease. Consideration for the rights granted under the original agreement included fees totaling $180 million and a running royalty on net sales, including: (i) an initial fee of $20 million, $10 million of which was due to REGENXBIO shortly after the effective date of the agreement, and $10 million of which was to be due on the first anniversary of the effective date of the agreement in November 2019, (ii) annual fees totaling up to $100 million, payable in $20 million annual installments beginning on the second anniversary of the effective date (the first of which was to remain payable if the agreement were terminated before the second anniversary in November 2020), (iii) sales milestone payments totaling $60 million, and (iv) royalties payable in the low double digits to low teens on net sales of products covered under the agreement. On November 1, 2019, we entered into an amendment of the original license agreement. The amended agreement replaced the $10 million payment due on November 4, 2019 with a $3 million payment due on November 4, 2019 and an additional $8 million payment (which included $1 million of interest) that would have been due no later than April 1, 2020. That $8 million payment had been scheduled to be paid by April 1, 2020 and the $20 million that had been due to be paid on November 4, 2020, and both were recorded as payable to licensor on the consolidated balance sheet. The Company has disputed that it is responsible for the $8 million and $20 million payments, and those payments are the subject of a current arbitration between the Company and REGENXBIO.
Prior to the April 1, 2020 deadline, we engaged REGENXBIO in discussions in an attempt to renegotiate the financial terms of the agreement, but we were unable to reach a mutual understanding that we believed would have been favorable for the Company or our programs, and we did not make the $8 million payment due by April 1, 2020. On April 17, 2020, REGENXBIO sent us a written demand for the $8 million fee, payable within a 15-day cure period after receipt of the demand letter. The license terminated on May 2, 2020, when the 15-day period expired. There were no penalties for early termination of the license. On May 25, 2020, we filed an arbitration claim with the American Arbitration Association (“AAA”) alleging that REGENXBIO materially breached the license agreement prior to termination and seeking, among other things, a declaration that as a result of REGENXBIO’s material breach, we are not responsible for payments totaling $28 million (which would otherwise have been due in 2020) plus accrued interest (of $3.5 million as of December 31, 2020). REGENXBIO disputes our arbitration claim and has filed a counterclaim seeking payment of the $28 million plus interest, which REGENXBIO argues remains due. An arbitration hearing before a tribunal of three AAA arbitrators was held on March 8 and March 9, 2021. The tribunal has not yet issued its opinion, and based on the post-hearing schedule an opinion is expected in late second quarter 2021 or early third quarter 2021. For additional information, refer to Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings of this Form 10-K.
In addition, we are also party to other license agreements, which include contingent payments. However, contingent payments related to these license agreements are not disclosed as the satisfaction of these contingent payments is uncertain as of December 31, 2020 and, if satisfied, the timing of payment for these amounts was not reasonably estimable as of December 31, 2020. Commitments related to the license agreements include contingent payments that will become payable if and when certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones are achieved. During the next 12 months, we do not expect to make milestone payments related to such license agreements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reported period. In applying our accounting principles, we must often make individual estimates and assumptions regarding expected outcomes or uncertainties. As one might expect, the actual results or outcomes are often different than the estimated or assumed amounts. These differences are usually minor and are included in our consolidated financial statements as soon as they are known. Our estimates, judgments and assumptions are continually evaluated based on available information and experience. Because of the use of estimates inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Leases
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted the provisions of ASU 2016-02, Leases, as amended (“ASC 842”) using the cumulative-effect adjustment transition method, which applies the provisions of the standard as of the effective date without adjusting the comparative periods presented. ASC 842 requires the recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under the previous guidance of ASC 840, Leases. As a result of the adoption, we recorded operating lease right-of-use assets of $8.9 million and operating lease liabilities of $8.9 million. The adoption had an immaterial impact on our net assets as of January 1, 2019. In addition, we elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which allowed us to carry forward the historical lease classification.
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Right-of-use lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. The classification of our leases as operating or finance leases along with the initial measurement and recognition of the associated right-of-use assets and lease liabilities is performed at the lease commencement date. The measurement of lease liabilities is based on the present value of future lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date in determining the present value of future lease payments. The right-of-use asset is based on the measurement of the lease liability and includes any lease payments made prior to or on lease commencement and excludes lease incentives and initial direct costs incurred, as applicable. Rent expense for our operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We do not have any leases classified as finance leases.
Our leases do not have significant rent escalation, holidays, concessions, material residual value guarantees, material restrictive covenants or contingent rent provisions. Our leases include both lease (e.g., fixed payments including rent, taxes, and insurance costs) and non-lease components (e.g., common-area or other maintenance costs), which are accounted for as a single lease component as we have elected the practical expedient to group lease and non-lease components for all leases. We have also elected the practical expedient to exclude short-term leases from our right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Most leases include one or more options to renew. The exercise of lease renewal options is typically at our sole discretion; therefore, the majority of renewals to extend the lease terms are not included in our right-of-use assets and lease liabilities as they are not reasonably certain of exercise. We regularly evaluate the renewal options and when they are reasonably certain of exercise, we include the renewal period in our lease term.
Licensed Technology
We maintain licensed technology on our consolidated balance sheet until either the licensed technology agreement underlying it is completed or the asset becomes impaired. When we determine that an asset has become impaired or we abandon a project, we write down the carrying value of the related intangible asset to its fair value and take an impairment charge in the period in which the impairment occurs.
Generally, licensed technology is amortized over the life of the patent or the agreement. We test our intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if indicators are present or changes in circumstance suggest that impairment may exist. Events that could result in an impairment, or trigger an interim impairment assessment, include the receipt of additional clinical or nonclinical data regarding our drug candidate or a potentially competitive drug candidate, changes in the clinical development program for a drug candidate or new information regarding potential sales for the drug. In connection with each annual impairment assessment and any interim impairment assessment, we compare the fair value of the asset as of the date of the assessment with the carrying value of the asset on our consolidated balance sheet.
We considered the status of our discussions with REGENXBIO in March 2020 as a potential indicator of impairment in accordance with ASC 360-10-35-21. Our impairment test indicated that the carrying value of the license agreement exceeded its fair value and we recorded a $32.9 million non-cash impairment charge in 2020.
In 2019, we did not impair any licensed technology.
Goodwill
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded goodwill of $32.5 million on our consolidated balance sheet. In accordance with ASC 350 - Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, goodwill is tested annually for impairment and whenever changes in circumstances occur that would indicate impairment.
In 2020 and 2019, we did not impair any goodwill.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as amended (“ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective transition method. The ASC 606 revenue recognition standard replaced the prior revenue recognition standard ASC 605, Revenue Recognition. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with our customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Sublicense and Inventory Purchase Agreements Relating to CLN1 Disease: In August 2020, we entered into sublicense and inventory purchase agreements with Taysha Gene Therapies (“Taysha”) relating to a potential gene therapy for CLN1 disease. Under the sublicense agreement, Taysha received worldwide exclusive rights to intellectual property and know-how relating to the research, development, and manufacture of the potential gene therapy, which we had referred to as ABO-202. Under the inventory purchase agreement, we sold to Taysha certain inventory and other items related to ABO-202. We assessed these contracts at contract inception and determined that, under ASC 606, the two contracts would be combined and accounted for as a single contract, with a single performance obligation. We assessed the nature of the promised license to determine whether the license has significant stand-alone functionality and evaluated whether such functionality can be retained without ongoing activities by us and determined that the license has significant stand-alone functionality. Furthermore, we have no ongoing activities associated with the license to support or maintain the license’s utility. Based on this, we determined that the pattern of transfer of control of the license to Taysha was at a point in time.
The transaction price of the contract includes (i) $7.0 million of fixed consideration, (ii) up to $26.0 million of variable consideration in the form of event-based milestone payments, (iii) up to $30.0 million of variable consideration in the form of sales-based milestone payments, and (iv) other royalty-based payments based on net sales. The event-based milestone payments are based on certain development and regulatory events occurring. We evaluated whether the milestone conditions have been achieved and if it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur before recognizing the associated revenue. We determined that these milestone payments are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, and are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. Accordingly, we have fully constrained the $26.0 million of event-based milestone payments until such time that it is probable that significant revenue reversal would not occur. The sales-based milestone payments and other royalty-based payments are based on a level of sales for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate. We will recognize revenue for these payments at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any sales-based or royalty revenue resulting from this licensing arrangement.
Under this arrangement, we recognized $7.0 million of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, which amount related solely to fixed consideration. We do not have any contract assets or contract liabilities as a result of this transaction.
Sublicense Agreement Relating to Rett Syndrome: In October 2020, we entered into a sublicense agreement with Taysha for a gene therapy for Rett syndrome and MECP2 gene constructs and regulation of their expression. The agreement grants Taysha worldwide exclusive rights to intellectual property developed by scientists at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of Edinburgh and us, and our know-how relating to the research, development, and manufacture of the gene therapy for Rett syndrome and MECP2 gene constructs and regulation of their expression.
We assessed the nature of the promised license to determine whether the license has significant stand-alone functionality and evaluated whether such functionality can be retained without ongoing activities by us and determined that the license has significant stand-alone functionality. Furthermore, we have no ongoing activities associated with the license to support or maintain the license’s utility. Based on this, we determined that the pattern of transfer of control of the license to Taysha was at a point in time.
The transaction price of the contract includes (i) $3.0 million of fixed consideration, (ii) up to $26.5 million of variable consideration in the form of event-based milestone payments, (iii) up to $30.0 million of variable consideration in the form of sales-based milestone payments, and (iv) other royalty-based payments based on net sales. The event-based milestone payments are based on certain development and regulatory events occurring. We evaluated whether the milestone conditions have been achieved and if it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur before recognizing the associated revenue. We determined that these milestone payments are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, and are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. Accordingly, we have fully constrained the $26.5 million of event-based milestone payments until such time that it is probable that significant revenue reversal would not occur. The sales-based milestone payments and other royalty-based payments are based on a level of sales for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate. We will recognize revenue for these payments at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any sales-based or royalty revenue resulting from this licensing arrangement.
Under this arrangement, we recognized $3.0 million of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, which amount related solely to fixed consideration. We do not have any contract assets or contract liabilities as a result of this transaction.
Foundation Revenues: Foundation revenues relate to a collaborative agreement between nine Sanfilippo foundations to provide up to approximately $13.9 million of grants to Abeona in installments for the advancement of our clinical stage gene therapies for MPS IIIA and MPS IIIB, subject to the achievement of certain milestones. We have assessed the ASC 606-10-25-27 criteria used to determine whether foundation revenue should be recognized over time and determined that our performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the foundations and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. We determined that the input method based on costs incurred in accordance with ASC 606-10-55-20 would be the most appropriate method for measuring progress. As a result, we have concluded that cash received upfront from the foundations should be deferred on the balance sheet until the costs of the activities as outlined in the manufacturing and clinical work plan are incurred by installment as outlined in the agreement with the foundations. Effectively, this matches the revenue up to the costs incurred by installment. Should the aggregate cash received exceed the costs incurred by installment, the excess of aggregate cash over costs will be deferred. We have foundation revenue of $0.3 million recorded as deferred revenue on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. In 2020 and 2019, we did not record any foundation revenues since no milestones were achieved.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
We account for share-based compensation expense in accordance with ASC 718, Stock Based Compensation. We have two share-based compensation plans under which incentive and qualified stock options and restricted shares may be granted to employees, directors, and consultants. We measure the cost of the employee/director/consultant services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value for employees and directors and vesting date fair value of the award for consultants. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of options as of the grant date and the Hull White I lattice model as of any option repricing dates. The models used to determine the fair value of options includes assumptions for expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield and estimated expected term. We use the closing price of our common stock as quoted on Nasdaq to determine the fair value of restricted stock. We account for forfeitures as they occur, which may result in the reversal of compensation costs in subsequent periods as the forfeitures arise.
Stock option-based compensation expense recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $5.9 million and $7.3 million, respectively. Restricted stock-based compensation expense recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $2.3 million and $0.9 million, respectively.