Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We have included or incorporated by reference into this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and from time to time our management may make, statements that constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements may be identified by words including “anticipate,” “plan,” “believe,” “intend,” “estimate,” “expect,” “should,” “may,” “potential” and similar expressions. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from the information expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. While we believe that we have a reasonable basis for each forward-looking statement contained in this Annual Report, we caution you that these statements are based on a combination of facts and factors currently known by us and our projections of the future, about which we cannot be certain. We undertake no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and our website.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company applying a precision medicine approach to the development and commercialization of targeted therapies for cardiovascular diseases. Precision medicine refers to the tailoring of medical treatment to the individual characteristics of patients, using genomic, non-genomic biomarker and other information that extends beyond routine diagnostic categorization. We believe that when implemented correctly precision medicine can enhance therapeutic response, improve patient outcomes, and reduce healthcare costs.
Our lead product candidates are rNAPc2 (AB201) as a potential treatment for diseases caused by ribonucleic acid, or RNA, viruses, initially focusing on COVID-19, the disease syndrome caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, and Gencaro™ (bucindolol hydrochloride)
for the treatment of atrial fibrillation, or AF, in patients with chronic heart failure, or HF. rNAPc2 targets COVID-19 patients with biomarker evidence of coagulopathy, while Gencaro is being developed for patients who have a genotype that identifies a drug target associated with heightened efficacy.
rNAPc2 (AB201) for treatment of COVID-19
Recombinant Nematode Anticoagulant Protein c2, or rNAPc2 (AB201), is a protein therapeutic in clinical development as a potential treatment for patients with COVID-19. Based on its unique mechanism of action, development history and the clinical evidence from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, we believe rNAPc2 has potential to be a beneficial therapy for patients with this serious viral disease. We initiated a Phase 2 clinical trial of rNAPc2 as a potential treatment for patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the fourth quarter of 2020 and are currently enrolling patients.
Certain patients with severe COVID-19 disease exhibit thrombotic complications and other inflammatory responses suggesting potential dysregulation of the coagulation and immune systems. rNAPc2 is a potent inhibitor of tissue factor, a cellular receptor responsible for initiation of the primary coagulation pathway and appears to be the major activator of the coagulation cascade during viral infection. Tissue factor is also implicated in the immune system inflammatory response to viral infections and in the process of viral dissemination during infection. We believe that evidence from the pandemic implicates tissue factor pathways as an important part of the COVID-19 disease process, and provides a rationale to test rNAPc2 as a potential therapeutic for COVID-19 for its anticoagulant and potential anti-inflammatory properties.
rNAPc2 was originally developed for potential use as an anticoagulant due to its inhibition of the TF-initiated coagulation process. It was evaluated for the prevention of thrombosis in Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical studies involving over 800 subjects and demonstrated both safety and efficacy in these studies. rNAPc2 has also been investigated as a potential therapeutic for severe viral infections other than COVID-19. Research has shown that viral infections can provoke dysregulated activation of the TF pathway, resulting in abnormal systemic coagulation and related inflammation, leading to potential organ failure and mortality. For this reason, rNAPc2 was tested as a therapeutic in non-human primates, or NHPs, in studies against lethal doses of the Ebola and Marburg viruses, where it showed evidence of efficacy in the form of mortality reduction, decreases in inflammatory biomarkers and, evidence of reduced disseminated intravascular coagulation, or DIC. DIC is a serious condition that causes abnormal blood clotting throughout the body's blood vessels.
SARS-CoV-2 is a new coronavirus identified in late 2019 that belongs to a family of enveloped RNA viruses that include Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV-1), both of which caused serious human infections of the respiratory system. The disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus has been designated COVID-19. Since this outbreak was first reported in late 2019, there have been over 119 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 and over 2.6 million deaths worldwide attributed to the virus (as of March 2021).
COVID-19 is associated with a high incidence of both arterial and venous coagulation-related adverse events in large and small blood vessels. These include, stroke, myocardial infarction, or MI, (i.e., heart attack) and pulmonary emboli; as well as, blockage of the smaller peripheral blood vessels in the fingers/toes (COVID-digit). This syndrome is so frequently observed in COVID-19 that it has received the name of COVID-19 Associated Coagulopathy, or CAC. The underlying pathology of CAC is believed to result from thrombo-inflammatory processes triggered by the viral infection. A commonly used biomarker for assessing the presence of abnormal coagulation is a D-dimer test, which is elevated (greater than 0.5) in nearly 70% of hospitalized COVID-19 patients and is associated with adverse clinical outcomes. Some researchers believe that this and other evidence points to dysregulation of TF pathways in COVID-19 patients that result in the development of thrombotic complications.
rNAPc2 has shown potential in addressing the coagulation disorder caused by severe viral infections. In preliminary, non-human studies in NHPs against lethal doses of the Ebola and Marburg virus, rNAPc2 lowered D-dimer levels, reduced mortality and exhibited anti-inflammatory effects. We believe more recent research supports our belief that rNAPc2 has the ability to inhibit the activity of TF in multiple processes that contribute to severe viral disease. Taken together, we believe this evidence suggests that rNAPc2 may have therapeutic benefits for patients with serious COVID-19 infections and the accompanying high risk of thrombosis. To our knowledge, rNAPc2 is the only NME anticoagulant, and the only tissue factor inhibitor, currently under evaluation for COVID-19.
As a therapeutic aimed at a host response to a disease syndrome, we believe rNAPc2 potentially could be used in combination with other antiviral drugs. We believe its potential efficacy is not linked to a specific viral genome and may not be diminished by genetic drift or the development of new strains of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. As a therapeutic addressing a disease, we believe rNAPc2 may have broad spectrum potential against multiple pathogens that have disease elements in common with COVID-19, such as other coronaviruses and other RNA viruses. Therefore, we believe that rNAPc2 has therapeutic potential for future viral outbreaks beyond the current pandemic.
rNAPc2 is a single-chain, 85 amino acid, recombinant protein administered subcutaneously, that has previously been evaluated under three FDA Investigational New Drug, or IND, applications in six Phase 1 and three Phase 2 clinical studies in the United States and Europe. These clinical trials primarily examined the safety, dosing and anticoagulation effects of rNAPc2 in patients with acute coronary syndromes, in patients undergoing knee replacement surgery and in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions. In these trials, involving more than 800 human patients with over 700 exposed to drug, rNAPc2 was generally well-tolerated with a
safety profile comparable to commercially available anticoagulants. rNAPc2 is manufactured in an engineered yeast strain by an established methodology following current Good Manufacturing Practices, or cGMP, and we believe this process can be readily scaled to commercial quantities. FDA granted rNAPc2 Orphan Drug Designation status in 2014 for the treatment of viral hemorrhagic fever post-exposure to Ebola virus, but human clinical trials were not conducted.
In October 2020, FDA approved the IND application for rNAPc2 as a potential treatment for patients hospitalized with COVID-19 and it received a Fast-Track designation in November 2020. We initiated the Phase 2b clinical trial of rNAPc2 (AB201), ASPEN-COVID-19, in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the fourth quarter of 2020. We anticipate announcing topline data from this approximately 100 patient Phase 2b clinical trial in the third quarter of 2021.
We are evaluating rNAPc2 as a treatment for patients hospitalized with COVID-19 who are at high risk for thrombotic complications, as indicated by elevated D-dimer levels. The Phase 2b clinical trial is designed to be a randomized comparison of two-dose regimens of rNAPc2 versus heparin prescribed per local standard of care. The primary endpoint of the clinical trial is the change in D-dimer level from baseline to Day 8. If Phase 2b results indicate a favorable effect on D-dimer levels and safety is confirmed, following FDA review of the data and identification of the proposed Phase 3 rNAPc2 dose, we anticipate that clinical investigative sites will begin enrolling patients in a planned Phase 3 clinical trial. The primary endpoint of Phase 3 is planned to be clinical recovery as measured by the Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial ordinal scale, with secondary endpoints that include D-dimer levels and the number of thrombotic events. We believe the Phase 3 clinical trial will be event driven, with an estimated requirement of 450 patients. We believe that favorable results from this Phase 2b/3 clinical trial program could support use of rNAPc2 in COVID-19 patients, given its potential efficacy both as an anticoagulant and an anti-viral agent that we believe counters the dysregulatory immune response and improves clinical recovery.
The clinical trial is being managed in collaboration with the Colorado Prevention Center, or CPC, the University of Colorado's Academic Research Organization with extensive experience in managing vascular and anticoagulation clinical trials.
We have financed the development of rNAPc2 through public equity sales. Our rNAPc2 development plans, including the timeline, depend on our ability to enroll patients during the COVID-19 pandemic, the results of our Phase 2b clinical trial, FDA guidance, and availability of drug product, all of which are currently uncertain.
We own the clinical development program of rNAPc2, including Phase 2 clinical trials. If rNAPc2 is successfully developed, we believe it will have intellectual property protection, including 12 years of market exclusivity as an innovative biologic product under FDA law in the United States, 10 years data protection exclusivity in the European Union, or EU, and potentially patent protection in addition to this. We plan to pursue strategic co-development and partnering opportunities for rNAPc2 development and commercialization.
Gencaro™ (bucindolol hydrochloride) for Atrial Fibrillation
Gencaro™ (bucindolol hydrochloride) is a pharmacogenetically-targeted beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist with mild vasodilator properties that we are developing for the treatment of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart failure. We believe the pharmacology of Gencaro is unique and its efficacy can be enhanced by prescribing it to patients with a common genotypic variant that is present in approximately 50% of the North American and European general populations. This gene can be detected with a simple genetic test.
We are developing Gencaro to treat atrial fibrillation, or AF, in patients with chronic heart failure, or HF. AF is the most common form of cardiac arrhythmia, a disruption of the heart’s normal rhythm or rate. HF is a chronic condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to meet the body’s needs. AF and HF commonly occur together. In HF patients, the development of AF leads to worsening symptoms, and increased risk of hospitalization and death. Current treatment options for AF in HF patients are limited, and can be invasive, costly and dangerous.
Our development plan for Gencaro focuses on the treatment of AF in patients with higher ejection fraction HF, those who have an ejection fraction, or EF, of 40% and higher who also have the genotype we believe is optimal for Gencaro efficacy. This population of HF encompasses more than half of all HF patients in the United States and Europe. There are currently few approved or effective drug therapies to treat AF or HF in this patient population.
Our development plan for Gencaro is based on our recent analysis of the Phase 2b clinical trial of Gencaro for the prevention of AF in HF patients, known as GENETIC-AF. This analysis showed novel results for Gencaro in patients in the clinical trial with EF’s of 40% and higher. We are planning a new design for a Phase 3 pivotal clinical trial of Gencaro based on this analysis that addresses what we believe are important clinical assessments, including the total amount of time that a patient experiences AF, known as AF burden, maintenance of normal sinus rhythm, rhythm control interventions such as electrical cardioversion, catheter ablation and use of anti-arrhythmic drugs and drug-related complications such as bradycardia. Based on these analyses, we were issued a United States patent in February 2021 for the use of Gencaro in this patient population. We believe this patent will substantially extend the patent protection for our planned development of Gencaro into 2039. We are seeking similar patent protection in other countries.
We currently have an agreement with the FDA, known as a Special Protocol Assessment, or SPA, for the requirements of a Gencaro Phase 3 clinical trial that would support approval of Gencaro if successful. Based on our recent analyses of the GENETIC-AF data, we may alter the design of PRECISION-AF to focus on endpoints that are not covered in the SPA agreement.
We believe that patients with HF and AF represent a major unmet medical need, and this need is most pronounced in patients with EF values of 40% and above. This EF range constitutes more than half of all chronic HF in the United States and Europe, as well as in Japan and China, and there are currently few approved, effective or guideline-recommended therapies for these patients to treat either their AF or HF. AF is a very common complication in these patients, with estimates of AF incidence ranging from 40% to 60%. Beta-blockers approved for HF are commonly used off-label to control heart rate in these patients, but they are not considered effective in preventing AF and none are approved for patients with EF ≥ 40%. Other anti-arrhythmic drugs approved for the treatment of AF have adverse side effects and in HF patients are either contraindicated or have label warnings for use due to an increased risk of mortality. Interventional procedures for AF, such as catheter ablation and electrical cardioversion, are invasive, expensive, and often temporary; these interventions also typically require the continued use of beta blockers and other anti-arrhythmic drugs post-intervention.
We believe that Gencaro, if approved, may be a safe and more effective therapy for the treatment of higher ejection fraction HF patients with AF. We believe there are several potentially important attributes that would differentiate Gencaro from existing therapies, including:
•
More effective rhythm control compared to the current standard of care;
•
Reduction in the need for catheter ablation, electrical cardioversion, or toxic anti-arrhythmic drugs;
•
Maintenance of rhythm control after a successful AF catheter ablation;
•
Effective rate control with lower risk of treatment-limiting bradycardia;
•
Reduction in symptoms and improvement in quality of life;
•
Reduced health care burden;
•
Foundational beta-blocker benefits for HF and unique evidence of efficacy in HF patients with AF;
•
One of the only drug therapies approved and shown effective for AF in HF patients with EF ≥ 40%, and the only one in its drug class.
We have an international patent portfolio for Gencaro in the United States, the EU, and other major markets, as well as new chemical entity status, including a new patent that we believe will give us a strong intellectual property position to at least approximately 2039 in the United States; we have filed applications similar to this new patent in international territories. We have developed a laboratory platform for the diagnostic test that would be used to prescribe Gencaro; this platform was approved by FDA for use in the Phase 2B clinical trial. We retain all rights to this test platform; we expect to use it in future clinical trials, and we believe it could be one of multiple diagnostic platforms used for commercialization.
To support the continued development of rNAPc2 and Gencaro, we will need additional financing to fully fund the planned clinical trials, and our general and administrative costs through the clinical trials’ projected completion and potential commercialization. Considering the substantial time and costs associated with the development of rNAPc2 and Gencaro and the risk that we may be unable to raise a significant amount of capital on acceptable terms, we are also pursuing co-development and commercialization partnering opportunities with large pharmaceutical and/or specialty pharmaceutical companies and may pursue a strategic combination or other strategic transactions. If we are unable to obtain sufficient financing or are unable to complete a strategic transaction, we may discontinue our development activities on rNAPc2 or Gencaro or discontinue our operations.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, together with the $23.3 million of net proceeds raised through February 2021 from sales of our common stock, will be sufficient to fund our operations through the end of fiscal year 2022, including the projected costs for the rNAPc2 (AB201) Phase 2b clinical trial. Conducting a Phase 3 rNAPc2 clinical trial or the Phase 3 PRECISION-AF trial would likely require additional financing. However, changing circumstances may cause us to consume capital significantly faster or slower than currently anticipated. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available financial resources sooner than we currently anticipate; therefore, we may have to raise additional capital for other clinical trials of rNAPc2. Initiating any Phase 3 clinical trial of Gencaro is dependent on sustained improvement in the COVID-19 pandemic and will require additional financing.
In 2017, we entered into a sales agreement with a placement agent to sell, from time to time, our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $10.2 million, in an “at the market offering.” In 2020, we further amended the sales agreement to increase the maximum aggregate value of shares which we may issue and sell from time to time under this sales agreement to $32.4 million. This sales agreement terminated in July 2020. Under this sales agreement, we had sold an aggregate of 3,302,159 shares of our common stock pursuant to the terms of such sales agreement, as amended, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $32.3 million. Net proceeds received in this offering were approximately $30.8 million, after deducting expenses for executing the “at the market offering” and commissions paid to the placement agent.
In July 2020, we entered into a new sales agreement with a placement agent to sell, from time to time, our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $54.0 million, in an “at the market offering.” As of February 2021, we had sold an aggregate of 9,928,272 shares of our common stock pursuant to the terms of such sales agreement for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $54.0 million. Net proceeds received in this offering were approximately $52.2 million, after deducting expenses for executing the “at the market offering” and commissions paid to the placement agent. We have sold all shares available under the current prospectus.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, a novel strain of Coronavirus, a global pandemic. This outbreak is causing major disruptions to businesses and markets worldwide as the virus spreads. We do not expect a material financial effect as a result of the pandemic. However, if the pandemic continues to be a severe worldwide crisis, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Results of Operations
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expense is comprised primarily of personnel costs, clinical development, manufacturing process development, and regulatory activities and costs. Our R&D expense continues to be almost entirely generated by our activities relating to the development of Gencaro.
Our research and development expenses were $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1.8 million for 2019. The $3.2 million increase in research and development expenses in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily related to the initiation of our rNAPc2 (AB201) clinical trial in the second half of 2020.
Clinical expense increased approximately $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was related to the initiation of our rNAPc2 (AB201) clinical trial in the second half of 2020.
Manufacturing process development costs increased approximately $1.2 million year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was a result of production of clinical trial materials used in our rNAPc2 (AB201) clinical trial that was initiated in the second half of 2020.
R&D personnel costs increased approximately $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. The remaining increase was primarily a result of higher outside services and consulting costs related to initiation of our rNAPc2 (AB201) clinical trial.
R&D expense in 2021 is expected to be higher than 2020, as we continue our rNAPc2 (AB201) Phase 2b clinical trial.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative, or G&A, expenses primarily consist of personnel costs, consulting and professional fees, insurance, facilities and depreciation expenses, and various other administrative costs.
G&A expenses were $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.0 million for 2019, an increase of approximately $0.8 million. The increase in expenses during 2020 comprised primarily of increased legal and professional costs, insurance costs and higher personnel costs in 2020, as compared to 2019.
G&A expenses in 2021 are expected to be consistent with those in 2020 as we maintain administrative activities to support our ongoing operations.
Interest and Other Income
Interest and other income was $28,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $172,000 for 2019, resulting in an decrease of $144,000. We expect interest income to be lower in 2021 than in 2020, as we continue to use our cash and cash equivalents to fund our operations.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $9,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $7,000 for 2019. The amounts were nominal to our overall operations. Based on our current capital structure, interest expense is expected to be negligible in 2021.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $9,000 and $167,000, respectively. The income tax benefit in 2019 was primarily related to the reduction in the recorded valuation allowance as a result of the realization of research and experimentation credit carryforwards under the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015, or PATH Act. In 2019, the benefit was fully monetized and we do not expect additional significant income tax benefit in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of December 31, 2020, we had total cash and cash equivalents of approximately $49.1 million, as compared to $8.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The net increase of $40.7 million during the year primarily reflects net proceeds of approximately $48.9 million from the issuance of common stock, offset by $7.7 million of cash used to fund operating activities and $0.4 million of payments on a vendor financing arrangement.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased approximately $2.9 million compared with 2019. This was primarily due to a higher net loss in 2020, as discussed in more detail above, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $19,000 and $4,000, respectively, for the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $48.5 million for year ended December 31, 2020 representing $48.9 million in net proceeds from sales of our common stock in our registered direct equity offering and our “at the market” equity offering in the period, less $0.4 million of payments on a vendor finance arrangement. Net cash provided by financing activities was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 representing $6.9 million of net proceeds from sales of our common stock pursuant to our sales agreement, less $0.3 million in payments on a vendor financing arrangement.
Sources and Uses of Capital
Our primary sources of liquidity to date have been capital raised from issuances of shares of our preferred and common stock. The primary uses of our capital resources to date have been to fund operating activities, including research, clinical development and drug manufacturing expenses, license payments, and spending on capital items.
In 2017, we entered into a sales agreement with a placement agent to sell, from time to time, our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $10.2 million, in an “at the market offering.” In 2020, we further amended the sales agreement to increase the maximum aggregate value of shares which we may issue and sell from time to time under this sales agreement to $32.4 million. This sales agreement terminated in July 2020. Under this sales agreement, we sold an aggregate of 3,302,159 shares of our common stock pursuant to the terms of such sales agreement, as amended, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $32.3 million. Net proceeds received in this offering were approximately $30.8 million, after deducting expenses for executing the “at the market offering” and commissions paid to the placement agent.
In July 2020, we entered into a new sales agreement with a placement agent to sell, from time to time, our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $54.0 million, in an “at the market offering.” As of February 2021, we had sold an aggregate of 9,928,272 shares of our common stock pursuant to the terms of such sales agreement for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $54.0 million. Net proceeds received in this offering were approximately $52.2 million, after deducting expenses for executing the “at the market offering” and commissions paid to the placement agent. We have sold all shares available under the current prospectus.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, a novel strain of Coronavirus, a global pandemic. This outbreak is causing major disruptions to businesses and markets worldwide as the virus spreads. We do not expect a material financial effect as a result of the pandemic. However, if the pandemic continues to be a severe worldwide crisis, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Our ability to execute our development programs in accordance with our projected time line depends on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
•
the costs and timing for the potential additional clinical trials in order to gain possible regulatory approval for rNAPc2, Gencaro or any other product candidate;
•
the market price of our stock and the availability and cost of additional equity capital from existing and potential new investors;
•
our ability to retain the listing of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market;
•
our ability to control costs associated with our operations;
•
general economic and industry conditions affecting the availability and cost of capital, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•
the terms and conditions of our existing collaborative and licensing agreements.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, together with the $23.3 million of net proceeds raised through February 2021 from sales of our common stock, will be sufficient to fund our operations, at our current cost structure, after giving effect to potential cost reductions, through the end of fiscal year 2022. Conducting a Phase 3 rNAPc2 clinical trial or the Phase 3 PRECISION-AF trial would likely require additional financing. However, changing circumstances may cause us to consume capital significantly faster or slower than currently anticipated. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available financial resources sooner than we currently anticipate; therefore, we may have to raise additional capital for clinical trials of rNAPc2. Initiating any Phase 3 clinical trial of Gencaro is dependent on our obtaining additional financing. We may not be able to raise sufficient capital on acceptable terms, or at all, to continue development and potential commercialization of rNAPc2 or Gencaro or to otherwise continue operations and may not be able to execute any strategic transaction.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operation and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. While our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 of “Notes to Financial Statements” included within Item 8 in this report, we believe the following critical accounting policy affected our most significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements and, therefore, is important in understanding our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Outsourcing Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued outsourcing expenses. This process involves identifying services that third parties have performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for these services as of the balance sheet date. Examples of estimated accrued outsourcing expenses include contract service fees, such as fees payable to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of materials related to our drug product, and service fees from clinical research organizations. We develop estimates of liabilities using our judgment based upon the facts and circumstances known at the time.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not participated in any transactions with unconsolidated entities, such as special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
Indemnifications
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into contractual arrangements under which we may agree to indemnify certain parties from any losses incurred relating to the services they perform on our behalf or for losses arising from certain events as defined within the particular contract. Such indemnification obligations may not be subject to maximum loss clauses. We have entered into indemnity agreements with each of our directors, officers and certain employees. Such indemnity agreements contain provisions, which are in some respects broader than the specific indemnification provisions contained in Delaware law. We also maintain an insurance policy for our directors and executive officers insuring against certain liabilities arising in their capacities as such.