ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information, which we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to the financial statement contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including, without limitation, statements containing the words “believes”, “anticipates”, “estimates”, “expects”, “intends”, “projects”, and words of similar import, are forward-looking as that term is defined by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (“1995 Act”), and in releases issued by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). These statements are being made pursuant to the provisions of the 1995 Act and with the intention of obtaining the benefits of the “Safe Harbor” provisions of the 1995 Act. We caution that any forward-looking statements made within this Annual Report on Form 10-K are not guarantees of future performance and in fact, actual results may differ materially from those results discussed in such forward-looking statements. This material difference can be a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, any risks detailed herein, including the “Risk Factors” section contained in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K, or detailed in our most recent reports on Form 10-Q and Form 8-K and from time to time in our other filings with the SEC and amendments thereto. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we are not undertaking any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements. Readers should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
Overview and Plan of Operations
Sales in Fiscal 2020 were positively impacted by the sales and marketing of a Covid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette to detect Covid-19 antibodies in whole blood, serum or plasma (that we began selling via a distribution agreement with Healgen Scientific, LLC in March 2020; hereinafter referred to as the “Covid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette”) and sales of a Rapid Covid-19 Antigen Test Cassette (that we began distributing in December 2020) while sales of our drugs of abuse testing products continued to be negatively impacted by the price competitiveness in our core markets (government, employment and clinical) and by the Covid-19 pandemic. The Covid-19 testing products are being marketed in full compliance with the FDA EUA policy and the Covid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette is being marketed in accordance with an EUA issued by FDA on May 29, 2020. Due to specific regulatory events that occurred from March 2020 until May 2020, we did not record any sales of Covid-19 tests until later in May 2020, although we did take pre-orders (with payments) for Covid-19 tests prior to shipping product.
In addition to the Covid-19 antibody and antigen tests discussed above, in October 2020, we announced that we signed a distribution agreement with Co-Diagnostics, Inc. granting ABMC the right to market and sell the Logix Smart Covid-19 tests in the United States on a non-exclusive basis. There were no sales of the Logix Smart Covid-19 test in Fiscal 2020. This is primarily due to the shortage of PCR machines; because of this lack of supply, we could not offer potential customers a testing platform for the reagents to be used on.
In addition to the Covid-19 testing platforms, additional products and services are still being offered to diversify our revenue stream through third party relationships. We currently offer a lower-cost alternative for onsite drug testing, point of care products for certain infectious diseases and alternative drug testing sample methods. With the exception of the lower-cost drug test alternative and Covid-19 rapid antibody tests, these offerings have yet to materially positively impact sales. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced reduced sales to our two contract manufacturing customers as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. Beginning in mid-2019, we can sell oral fluid drugs tests in the employment and insurance markets under a limited exemption set forth by the FDA. Prior to this point, we could only sell our oral fluid drug tests in the forensic market in the United States and to markets outside the United States. We are hopeful that gaining access to this market again will enable us to see revenue growth for our oral fluid drug tests in the future; however, we are uncertain when/if in the year ended December 31, 2021 we will see significant sales oral fluid drug testing in the employment market given the current global health crises and Covid-19. We are focusing our efforts on further penetration of markets with new products, including, but not limited to, the Covid-19 testing products we are offering, as well as other infectious disease products we are offering. We are also looking for avenues to capitalize on our US manufacturing operations; especially during this time of demand for diagnostic products for Covid-19.
Operating expenses increased $82,000 in Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019 due to commissions paid on sales of the Covid-19 rapid antibody tests as well as fees related to the Cherokee refinancing in February 2020. We continuously make efforts to control operational expenses to ensure they are in line with sales. We have consolidated job responsibilities in certain areas of the Company as a result of employee retirement and other departures and this has enabled us to implement personnel reductions. Throughout most of the six months ended June 30, 2020, we also maintained a 10% salary deferral program for our sole executive officer, our Chief Executive Officer/Principal Financial Officer Melissa Waterhouse. The 10% deferral program ceased in early June 2020 considering the length of time the deferral was in place for Waterhouse (almost 7 years) and the balance owed. Until his departure in November 2019, another member of senior management participated in the program. As of December 31, 2020, we had total deferred compensation owed to these two individuals in the amount of $138,000. We did not make any payments on deferred compensation to Melissa Waterhouse in Fiscal 2020 or in Fiscal 2019. After the member of senior management retired in November 2019, we agreed to make payments for the deferred comp owed to this individual. In Fiscal 2020, we made payments totaling $57,000 to this individual and in Fiscal 2019 we made payments of $4,000 to this individual. We will continue to make payments to the former member of senior management until the deferred compensation is paid in full; which is expected to be in May 2021. As cash flow from operations allows, we intend to repay/make payments on the deferred compensation owed to Melissa Waterhouse.
Our continued existence is dependent upon several factors, including our ability to: 1) raise revenue levels even though the drug testing market continues to be infiltrated by product manufactured outside of the United States as well as being impacted by the global health crisis caused by Covid-19, 2) further penetrate the markets (in and outside of the United States) for Covid-19 tests, 3) secure new contract manufacturing customers, 4) control operational costs to generate positive cash flows, 5) maintain our current credit facilities or refinance our current credit facilities if necessary, and 6) if needed, obtain working capital by selling additional shares of our common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or “U.S. GAAP”. Part IV, Item 15, Note A to our financial statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our financial statements. The accounting policies that we believe are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating the financial statements include the following:
Inventory and Allowance for Slow Moving and Obsolete Inventory: We maintain an allowance for slow moving and obsolete inventory. If necessary, actual write-downs to inventory are made for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the net realizable value based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory allowances or write-downs may be required.
Valuation of Receivables: We estimate an allowance for doubtful accounts based on facts, circumstances and judgments regarding each receivable. Customer payment history and patterns, length of relationship with the customer, historical losses, economic and political conditions, trends and individual circumstances are among the items considered when evaluating the collectability of the receivables. Accounts are reviewed regularly for collectability and those deemed uncollectible are written off. If our customers’ economic condition changes, we may need to increase our allowance for doubtful accounts.
Estimates of the fair value of stock options and warrants at date of grant: The fair value of stock options issued to employees, members of our Board of Directors and consultants is estimated (on the date of grant) based on the Black-Scholes options-pricing model utilizing certain assumptions for a risk free interest rate; volatility; and expected remaining lives of the awards. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. If factors change and we use different assumptions, our equity-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares expected to vest. In estimating our forfeiture rate, we analyzed our historical forfeiture rate, the remaining lives of unvested options, and the amount of vested options as a percentage of total options outstanding. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from its estimate, or if we reevaluate the forfeiture rate in the future, the equity-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period.
Use of Estimates: We make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL 2020 COMPARED TO FISCAL
Net Sales: Net sales increased 13.5%, or $492,000, in Fiscal 2020 when compared to Fiscal 2019. Sales of the Covid-19 tests in the amount of $1,573,000 offset declines in drug test product sales which were negatively impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic. The vast majority of Covid-19 test sales were sales of the Covid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test. Contract manufacturing sales declined in Fiscal 2020 when compared to Fiscal 2019 due to a shift in focus to Covid-19 tests within and outside the United States.
We began selling theCovid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette in late March 2020; however there were a number of regulatory events that resulted in an inability to get supply of the product from the manufacturing plant in China until May 2020. Once those events were addressed, we were able to receive product and ship orders of the antibody tests to customers throughout Fiscal 2020. In order to provide our customers with a diagnostic option for Covid-19, in October 2020 we began distributing the Co-Diagnostic Logix Smart Covid-19 tests in the United States. This RT-PCR test enables us to offer customers a diagnostic tool that can be run on high-throughput machines in clinical laboratories certified under CLIA. Unfortunately, due to a large backorder of high-throughput machines, we did not record any sales of the Logix Smart Covid-19 test in Fiscal 2020. We are hopeful that the machine backorder will subside and we would then be able to provide this testing resource to customers.
In December 2020, we started offering a Rapid Covid-19 Antigen Test Cassette; and we were able to ship $103,000 in orders to customers in Fiscal 2020.
When infection surges occur, there is a higher demand for diagnostic tests (i.e. PCR’s or antigen tests) versus antibody tests (as antibody tests are not diagnostic tests).The CDC has indicated that antibody testing can help establish a clinical picture when patients have late complications of Covid-19 illness, such as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
We believe that the demand for Covid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette can still increase over time as the need for data increases; that is, when testing is used as a means to determine the full impact/extent of the virus, its mortality rate, the length of time antibodies remain in the body and the impact of the antibodies on the virus, as well as a means to monitor the efficacy of vaccines as they are released.
Our core markets for drug test sales are clinical, government and workplace; all of which require a lower amount of testing due to stay at home orders, reduced workforce and reduced budgets. In the latter part of Fiscal 2020, we started to see some rebound in our drug testing markets, however, our core drug testing markets are still uncertain (as they relate to the pandemic), so we are unsure at this time whether this rebound will continue.
In addition to the negative sales impact from the customer side, we also experienced delays in materials required for the manufacturing of our drug tests from vendors due to decreased production levels resulting from stay at home orders and reduced workforce numbers. While our staff continues to work due to the essential nature of our manufacturing, delays in materials resulted in customer backorders for specific products that required the materials in question.
We do expect the marketing of Covid-19 testing products to further positively impact our revenues in the year ending December 31, 2021, however we do not yet know the full extent of the impact of Covid-19 test sales on our business, our financial condition and/or results of operations. The extent to which sales of Covid-19 tests may impact our business, operating results, financial condition, or liquidity in the future will depend on future developments which are evolving and uncertain including the duration of the outbreak and the need for antibody and diagnostic testing in the future.
Gross profit: Gross profit decreased to 29.8% of sales in Fiscal 2020 compared to 32.4% of net sales in Fiscal 2019. Although net sales increased, the increase in sales was a result of products we distribute. Sales of products that we manufactured (primarily drug tests) decreased and this resulted in greater inefficiencies in manufacturing. Manufacturing inefficiencies typically occur when revenues decline (from manufacturing) because certain overhead costs are fixed and cannot be reduced; if fewer testing strips are produced and fewer products are assembled this results in higher costs being expensed through cost of goods. Lower product pricing to customers also negatively impacts gross profit. We are continually taking actions to adjust our production schedules to try to mitigate future inefficiencies and we closely examine our gross profit margins on our manufactured products.
Lower gross margins from drug test sales (due to the increased manufacturing inefficiencies) were partially offset by higher margins related to Covid-19 tests. It is uncertain whether the current profit margins of Covid-19 test sales will continue at the present rate. Various factors can affect market pricing (such as an increased number of EUA issued products and their availability to customers, and costs of materials to manufacture the Covid-19 tests).
Operating Expenses: Operating expenses for Fiscal 2020 increased 4.6%, or $82,000, when compared to operating expenses in Fiscal 2019. Expenses in all operation areas of the Company increased. More specifically:
Research and development (“R&D”)
R&D expenses for Fiscal 2020 increased 9.8%, or $8,000, when compared to R&D expenses incurred in Fiscal 2019. The primary reason for the increase is increased FDA compliance costs (due to timing of payments made for our FDA facility registrations). All other expenses remained relatively consistent year over year. Throughout Fiscal 2020, our R&D department primarily focused their efforts on the enhancement of our current products and the evaluation of potential contract manufacturing opportunities.
Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expenses for Fiscal 2020 increased by 7.4%, or $34,000, when compared to selling and marketing expenses in Fiscal 2019. The primary reason for the increase in selling and marketing expense is commissions paid related to sales of the Covid-19 tests. This increase was partially offset by decreased sales salary expense and benefits (due to the termination of personnel), decreased sales travel and trade show expense (as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic) and lower auto allowance costs.
In Fiscal 2020, we continued selling and marketing efforts related to our drug tests and we continued to take actions to secure new contract manufacturing customers. In addition, we promoted lower cost alternatives for onsite drug testing and point of care products for infectious disease (through relationships with third parties). The addition of these offerings did not result in increased selling and marketing expenses. In late March 2020, we also started selling a Covid-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test via a distribution relationship and in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, we started selling the Logix Smart Covid-19 test and a Rapid Covid-19 Antigen Test Cassette. As of result of these new offerings, we recorded increased sales commission rates. Although we decreased the size of our sales force in Fiscal 2020, those reductions were made for performance reasons. We are hoping to hire new personnel and ultimately increase the size of our sales team to further penetrate our markets. We will continue to take all steps necessary to ensure selling and marketing expenditures are in line with sales.
General and administrative (“G&A”)
G&A expense increased 3.2%, or $40,000, in Fiscal 2020 when compared to G&A expense in Fiscal 2019. Costs associated with G&A employees (due to filling vacancy), patents and licenses (due to increased patent maintenance activity), repairs and maintenance (due to water damage and septic repairs at the Kinderhook, NY facility), and bank fees (due to Cherokee debt facility extension in February 2020) increased. These increases were partially offset by decreased salaries associated with quality assurance and warehouse employees (due to fewer employees and/or the consolidation of job responsibilities), supplies, insurance costs and utilities. We continuously examine all G&A expenses to look for lower cost alternatives to current services/products being used.
Other income and expense: Other expense of $173,000 in Fiscal 2020 consisted of interest expense associated with our credit facilities (our line of credit, equipment loan with Crestmark Bank and our two loans with Cherokee Financial, LLC) nominally offset by $2,000 in other income. Other expense of $93,000 in Fiscal 2019 consisted of interest expense associated with our credit facilities (our line of credit, equipment loan with Crestmark Bank, and our two loans with Cherokee Financial, LLC), offset by other income related to gains on certain liabilities.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES AS OF DECEMBER 31,
Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including but not limited to manufacturing costs (such as raw materials, equipment, etc.), selling and marketing initiatives, product development activities, regulatory costs, legal costs, and effective management of inventory levels and production levels in response to sales history and forecasts. We expect to devote capital resources related to selling and marketing initiatives. We are examining other growth opportunities including strategic alliances and contract manufacturing. Given our current and historical cash position, such activities would need to be funded from the issuance of additional equity or additional credit borrowings, subject to market and other conditions.
On February 20, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Chaim Davis (the Chairman of our Board of Directors) and certain other accredited investors (the “Investors”), pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell to the Investors in a private placement (the “Private Placement”), 2,842,856 Units (the “Units”). Each Unit consisted of one (1) share of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Common Share”), at a price per Unit of $0.07 (the “Purchase Price”) for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $199,000. We received net proceeds of $199,000 from the Private Placement as expenses related to the Private Placement were minimal. We did not utilize a placement agent for the Private Placement. We used the net proceeds for working capital and general corporate purposes. The Company does not intend to register the Units issued under the Private Placement; rather the Units issued will be subject to the holding period requirements and other conditions of Rule 144.
On December 9, 2020, we entered into a Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) and a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) under which Lincoln Park agreed to purchase from the Company, from time to time, up to $10,250,000 of our shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, subject to certain limitations set forth in the Purchase Agreement, during the term of the Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, we were required to file with the SEC, a registration statement on Form S-1 (the “Registration Statement”) to register for resale under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), the shares of common stock that we had already issued and sold to Lincoln Park (500,000 shares of common stock for a purchase price of $125,000 along with 1,250,000 shares of common stock issued to Lincoln Park’s for their irrevocable commitment to purchase common shares upon the terms of and subject to satisfaction of the conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement), and shares of common stock we may in the future elect to issue and sell to Lincoln Park from time to time under the Purchase Agreement.
Our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 were prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern, which assumes the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our current cash balances, together with cash generated from future operations and amounts available under our credit facilities (including the Lincoln Park equity facility) may not be sufficient to fund operations through April 2022. At December 31, 2020, we have Stockholders’ Deficit of $1,256,000.
Our loan and security agreement and 2020 Term Note with Cherokee for $900,000 and $220,000, respectively, expired on February 15, 2021; however, the credit facilities were extended for another 12 months, or until February 15, 2022 (which is less than 12 months from the date of this report); See Note K - Subsequent Events to our financial statements for Fiscal 2020. Our total debt at December 31, 2020 with Cherokee Financial, LLC was $1,120,000 and under the terms of the February 2021 extension, the total debt was increased to $1,240,000. We do not expect cash from operations within the next 12 months to be sufficient to pay the amounts due under these credit facilities, which is due in full on February 15, 2022. We may be able to utilize the Lincoln Park equity facility to pay down a portion (or all) of the debt owed to Cherokee prior to the maturity date of February 15, 2022; however, as of the date of this report, that is not a certainty.
Throughout Fiscal 2020, we had a line of credit with Crestmark Bank. The maximum availability on the line of credit through a part of Fiscal 2020 was $1,500,000 but, it was reduced on June 22, 2020 to $1,000,000 under the amendment and extension of the line of credit. However, because the amount available under the line of credit is based upon our accounts receivable, the amounts actually available under our line of credit (historically) have been significantly less than the maximum availability. When sales levels decline, we have reduced availability on our line of credit due to decreased accounts receivable balances. As of December 31, 2020, based on our availability calculation, there were no additional amounts available under the line of credit because we draw any balance available on a daily basis.
If availability under our line of credit and cash received from equity sales under the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement are not sufficient to satisfy our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, we will be required to obtain additional credit facilities or sell additional equity securities, or delay capital expenditures which could have a material adverse effect on our business. There is no assurance that such financing will be available or that we will be able to complete financing on satisfactory terms, if at all.
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following debt/credit facilities:
Working Capital Deficit
At the end of Fiscal 2020, we were operating at a working capital deficit of $841,000. This compares to a working capital deficit of $463,000 at the end of Fiscal 2019. This increase in our working capital deficit was primarily a result of the PPP loan. We have historically satisfied working capital requirements through cash from operations and bank debt.
Dividends
We have never paid any dividends on our common shares and we anticipate that all future earnings, if any, will be retained for use in our business.
Cash Flow, Outlook/Risk
In Fiscal 2020, we had a net loss of $796,000 and net cash used by operating activities of $483,000. Our cash position increased from $4,000 at December 31, 2019 to $98,000 at December 31, 2020 as a result of proceeds from the initial sale of common stock under the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement in December 2020.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared Covid-19 to be a pandemic. Covid-19 has spread throughout the globe, including in the State of New York where our headquarters are located, and in the State of New Jersey where our strip manufacturing facility is located. In response to the outbreak, we have followed the guidelines of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and applicable state government authorities to protect the health and safety of our employees, families, suppliers, customers and communities. While these existing measures and, Covid-19 generally, have not materially disrupted our business operations to date, any future actions necessitated by the Covid-19 pandemic may result in disruption to our business. While we have not seen a disruption in our business operations to date, our drug testing sales have been negatively impacted by the pandemic.
While the Covid-19 pandemic continues to evolve and as surges continue to occur, we continue to assess the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic to best mitigate risk and continue the operations of our business. The extent to which the outbreak impacts our business, liquidity, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity or longevity of the Covid-19 pandemic and actions that may be taken to contain it or treat its impact, among others. If we, our customers or suppliers experience (or in some cases continue to experience) prolonged shutdowns or other business disruptions, our business, liquidity, results of operations and financial condition are likely to be materially adversely affected, and our ability to access the capital markets may be limited.
In other efforts to reduce cash requirements, we have issued shares of restricted stock in lieu of cash. More specifically, we issued 300,000 restricted shares of common stock to Cherokee in connection with a February 2020 debt extension and 129,636 restricted shares of common stock to board members in connection with their attendance at meetings of our Board of Directors in the six months ended June 30, 2020 (there were no formal board meetings held in the second half of Fiscal 2020).
On February 20, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Chaim Davis (then the Chairman of our Board of Directors) and certain other accredited investors (the “Investors”), pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell to the Investors in a private placement (the “Private Placement”), 2,842,856 Units (the “Units”). Each Unit consisted of one (1) share of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Common Share”), at a price per Unit of $0.07 (the “Purchase Price”) for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $199,000. We received net proceeds of $199,000 from the Private Placement as expenses related to the Private Placement were minimal.
On June 22, 2020, we extended the Crestmark LOC until June 22, 2021. All terms and conditions of the Crestmark LOC remain unchanged under the extension period with the exception of the following, 1) the maximum availability under the Crestmark LOC was reduced from $1,500,000 to $1,000,000, 2) availability under the Crestmark LOC is based on receivables only (under the same terms), 3) the requirement for field audits of the Company was removed, and 4) the Tangible Net Worth (TNW) covenant was removed.
On December 9, 2020, we entered into a Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) and a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) under which Lincoln Park agreed to purchase from the Company, from time to time, up to $10,250,000 of our shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, subject to certain limitations set forth in the Purchase Agreement, during the term of the Purchase Agreement. We registered 9,750,000 shares of common stock under a Registration Statement on Form S-1 (as amended) and the Form S-1 was declared effective by the SEC on January 11, 2021 and going forward we are able to utilize the Lincoln Park equity facility to fund operations (if necessary), pay down other debt (whenever possible) and fund our growth initiatives.
Our ability to repay our current debt may also be affected by general economic, financial, competitive, regulatory, legal, business and other factors beyond our control, including those discussed herein. If we are unable to meet our credit facility obligations and we are unable to facilitate purchases under our Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park, we would be required to raise money through new equity and/or debt financing(s) and, there is no assurance that we would be able to find new financing, or that any new financing would be at favorable terms.
We will continue to take steps to ensure that operating expenses and manufacturing costs remain in line with sales levels. We have consolidated job responsibilities in certain areas of the Company and this enabled us to implement personnel reductions. Sales declines result in lower cash balances and lower availability on our line of credit at times. We are promoting new products and service offerings to diversify our revenue stream, including Covid-19 tests.
If we are forced to refinance our debt on less favorable terms, our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected by increased costs and rates. There is also no assurance that we could obtain alternative debt facilities. We may also be forced to pursue one or more alternative strategies, such as restructuring, selling assets, reducing or delaying capital expenditures or seeking additional equity capital. There can be no assurances that any of these strategies could be implemented on satisfactory terms, if at all.
If events and circumstances occur such that 1) we do not meet our current operating plans to increase sales, 2) we are unable to raise sufficient additional equity or debt financing, 3), we are unable to utilize equity as a form of payment in lieu of cash, or 4) our credit facilities are insufficient or not available, we may be required to further reduce expenses or take other steps which could have a material adverse effect on our future performance.