ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our “Selected Financial Data” and the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Part I, Item 1.A Risk Factors” in this Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a leading provider of medical devices that provide circulatory support and oxygenation. Our products are designed to enable the heart to rest by improving blood flow and/or provide sufficient oxygenation to those in respiratory failure. We develop, manufacture and market proprietary products that are designed to enable the heart to rest, heal and recover by improving blood flow to the coronary arteries and end-organs and/or temporarily assisting the pumping function of the heart. Our products are used in the cardiac catheterization lab, or cath lab, by interventional cardiologists, the electrophysiology lab, the hybrid lab and in the heart surgery suite by cardiac surgeons. A physician may use our devices for patients who are in need of hemodynamic support prophylactically, urgently or emergently before, during or after angioplasty or heart surgery procedures. We believe that heart recovery is the optimal clinical outcome for a patient experiencing heart failure because it enhances the potential for the patient to go home with their own heart, facilitating the restoration of quality of life. In addition, we believe that, for the care of such patients, heart recovery is often the most cost-effective solution for the healthcare system.
Our strategic focus and the primary driver of our revenue growth is the market penetration of our family of Impella® heart pumps. The Impella device portfolio, which includes the Impella 2.5®, Impella CP®, Impella 5.0®, Impella LD®, Impella 5.5® and Impella RP® devices, has supported thousands of patients worldwide. We expect that most of our product and service revenue in the near future will be from our Impella devices. Our Impella 2.5, Impella CP, Impella 5.0, Impella LD, Impella 5.5 and Impella RP devices have FDA and CE Mark approval which allows us to market these devices in the U.S. and European Union. We expect to continue to make additional PMA supplement submissions for our Impella portfolio of devices for additional indications. Our Impella 2.5, Impella CP and Impella 5.0 devices have regulatory approval from the MHLW in Japan.
In September 2019, the Impella 5.5 device received FDA PMA for safety and efficacy in the therapy of cardiogenic shock for up to 14 days in the U.S. The Impella 5.5 pump was introduced in the U.S. through a controlled rollout at hospitals with established heart recovery protocols beginning in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020. Impella 5.5 received CE marking approval in Europe in April 2018 and was introduced in Europe through a similar controlled rollout.
Acquisition of Breethe, Inc.
We acquired Breethe, a Maryland corporation, on April 24, 2020. Breethe is engaged in research and development of a novel extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (“ECMO”) system that we expect will complement and expand our product portfolio to more comprehensively serve the needs of patients whose lungs can no longer provide sufficient oxygenation, including some patients suffering from cardiogenic shock or respiratory failure. We acquired Breethe for $55.0 million in cash, with additional potential payouts up to a maximum of $55.0 million payable based on the achievement of certain technical, regulatory and commercial milestones. In October 2020, the OXY-1 System received a 510(k) clearance from the FDA for an all-in-one, compact cardiopulmonary bypass system. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2021, we initiated a controlled launch of the OXY-1 System at a limited number of hospitals in the U.S, with expanded U.S. commercial availability expected in fiscal year 2022.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and is likely to further adversely impact nearly all aspects of our business and markets, including our workforce and the operations of our customers, suppliers, and business partners.
Beginning in mid-March 2020, we experienced a decline in patient utilization in our main markets in the U.S., Europe and Japan as healthcare systems diverted resources to meet the increasing demands of managing COVID-19. Our business was most impacted in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, in terms of the decline in patients and revenue from the shelter-in-place restrictions in a majority of countries and limitations on procedures in hospitals. We experienced sequential quarterly improvement during the second quarter of fiscal year 2021 as patient procedure volume trends and availability of healthcare resources improved as certain restrictions were lifted and limitations eased during the summer of 2020. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2021, a broad resurgence of COVID-19 cases throughout the U.S. and Europe slowed our continued recovery in patient utilization. Despite these challenges, we experienced increased recovery in patient utilization and revenue during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 due to the high-risk nature of the patient population that are treated with our Impella devices.
While the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid and continues to evolve differently across various geographies, we believe we are likely to continue to experience variable impacts on our business. Hospitals are generally managing the pandemic better currently than they have in the earlier part of the pandemic due to more testing, improved protocols, more experience with the effects of COVID-19 and a greater number of vaccinated caregivers. During these challenging times, our priorities have been to support our clinician partners, protect the well-being of our employees and maintain continuous access to our life-saving technologies while offering front-line in-hospital support. We have established onsite COVID-19 testing for our employees in both Danvers, Massachusetts and Aachen, Germany, set up temperature-taking stations, administered thousands of COVID-19 tests to date and provided personal protective equipment for our employees in order to maintain a safe working environment.
Our proactive testing program has reduced exposure with early detection, reduced employee anxiety and enabled our manufacturing facilities to operate at full capacity in line with local social distancing requirements. We also took proactive actions in the first half of fiscal year 2021 in order to mitigate the business impact of COVID-19 on our financial operations and we continue monitor closely the business impact of COVID-19. Despite the ongoing challenges posed by COVID-19, we continue to invest strategically in engineering, regulatory, clinical trials and manufacturing in order to support our future growth initiatives and sales and marketing activities, with a particular focus on training and education initiatives to drive utilization of our products and recovery awareness for acute heart failure patients.
We continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business and geographies, including its impact on our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, business partners and distribution channels. The full extent to which the pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including but not limited to sales, expenses, manufacturing, clinical trials, research and development costs, reserves and allowances, fair value measurements, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and difficult to predict. These developments include, but are not limited to, the duration and spread of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (including new variants of COVID-19), its severity, the actions to contain the virus or address its impact, the timing, distribution, and efficacy of vaccines and other treatments, U.S. and foreign government actions to respond to the reduction in global economic activity, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). Preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates. The accounting policies we believe are critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements relate to revenue recognition and income taxes. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in “Note 2. Basis of Preparation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements in this Report.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when, or as, obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer.
Product revenue is generally recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time, and may be upon shipment or upon delivery based on the contractual shipping terms of the contract.
Service revenue is generally recognized over time as the services are rendered to the customer based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We recognize service revenue over the term of the service contract. Services are expected to be transferred to the customer throughout the term of the contract and we believe recognizing revenue ratably over the term of the contract best depicts the transfer of value to the customer. Revenue generated from preventative maintenance calls is recognized at a point in time when the services are provided to the customer.
Revenue from the sale of products and services are evidenced by either a contract with the customer or a valid purchase order or an invoice which includes all relevant terms of sale. We perform a review of each specific customer's credit worthiness and ability to pay prior to acceptance as a customer. Further, we perform periodic reviews of customers' creditworthiness.
Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes is composed of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on income tax returns for the current year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse.
Deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences in future years as the differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each fiscal year end based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to impact taxable income.
We regularly assess our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Assessing the realization of deferred tax assets requires significant management judgment. We consider whether a valuation allowance is needed on our deferred tax assets by evaluating all positive and negative evidence relative to our ability to recover deferred tax assets, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial results.
We recognize and measure uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit at the largest amount that is more likely than not of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate these uncertain tax positions on an ongoing basis, when applicable. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, new information and technical insights, and changes in tax laws. Any changes in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision. When applicable, we accrue for the effects of uncertain tax positions and the related potential penalties and interest through income tax expense.
Other Investments
We periodically make investments in medical device companies that focus on heart failure and heart pumps and other medical device technologies. For investments that do not have readily determinable market values, we measure these investments at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment. We monitor any events or changes in circumstances that may have a significant effect on the fair value of investments, either due to impairment or based on observable price changes, and make any necessary adjustments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is included in “Note 2. Basis of Preparation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements in this Report.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020 (“fiscal year 2021” and “fiscal year 2020”)
The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated as a percentage of total revenues:
Revenue
The following table disaggregates our revenue by products and services:
The following table disaggregates our revenue by geographical location:
Impella product revenue encompasses Impella 2.5, Impella CP, Impella 5.0, Impella LD, Impella 5.5, Impella RP and Impella AIC product sales and related accessories. Service and other revenue represents revenue earned on service maintenance contracts and preventative maintenance calls. The following is a discussion of our revenues for fiscal year 2021.
Total Revenue
Total revenue for fiscal year 2021 increased $6.6 million, or 1%, to $847.5 million from $840.9 million for fiscal year 2020. The main drivers of our Impella product revenue and our service and other revenue are further described below.
The growth in total revenue for the fiscal year 2021 was adversely impacted by lower Impella product revenue in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 caused by the impact of COVID-19 pandemic in reducing hospital procedures during that time, which was offset by sequential quarterly improvement during the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2021 as patient procedure volume trends and availability of healthcare resources have improved as certain restrictions were lifted and limitations eased during those periods.
Impella Product Revenue
Impella product revenue for fiscal year 2021 decreased slightly by $0.5 million to $806.3 million from $806.8 million for fiscal year 2020. U.S. Impella product revenue for fiscal year 2021 totaled $655.2 million, down 3% compared to $674.4 million in the prior fiscal year with U.S. patient usage of Impella heart pumps down 13%. Impella product revenue outside the U.S. for fiscal year 2021 totaled $151.1 million, an increase of 14% compared to $132.4 million in the prior fiscal year. Impella product revenue outside of the U.S. increased primarily due to higher utilization in Germany and Japan.
As described above, Impella procedure volumes have varied significantly since the end of March 2020 by geography, and even by hospital, as their physicians have managed the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in mid-March 2020, we experienced a decline in patient utilization in the U.S., Europe and Japan as healthcare systems diverted resources to meet the increasing demands of managing COVID-19. Our business was most impacted in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, in terms of the decline in patients and revenue from the shelter-in-place restrictions in many countries and limitations on procedures in hospitals. We experienced sequential quarterly improvement during the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2021 as patient procedure volume trends and availability of healthcare resources have improved as certain restrictions were lifted and limitations eased during those periods.
While the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid and continues to evolve differently across various geographies, we believe we will likely continue to experience variable impacts on our business. While we cannot reliably estimate the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact patient utilization and revenues of our products, our focus is on increasing patient utilization of our Impella devices in the U.S., our controlled launch of Impella 5.5, primarily in the U.S. and Europe, and our plan to continue growing our business internationally, with a continued focus on Europe and Japan.
Service and other revenue
Service and other revenue for fiscal year 2021 increased by $7.1 million, or 21%, to $41.2 million from $34.1 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase in service revenue was primarily due to an increase in preventative maintenance service contracts. We have expanded the number of Impella AIC consoles at many of our existing higher volume customer sites and continue to sell additional consoles to new customer sites. We expect revenue growth for service revenue to be consistent with recent history as most of these using sites in the U.S. have service contracts that normally have three-year terms.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for fiscal year 2021 increased by $10.6 million, or 7%, to $161.9 million from $151.3 million for fiscal year 2020. Gross margin was 81% for fiscal year 2021 and 82% for fiscal year 2020.
The increase in cost of product revenue and decrease in gross margin was primarily due to increased investment in direct labor and overhead as we expanded our manufacturing capacity of our facilities in the U.S. and Germany, a higher proportion of revenue outside the U.S., sales mix and costs associated with our initial launch of Impella 5.5.
We expect that our ongoing investment in manufacturing capacity and the expansion of our Impella SmartAssist platform and Impella Connect may decrease gross margin in the near future.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for fiscal year 2021 increased by $23.1 million, or 23%, to $121.9 million from $98.8 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to our ongoing product development initiatives relating to our existing and pipeline products, the development of the Impella XR Sheath™, Impella ECP™ , Impella BTR devices and the OXY-1 System with the acquisition of Breethe, the expansion of our engineering organization, continued investment in our clinical trials, most notably the STEMI DTU and PROTECT IV studies, and our focus on clinical and quality initiatives for our products.
We expect research and development expenses to continue to increase with our ongoing efforts to expand our engineering, product development and clinical spending related to our initiatives to improve our existing products and develop new technologies and conduct clinical studies. Research and development expenses can fluctuate with project timing on engineering programs and clinical trials.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2021 decreased by $7.4 million, or 2%, to $334.2 million from $341.6 million for fiscal year 2020. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to lower stock compensation expense due to a lower number of restricted stock units granted and earned and the proactive cost actions taken early in fiscal year 2021 to mitigate the business impact of COVID-19 on our financial operations, including reducing discretionary spending primarily related to travel and marketing expenses, decreases in hiring and eliminating certain non-critical consultants and contractors, partially offset by targeted investments we made in expanding our sales distribution team and advertising. We also received an employee retention credit associated with the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) to assist companies impacted by COVID-19.
Despite the ongoing challenges posed by COVID-19, we expect to continue to invest in sales and marketing activities, with a particular focus on training and education initiatives to drive utilization of our Impella devices and recovery awareness for acute heart failure patients. We also expect to continue to incur legal expenses for the foreseeable future related to ongoing patent litigation, securities class action litigation and other legal matters discussed in “Note 16. Commitment and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements. For the impact of COVID-19 on our business, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-COVID-19 Pandemic.”
We continue to manage our discretionary costs closely in order to mitigate the business impact of COVID-19. Despite the ongoing challenges posed by COVID-19, including the recent global resurgence, we aim to continue to invest strategically in engineering, regulatory, clinical trials and manufacturing in order to support our future growth initiatives and sales and marketing activities, with a particular focus on training and education to drive utilization of our Impella devices and recovery awareness for acute heart failure patients.
Operating Income
Operating income decreased by $19.6 million, to $229.6 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $249.2 million for fiscal year 2020. Operating margin was 27.1%% for fiscal year 2021 compared to 29.6%% for fiscal year 2020. The decreases in operating margins are primarily related to lower revenues as a result of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic and increases in research and development expenses with our investments in engineering programs and clinical trials.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other (expense) income, net increased by $51.1 million, to $58.7 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $7.6 million for fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to the recognition of a $50.8 million pre-tax gain from our investment in Shockwave Medical in fiscal year 2021 compared to a $0.5 million loss in fiscal year 2020. We also recorded change in fair value on our investments in other private medical device companies of $1.0 million and $4.7 million for fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2020, respectively.
Income Tax Provision
The income tax provision increased by $8.9 million to $62.7 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $53.8 million for fiscal year 2020. Our effective income tax rate was 21.8% in fiscal year 2021, and 21.0% in fiscal year 2020. The increase in the income tax provision and the effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 were primarily driven by $12.1 million in excess tax benefits in fiscal year 2021, compared to $14.8 million excess tax benefits in fiscal year 2020.
Net Income
In fiscal year 2021, net income was $225.5 million, or $5.00 per basic share and $4.94 per diluted share. Net income in fiscal year 2021 included excess tax benefits related to stock-based awards of $12.1 million, or $0.27 per basic share and $0.26 per diluted share, and a $38.3 million gain, net of tax, or $0.85 per basic share and $0.84 per diluted share, related to our investment in Shockwave Medical. For more information, see “Note 10. Other Assets-Investments in Shockwave Medical.”
In fiscal year 2020, net income was $203.0 million, or $4.49 per basic share and $4.43 per diluted share. Net income in fiscal year 2020 included excess tax benefits related to stock-based awards of $14.8 million, or $0.33 per basic share and $0.32 per diluted share, and a $0.4 million loss, net of tax, related to our investment in Shockwave Medical.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2020 and March 31, 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2020 and March 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on May 21, 2020, which comparative information is incorporated by reference in this Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of March 31, 2021, our total cash, cash equivalents, and short and long-term marketable securities totaled $847.8 million, an increase of $196.9 million compared to $650.9 million as of March 31, 2020. The change in our cash, cash equivalents, and short and long-term marketable securities was primarily due to positive cash flows from operations, offset by cash used for investments in property, equipment and other investments, and cash used for financing activities related to equity activity.
A summary of our cash flow activities is as follows:
For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources as of and our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 21, 2020, which is incorporated by reference in this Report.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
For fiscal year 2021, cash provided by operating activities consisted of net income of $225.5 million, plus non-cash items of $66.4 million less cash used for working capital of $17.4 million. Adjustments for non-cash items consisted primarily of $47.0 million
of stock-based compensation expense, a change in fair value of our investments in Shockwave Medical and other private medical technology companies of $51.0 million, a $29.4 million change in our deferred tax provision, $24.1 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $8.5 million in inventory write-downs and a change in fair value of contingent consideration of $2.4 million. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital included a $2.5 million decrease in inventory due to the mix of customer demand and production volumes related to our Impella devices and a $12.0 million decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities offset by a $12.1 million increase in accounts receivable associated with timing and volume of sales and collections and a $5.2 million increase in deferred revenue.
For fiscal year 2020, cash provided by operating activities consisted of net income of $203.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items of $103.9 million plus cash from working capital of $8.0 million. Adjustments for non-cash items consisted primarily of $39.8 million of stock-based compensation expense, a change in fair value of our investments in Shockwave Medical and other private medical technology companies of $5.2 million, a $33.0 million change in our deferred tax provision, $20.4 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $4.2 million in inventory write-downs and a change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.6 million. The increase in cash from changes in working capital included a $13.2 million increase in inventory to support demand for our Impella devices offset by a $5.6 million decrease in accounts receivable associated with collections activity and a $18.3 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and a $2.8 million increase in deferred revenue.
Cash Used for Investing Activities
For fiscal year 2021, net cash used for investing activities included $159.6 million in purchases (net of maturities) of marketable securities, $52.2 million for our acquisition of Breethe and $53.4 million for the purchase of property and equipment mostly related to the $17.5 million purchase of the building adjacent to our corporate headquarters in Danvers, Massachusetts and continued expansion of manufacturing capacity, office space and research development facilities in Danvers, Massachusetts and Aachen, Germany. We also made $26.1 million of investments in medical technology companies and intangible assets during fiscal year 2021. These amounts were partially offset by $67.9 million in proceeds from the sale of Shockwave Medical securities.
For fiscal year 2020, net cash used for investing activities included $60.5 million in purchases (net of maturities) of marketable securities and other and $44.0 million for the purchase of property and equipment mostly related to the expansion of manufacturing capacity and office space and research and development facilities in Danvers and Aachen and investments in information systems. We also made $21.0 million of investments in medical technology companies and intangible assets during fiscal year 2020.
Capital expenditures for fiscal year 2022 are estimated to range from $40 million to $50 million, including, as part of long-term development of our business, additional capital expenditures for manufacturing capacity and building expansions in our Danvers and Aachen facilities and information systems development projects.
Cash Used for Financing Activities
For fiscal year 2021, net cash used for financing activities included $11.3 million for the repurchase of our common stock and $11.3 million in payments in lieu of issuance of common stock for payroll withholding taxes upon vesting of certain equity awards. These amounts were offset by $9.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $5.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of stock under the employee stock purchase plan.
For fiscal year 2020, net cash used for financing activities included $84.9 million for the repurchase of our common stock and $41.7 million in payments in lieu of issuance of common stock for payroll withholding taxes upon vesting of certain equity awards. These amounts were offset by $3.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $5.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of stock under the employee stock purchase plan.
Operating Capital and Liquidity Requirements
Our sources of cash liquidity are primarily from existing cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and cash flows from operations. As of March 31, 2021, our total cash, cash equivalents, and short and long-term marketable securities totaled $847.8 million, an increase of $196.9 million compared to $650.9 million as of March 31, 2020. Marketable securities as of March 31, 2021 consisted of $615.1 million held in funds that invest in U.S. Treasury securities, government-backed securities, corporate debt securities and commercial paper. We generated operating cash flows of $274.6 million and $314.9 million for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of March 31, 2021, we had no debt outstanding. We believe that our sources of liquidity are sufficient to fund the current requirements of working capital, capital expenditures, and other financial commitments for at least the next twelve months.
Our primary liquidity requirements are to fund the following: expansion of our commercial and operational infrastructures; expansion of our manufacturing capacity and office space; the procurement and production of inventory to meet customer demand for our Impella devices; creation of new product and business development initiatives; ongoing commercial launch in Japan and expansion into potential new markets; expansion of the utilization of Impella Connect; increased clinical spending for clinical trials such as STEMI DTU and PROTECT IV; legal expenses related to ongoing patent litigation and other legal matters; and payments in lieu of issuance of common stock for payroll withholding taxes upon vesting of certain equity awards and provide for general working capital needs. To date, we have primarily funded our operations through product sales and the sale of equity securities.
Our liquidity is influenced by our ability to sell our products in a competitive industry and our customers’ ability to pay for our products. Factors that may affect liquidity primarily include our ability to penetrate the market for our products, our ability to maintain or reduce the length of the selling cycle for our products, our capital expenditures, and our ability to collect cash from customers after our products are sold. We also expect to continue to incur legal expenses for the foreseeable future related to ongoing patent litigation and other legal matters. We continue to review our short-term and long-term cash needs on a regular basis.
We also took proactive actions in the first half of fiscal year 2021 in order to mitigate the business impact of COVID-19 on our financial operations and we continue to manage discretionary costs closely in order to mitigate the business impact of COVID-19. Despite the ongoing challenges posed by COVID-19, including the recent global resurgence, we continue to invest strategically in engineering, regulatory, clinical trials and manufacturing in order to support our future growth initiatives and sales and marketing activities, with a particular focus on training and education initiatives to drive utilization of our Impella devices and recovery awareness for acute heart failure patients. We continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business and geographies, including its impact on our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, business partners and distribution channels.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements or guarantees of third-party obligations during the periods presented. An “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally entails a transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.