ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the Financial Statements, related Notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS,” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
The following discussion is an overview of the important factors that management focuses on in evaluating our businesses, financial condition and operating performance and should be read in conjunction with the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward looking statements as a result of any number of factors, including those set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and elsewhere in our other public filings. Factors that may cause actual results, our performance or achievements, or industry results to differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements include without limitation:
1. The company’s lack of funds in new R&D, especially in clinical testing;
2. The company’s lack of funds in new equipment and the utilization of the production process after the NMPA approval;
3. The company may need to seek funding through such vehicles as convertible notes and warrants, private placements, and/or convertible debentures;
4.
The company needs funding for marketing and sales network build-up;
5. The company plans to seek approval for clinical testing and marketing on a worldwide basis, including US FDA approval for testing and marketing in the United States of America, and there is no guaranty that we will obtain any such approval;
6. While the company currently holds two patents originating in China, the patents does not protect our intellectual property in the United States, and the company is unsure of the validity of the patent in other countries. However, specific trade secrets are involved in the manufacturing of our product to help protect our technologies, and reverse engineering is unlikely for our types of products and technologies. New patents are expected to be filed as result of our continuous research works for new and refined materials. Additionally, all machinery used to manufacture our products is protected by Chinese patents.
The Company is subject to a number of risks similar to other companies in the medical device industry. These risks include rapid technological change, uncertainty of market acceptance of our products, uncertainty of regulatory approval, competition from substitute products from larger companies, the need to obtain additional financing, compliance with government regulations, protection of proprietary technology, product liability, and the dependence on key individuals.
All written and oral forward-looking statements made in connection with this Form 10-K that are attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary statements. Given the uncertainties that surround such statements, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
Our Business
We are engaged in the business of designing, developing, manufacturing and marketing of biomaterial internal fixation devices. We hold one medical device permit from the National Medical Products Administration of the PRC (“NMPA”) for our product - polymer orthopaedic internal fixation screws and three patents issued by the State Intellectual Property Office of the P.R.C. (“SIPO”). Our polyamide materials, their uses and manufacturing processes are protected by Patent No. ZL971190739. Patent No. ZL201410647464.1 titled “Bone Fracture Plate Made of High Polymer Materials” and patent No. ZL201511005531.0 titled “Composite fiber, manufacturing method and orthopaedic binding wire” were granted to us in 2018 and 2020 respectively. Our polyamide materials are used in producing screws, binding wires, rods and related products. These products are used in a variety of applications including orthopaedic trauma, sports related medical treatment, or cartilage injuries, and reconstructive dental procedures. At this time, our company is the sole patent holder and market permit holder of PA technologies in China, as well as the only company currently engaged in clinical trials, manufacturing and marketing for PA orthopaedic internal fixation devices in the PRC. Our products are made of a very unique material called PA6-P(MMA-CO-NVP)-HA (“PA”). Our PA products, such as screws, binding wires, rods, suture anchors and rib-pins consist of enhanced fibers and high molecular polymers which are designed to facilitate quick healing of complex fractures in many areas of the human skeletal system.
Our products offer a number of significant advantages over existing metal implants and the first generation of degradable implants (i.e. PLLA) for patients, surgeons and other customers including:
1. A notably reduced need for a secondary surgery to remove implant due to post-operative complications, therefore avoiding unnecessary risk and expense on all patient care;
2. Enhancing the performance of the materials by manufacturing them to be easily fitted to each patient, forming an exact fit;
3. Improving the biological activity of materials. Clinical trial results have shown that PA implants promote a progressive shift of load to the new bone creating micro-motion and thereby avoiding bone atrophy due to ‘stress shielding’;
4. Reducing the chance of post-operative infection;
5. Stimulate bone tissues to facilitate effective biological integration, benefitting the regeneration of bone;
6. Ease of post-operative care i.e. no distortion during x-ray imaging;
7. Simple and cost-effective to manufacture.
Our products are designed to replace the traditional internal fixation device made of stainless steel and titanium and overcome the limitations of previous generations of products such as PLA and PLLA. Our laboratory statistics show that our PA products have a higher mechanical strength, last longer in degradation ratio and are more evenly absorbed form outer layer inwards as compared with similar materials such as PLA and PLLA. Thus PA allows increased restoration time for bone healing and re-growth. The Company’s polymer orthopaedic internal fixation screws received approval from the National Medical Products Administration of the PRC (“NMPA”) in April 2018. We launched our sales campaign at the end of our fiscal year ended October 31, 2019 and achieved a milestone in the Company’s history by generating revenue through the sales of our PA Screws.
NMPA Application Process and Approval for Polymer Screws
The Company first submitted its application for PA Screws to the NMPA (formerly the SFDA/CFDA) in 2008. The application has been withheld by the NMPA pending additional clinical trial cases. This is due to the amended NMPA regulations, which unlike previous regulations require the applicant to specify the position on the body where the clinical trial is carried out. Our amended NMPA application has specified the ankle fracture as the body part of our clinical trial. This is because bones around this part carry most of the body weight.
Due to the uniqueness of our material, there were no established NMPA Product Standards that we could follow during our application process for our PA Screws. To establish our own Product Standards, the Company had been carrying out extra tests. The Company submitted its Product Standards and supplementary reports to the NMPA in 2014. In December 2016, the Company received a notice from the NMPA requesting supplementary report as part of the review process. The Company completed the supplementary report and submitted it to the NMPA in June 2017.
In April 2018, the Company’s application for its PA Screws was approved by the NMPA in China (Medical Device Certification Number: 20183460133).
Clinical Trials on Other Products
The Company has completed a total of 83 successful clinical human trial cases, including 71 cases on ankle fractures and 57 successful PA Binding Wire trial cases. We have been conducting human trials at the 6 state level hospitals recognized by NMPA for clinical trials in different cities throughout China; including Nanchang, Changsha, Luoyang, Nanning and Tianjin. The cities and provinces where our clinical trial hospitals are based will be the initial target regions on our marketing plan. These regions are both densely populated and have experienced high or above medium economic growth. The clinical trials for the Company’s PA Screws have been completed with 100 percent success rate. Having gained NMPA approval for PA Screws, the Company is planning to start clinical trials on series of orthopaedic products the Company has developed using the same unique biomaterial.
Government Regulation
Medical implant devices/products manufactured or marketed by the Company in China are subject to extensive regulations by the NMPA. Pursuant to the related laws and acts, as amended, and the regulations promulgated there under (the “NMPA Regulations”), the NMPA regulates the clinical testing, manufacture, labeling, distribution and promotion of medical devices. The NMPA also has the authority to request repair, replacement, or refund of the cost of any device manufactured or distributed by the Company.
Under the NMPA Regulations, medical devices are classified into three classes (class I, II or III), the basis of the controls deemed necessary by the NMPA to reasonably assure their safety and efficacy. Under the NMPA’s regulations, class I devices are subject to general controls (for example, labeling and adherence to Good Manufacturing Practices (“GMP”) requirements) and class II devices are subject to general and special controls. Generally, class III devices are those which must receive premarket approval by the NMPA to ensure their safety and efficacy (for example, life-sustaining, life-supporting and certain implantable devices, or new devices which have not been found substantially equivalent to legally marketed class I or class II devices). The Company is classified as a manufacturer of class III medical devices. Current NMPA enforcement policy prohibits the marketing of approved medical devices for unapproved uses.
Before a new device can be introduced into the market in China, the manufacturer generally must obtain NMPA marketing clearance through clinical trials. Since the Company is classified as a manufacturer of Class III medical devices, the Company must carry out all clinical trials in pre-selected NMPA approved hospitals.
Manufacturers of medical devices for marketing in China are required to adhere to GMP requirements. Enforcement of GMP requirements has increased significantly in the last several years and the NMPA has publicly stated that compliance will be more strictly scrutinized. From time to time the NMPA has made changes to the GMP and other requirements that increase the cost of compliance. Changes in existing laws or requirements or adoption of new laws or requirements could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations. There can be no assurance that the Company will not incur significant costs to comply with applicable laws and requirements in the future or that applicable laws and requirements will not have a material adverse effect upon the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Regulations regarding the development, manufacturing and sale of the Company’s products are subject to change. The Company cannot predict the impact, if any, that such changes might have on its business, financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations
The “Results of Operations” discussed in this section merely reflect the information and results of Masterise and Shenzhen Changhua for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019.
Sales and Marketing
The Company launched the sales and marketing campaign of its NMPA approved unique proprietary bio-polymer internal fixation screws (“PA Screws”) at the end of the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019. The campaign was kick-started with the signing of a sales and marketing distribution agreement between Shenzhen Changhua, an ABMT subsidiary, and Guangzhou Ding Hua Biomedical Technology Ltd. (“GZDH”), a medical device sales company based in Guangzhou, South China. Both companies share core values and a common vision of the future. Guangzhou Ding Hua (GZDH) has been authorized as Changhua’s national sales representative company and will be leading its sales effort in China, where the market value for orthopaedic devices is expected to reach US$4 billion and continue to grow in the coming years. Mr. Tie Jun Chen, a related party, has a significant equity interest in Guangzhou Ding Hua (“GZDH”).
The Company has established long term relationships with many hospitals and national distributors in China. Ms. Hui Wang, the Company’s CEO, has over 25 years’ sales experience in medical distribution. She is in charge of our sales programs. Professor LIU, Shangli, our chief medical advisor for Greater China, is one of the highest ranked orthopaedic doctors in China as well as being highly renowned in the rest of the world. He has assisted the Company in nationwide product promotion and joint projects with associated academic institutions and medical schools.
The Company has been actively boosting its brand through participating in national and provincial orthopaedic conferences, garnering deals with national and provincial distributors. In addition, we have coordinated with government authorities to obtain the National New Orthopaedic Consumables Classification Code (“OCCC”) especially for our unique proprietary bio-polymer internal fixation screws and completed the provincial product registrations meeting China’s Medical Sourcing regulations. We believe that these activities will not only strengthen our network of agents and distributors to reach a greater number of hospitals, but also allow us to better understand the needs and demands of surgeons, without inhibiting existing operational procedures and maximizing the effectiveness of our products.
Revenues
The Company achieved a milestone in its history at the end of the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019, by completing sales of $11,657 to its distributor, a company in which Mr. Tie Jun Chen, a key management personnel of Shenzhen Changhua, has a significant equity interest. We generated $60,501 in sales revenue in the following quarter ended January 31, 2020, an over 400% increase compared with the previous quarter. Our marketing campaign was then disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the second and third quarter of 2020. Like most of the businesses in Mainland China, our facility in Shenzhen was closed during pandemic lockdown. With the easing of COVID-19 restrictions in Mainland China, we generated $62,336 in sales revenue in the fourth quarter ended October 31, 2020, and achieved a quarterly growth rate of 435% compared with the quarter ended October 31, 2019. We anticipate our sales revenue to grow at a moderate rate during 2021.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 was $51,817 and $7,596 respectively, which accounted for 41.93% and 65.16% of the gross revenue. Most of the costs were expenses for attending exhibitions and trade shows.
Gross Profits
Gross profits for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 was $71,770 and $4,061 respectively. Compared to prior year, the gross profits for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were positive rather than nil. We started to generate revenue at the end of our fiscal year from inception to October 31, 2019 before our sales campaign was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic,
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were $518,394 and $608,799 respectively, which accounted for 419.46% and 5,222.6% of the gross revenue. Compared to prior year, operating expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were reduced by 14.85% and 3.98%. The primary reasons for the changes were due to the General and Administrative expenses reduction of $99,551 or 30.72% and $237,200 or 42.27% for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively, in addition to Research and Development reduction of $80,680 or 30.6% for the year ended October 31, 2020, and Research and Development increment of $207,127 or 366.52% for the year ended October 31, 2019.
Funding Needs
The Company estimates that it will need to raise minimum $1,000,000 over the next 12 months to market and expand the sales of its products. This amount may increase if we decide to start clinical trials on new products.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, our sales plan has been disrupted and our revenue was insufficient to cover our expenditures in 2020. We estimate that our sales revenue to be insufficient to meet our operating costs in 2021, albeit our sales revenue started to recover with the easing of pandemic restrictions in China. Therefore, we will continue to rely on external investments and shareholder’s loans to cover our cash shortage. While the Company has no outside sources of funding, the Company’s shareholders have committed to advance the Company funds as needed. There is a Letter of Continuing Financial Support signed between the Company and one of its major shareholders, Titan Technology Development Ltd.
The management team is continuously looking for fundraising possibilities for sales and marketing expansion, product improvement, machinery upgrades, facility expansions and continuous research and development.
Estimate current production lines in full capacity
Our facility is located in Shenzhen, China, which is built to meet the GMP standards. Our facility covers about 865 square meters, which includes the combined facilities of offices, laboratories, and workshops. There is one production line for the PA Screw and another production line for the PA Binding Wire. The annual production capabilities of each production line are 100,000 pieces for PA Screw, and 240,000 packs for the PA Binding Wires. Both production lines, at their maximum production capacities are capable of generating approximately $30,000,000 in annual revenue.
China’s Marketing Analysis
China’s market for PA devices depends on 3 major conditions:
- Patients
- Advanced technology level
- Performance and price of the materials
The demand for internal fixation medical devices has rapidly increased during the last decade. According to China Health Care Year Book 2013, the total revenue of Chinese orthopaedic hospitals in 2013 was US$1.28 billion with over 11.5 million patients. From 2009 to 2013, the market size of China’s orthopaedic devices has grown from US$1.1 billion to US$1.92 billion, and China has overtaken Japan as the second largest market in the world. The size of the orthopaedic implant market in China continued to grow from US$2 billion in 2014 to US$3.2 billion in 2017. Even taken into account of the factors that have slowed down the growth, such as centralized procurement and domestic “import substitution” programs, the size of the China’s orthopaedic implant medical device market was US$4.34 billion in 2019, a growth rate of 16.03% compared with 2018.(source: 2020 China NMPA Blue Book).
China has gradually entered the Old Age Society. It is expected that there will be 245 million people over 60 years of age by 2020, and, according to the survey of 50 years old, the incidence of osteoporosis is as high as 60%, accompanied by osteoporosis, fracture, bone necrosis, disability and other diseases, resulting in continued high demand of orthopaedic implant medical devices. (Source: The UN; Shenwan Hongyuan Securities research report).
Other factors such as new and improved medical technology will continue to rapidly grow throughout hospitals in China, and material optimization and product pricing is expected to directly stimulate double digits market growth rate in the near future in China.
The Company has advantages and more opportunities over others competitors due to:
- No other similar patent registrations in China.
- We are the only company received market approval and permitted to perform PA clinical trials by the NMPA to the best of our knowledge.
- We have a timing advantage over other companies in China, which would have to go through the preclinical testing for the NMPA permit on clinical trials.
- Under new regulations by the NMPA, it will take at least 5-10 years for clinical trials of new materials.
- Our patented material enables us to rapidly diversify our product line according to market trend and demand.
Number of Hospitals at the end of October 2020 Statistic and Census report by the National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China.
Statistic and Census report by National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China
(October 2020)
In general, technological advancements and the marketing potential within Asia are the biggest factors in driving significant growth within the global orthopaedic devices market. Another major factor that positively influences this market is the growing number of aging baby boomers with active lifestyles. This sector represents a large portion of the total population.
Distribution Model
The Company will market its products through a hybrid sales force comprised of a managed network of independent regional distributors/sales agents (80%) and direct sales representatives (20%) in China.
Dealer/Distributor System:
We collaborate with dealers to sell and distribute our products to various hospitals and reach the consumers, i.e. bone fracture victims. The company will assist dealers to promote products to famous orthopaedic hospitals
By utilizing a distributor, ABMT will further benefit from promotional activities by having a second party help with common objectives, and at the same time, increase our sales audience through their contacts.
Currently, we have established contacts with various national and district distributors, every distributor covers a minimum of 50 hospitals, so our total coverage is 6,000 hospitals. We will provide ongoing after-sales service, technical supports and conventional meetings, etc., to help our distributors better promote our products.
Direct Hospital Sales (DHS):
Our Direct Hospital Sales (DHS) regions will include Guangdong, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Xinjiang, Shanghai and Beijing at the beginning. We have already established close relationships with the 7 state-level hospitals where our clinical tests have been conducted. These hospitals are located in one of the fastest growing areas of China, with healthcare coverage for 20% of the Chinese population. These 7 State level hospitals are:
1. The First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine.
2. The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhongshan University.
3. The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Traditional Chinese Medicine University.
4. The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University.
5. The People’s Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.
6. The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangxi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine.
7. Luoyang Orthopaedic-Traumatological Hospital.
Apart from assisting in our sales, these 7 hospitals will also be assisting ABMT in future clinical applications and trials.
In addition, we will receive up-to-date information directly from physicians to develop new products better suited for current patient needs and hence, speed up product commercialization.
Appointment of Chief Medical Officer
On March 9, 2020, the Company announced the appointment of Prof. Puyi Sheng, M.D., PhD, as its Chief Medical Officer. Prof. Sheng, age 53, is a professor and surgeon, specializing in Primary and Revision Arthroplasties, and Joint Surgery. Prof. Sheng currently serves as the vice director of the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, the vice director of the Department of Joint Surgery in the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, professor and PhD student mentor of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou, China. Prof. Sheng received his Bachelor and Master degrees from Sun Yat-Sen University of Medical Sciences, he received his PhD in Bone Science from Sun Yat-sen University in China and PhD in Surgery from Tampere University in Finland. During his career as an orthopaedic surgeon for over 20 years, Prof. Sheng has served in various capacities at different medical institutions including the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University in China, Coxa Hospital for Joint Replacement in Finland and Nagoya University in Japan. Prof. Sheng has published 48 science papers as author or co-author.
Prof. Sheng will have an advisory role only and report directly to and take direction from the Company’s Board of Directors. His scientific and strategic input and advice will help the Company’s research and development projects.
Research and Development
Research and development costs related to both present and future products are expensed as incurred. Total expenditure on research and development charged to general and administrative expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 was $182,959 and $263,639. Compared to prior period, the research and development expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were reduced by 30.6% and increased by 366.52%. The main component of research and development costs is staff costs of the technical personnel on product improvements to enhance industrial design.
The Company started research projects on two new products in 2020. These products are Class II and Class III medical devices for treating Sports Trauma. We expect research and development expenses to grow as we continue to invest in basic research, clinical trials, product development and in our intellectual property. The Company will be working closely with medical institutions and research universities to expedite future clinical trials of upcoming series of polymer fixation devices, including Intramedullary Nailing Fixation, Binding Wires, Micromodule Screws & Plates, Maxillofacial & Craniofacial Plates, and Rib Pins.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company’s primary business is carried out through its subsidiary, Shenzhen Changhua Biomedical Engineering Co., Ltd. (“Shenzhen Changhua”), based in Shenzhen, China, where COVID-19 pandemic started in January 2020.
The Company has identified the following areas that had been adversely affected by COVID-19:
1. Operation: Our facilities in China were not fully staffed due to COVID-19 lockdown, travel restrictions and quarantine requirements. This affected our accounting and marketing departments mostly because a large number of staff could not come back to office as they were not allowed to travel or have 14-day quarantine before they came back to work. Our operation gradually came back to normal with the easing of COVID-19 restrictions in China during the third and fourth quarter of 2020.
2. Manufacturing: We had sufficient raw material stock for 2 months, however, our production was affected by staff shortage and facilities closure during lockdown.
3. Marketing: We launched our sales campaign in late 2019 and we generated revenue the first time in the history of the Company at the end of 2019 fiscal year. Our sales and marketing plans were disrupted by COVID-19 pandemic because almost all the hospitals in China were dealing with COVID-19 and non-essential operations were postponed or cancelled.
The Company has been working with its business partners and workforce through crisis planning, effective communication and co-operation to minimize the negative impact of COVID-19.
Finance Costs
As of October 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company owed $880,108 and $824,705 respectively to a stockholder - Titan Technology Development Limited, which is unsecured and repayable on demand. Interest is charged at 7% per annum on the amount owed.
As of October 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company owed $2,068,471 and $1,802,625 to Chi Fung Yu, $2,327,850 and $2,835,785 to Tie Jun Chen, $41,742 and $37,701 to Que Feng, $267,449 and $240,527 to Shenzhen Hygeian Medical Device Company, Limited., which are unsecured and repayable on demand. Interest is charged at 7% per annum on the amount owed.
Total interest expenses on advances from a stockholder accrued for the years ended October 31, 2020 and October 31, 2019 are $50,065 and $48,418 for Titan Technology Development Limited.
Total interest expenses on advances from following related parties accrued for the years ended October 31, 2020 and October 31, 2019 are $92,625 and $93,742 for Chi Fung Yu; $152,606 and $155,444 for Tie Jun Chen; $2,007 and $2,032 for Que Feng; $13,899 and $14,067 for Shenzhen Hygeian Medical Device Company.
As of October 31, 2020 and October 31, 2019, the Company owed the following amounts respectively to three directors for advances made - $283,627 and $256,469 to Hui Wang; $20,930 and $23,478 to Chi Ming Yu; $3,474 and $567 to Kai Gui. These advances were made on an unsecured basis, repayable on demand and interest free.
Imputed interest charged at 5% per annum on the amounts owed to the directors for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively is $13,695 and $12,707 for Hui Wang; $0 and $0 for Chi Ming Yu and Kai Gui.
Income Tax
ABMT was incorporated in the United States and has incurred net operating loss for income tax purposes for 2020 and 2019. ABMT has net operating loss carry forwards for income taxes amounting to approximately $2,421,252 and $2,224,307 as of October 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively which may be available to reduce future years’ taxable income. These carry forwards, will expire, if not utilized, commencing in 2029. Management believes that the realization of the benefits from these losses appears uncertain due to the Company’s limited operating history and continuing losses. Accordingly, a full, deferred tax asset valuation allowance has been provided and no deferred tax asset valuation allowance has been provided and no deferred tax asset benefit has been recorded. The valuation allowance at October 31, 2020 and 2019 was $797,623 and $756,265 respectively. The net change in the valuation allowance for 2020 was an increase of $41,358.
Masterise was incorporated in the BVI and under current law of the BVI, is not subject to tax on income.
Shenzhen Changhua was incorporated in the PRC and is subject to PRC income tax which is computed according to the relevant laws and regulations in the PRC. The income tax rate has been 25%. No income tax expense has been provided by Shenzhen Changhua as it has only started to generated revenue at the end of fiscal year and it has incurred losses.
Other Income/(Expenses)
Other expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were $225,376 and $344,082 respectively. Comparing with prior year, the other expenses were reduced by $118,706 or 34.5%. There were no substantial changes in other income/expenses except the added in government grants and interest on lease liabilities. During the year ended 31 October 2020, the Company was awarded a government grant equivalent to US$125,806 by the government of Shenzhen Longgang District where our facilities are located. The grant was a Biomedical Incentive Award recognizing the Company’s achievement of obtaining a Class III medical device permit from China’s NMPA.
Net Loss
As reflected in the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $10,256,364 at October 31, 2020 that includes a net loss of $672,000 for the year ended October 31, 2020. We started to generate revenue at the end of 2019 fiscal year from inception, but our marketing campaign was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue income from our PA Screws sales was not sufficient to meet operating expenses for the upkeep of the Company and the clinical trials.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had a working capital deficit of $7,533,045 at October 31, 2020 compared to a working capital deficit of $6,577,273 as of October 31, 2019. Our working capital deficit increased as a result of the fact that we only started to market of our NMPA approved PA Screw in China at the end of 2019 fiscal year, and the company has to put resources to market its products, complete the clinical trials of other products. Although we began to generate revenues at the end of 2019 fiscal year, the first time in the Company’s history, our marketing campaign was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the revenue income was not sufficient. Our main source of financing during the year came in the form of PA Screws sales and loan from our related parties and stockholders.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Generated from Operating Activities
Net cash generated from operating activities was $646,660 in the year ended October 31, 2020. This amount was attributable primarily to the net loss after adjustment for non-cash items, such as depreciation and imputed interest on advances from directors.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
We recorded $30,706 net cash used in investing activities in the year ended October 31, 2020. This amount reflected purchases of property and equipment, primarily for research and development to our facilities.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities in the year ended October 31, 2020 was $427,821, which represented advances from related parties.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
Our ability to continue as a going concern and support the commercialization of current products is dependent upon our ability to obtain additional financing in the near term. We anticipate that such funding will be in the form of marketing of our products and equity financing from sales of our common stock. However, there is no assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our products and common stock to fund our business plan should we decide to proceed. We anticipate our sales revenue will not meet our financial needs in 2021 and we need to rely on advances from our related parties and stockholders in order to continue to fund our business operations
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents at October 31, 2020, will be insufficient to meet our cash needs. The management is actively marketing its product, pursuing additional funding and strategic partners, which will enable the Company to implement our business plan, business strategy, to continue research and development, manufacturing and marketing our products, clinical trials or further development that may arise.
Going Concern
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $10,256,364 as of October 31, 2020 that includes a net loss of $672,000 for the year ended October 31, 2020. The Company’s total current liabilities exceed its total current assets by $7,533,045.
These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. In view of the matters described above, recoverability of a major portion of the recorded asset amounts shown in the accompanying balance sheet is dependent upon continued operations of the Company, which in turn is dependent upon the Company’s ability to generating revenue, raise additional capital, obtain financing and succeed in its future operations. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management has taken steps to revise its operating and financial requirements, which it believes are sufficient to provide the Company with the ability to continue as a going concern. The Company is now marketing its products, pursuing additional funding and potential merger or acquisition candidates, which would enhance stockholders’ investment. Management believes that the above actions will allow the Company to continue operations through the next fiscal year.
As of October 31, 2020, loans from the Company’s stockholder, three directors, three related parties and a non-related third party totaling $5,893,651 were provided to us for use as working capital. Management believes that such financing will allow us to continue operations through the next fiscal year. The Company is also actively pursuing a number of private placements funding which would ensure continued operations. The Company launched the sales campaign for its NMPA approved PA Screws at the end of fiscal year ended October 31, 2019 and continuously generated revenue since then. The Company believes its revenue will gradually increase during 2021.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to our investors.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including but not limited to those related to income taxes and impairment of long-lived assets. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions and factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Based on our ongoing review, we plan to adjust to our judgments and estimates where facts and circumstances dictate. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require our management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
1. Property and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost, less accumulated depreciation. Expenditures for additions, major renewals and betterments are capitalized and expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred.
Depreciation is provided on a straight-line basis, less estimated residual value over the assets estimated useful lives. The estimated useful lives of the assets are 5 years.
2. Long-lived assets
In accordance with FASB Codification Topic 360 (ASC Topic 360), “Accounting for the impairment or disposal of Long-Lived Assets”, long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangible assets held and used by the Company are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. For purposes of evaluating the recoverability of long-lived assets, the recoverability test is performed using undiscounted net cash flows related to the long-lived assets. The Company reviews long-lived assets to determine that carrying values are not impaired.
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. Impairment of the carrying value of long-lived assets would be indicated if the best estimate of future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset grouping is less than its carrying value. If an impairment is indicated, any loss is measured as the difference between estimated fair value and carrying value and is recognized in operating income. For the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019, the company has not recognized any impairment charges.
3. Fair value of financial instruments
FASB Codification Topic 825(ASC Topic 825), “Disclosure About Fair Value of Financial Instruments,” requires certain disclosures regarding the fair value of financial instruments. The carrying amounts of other receivables and prepaid expenses, other payables and accrued expenses, due to a stockholder, directors and related parties approximate their fair values because of the short-term nature of the instruments. The management of the Company is of the opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest or credit risks arising from these financial statements.
4. Government grant
Government grants are recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the Company complies with any conditions attached to them and the grants will be received.
5. Revenue recognition
Revenue from contract with customers is recognized when control of goods is transferred to a customer, at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods. Control is considered to be transferred when the customer has the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits of that good, generally on delivery of the goods.
Revenues are generated from manufacturing and supply of biomaterial internal fixation devices, which are sold through its network of distributors/agents and direct sales channels. Our performance obligations are satisfied at a point in time. Our contracts have an anticipated duration of less than a year.
Actual returns and claims in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus may differ from our estimates. If actual or expected future returns and claims are significantly greater or lower than the reserves that we have established, we will record a reduction or increase to net revenue in the period in which we make such a determination.
6. Income taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the FASB Codification Topic 740-10-25 (“ASC 740-10-25”). Under ASC 740-10-25, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under ASC 740-10-25, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized as income in the period included the enactment date.
7. Research and Development
Research and development costs related to both present and future products are expensed as incurred.
8. Foreign currency translation
The financial statements of the Company’s subsidiary denominated in currencies other than US $ are translated into US $ using the closing rate method. The balance sheet items are translated into US $ using the exchange rates at the respective balance sheet dates. The capital and various reserves are translated at historical exchange rates prevailing at the time of the transactions while income and expenses items are translated at the average exchange rate for the year. All exchange differences are recorded within equity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There has been no newly effective accounting pronouncement that has significance, or potential significance, to our consolidated financial statements.
The Company has reviewed all recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and does not believe the future adoptions of any such pronouncements may be expected to cause a material impact on the financial condition or the results of operations. The Company will carefully analyze these recently accounting pronouncements and take action to adopt them as required.