Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future. Except as otherwise noted, all references to 2020 refer to the year ended December 31, 2020, references to 2019 refer to the year ended December 31, 2019, and references to 2018 refer to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Overview
Airbnb is a community based on connection and belonging-a community that was born in 2007 when two hosts welcomed three guests to their San Francisco home, and has since grown to 4 million hosts who have welcomed over 800 million guest arrivals to approximately 100,000 cities in almost every country and region across the globe. Hosts on Airbnb are everyday people who share their worlds to provide guests with the feeling of connection and being at home. Airbnb has five stakeholders and is designed with all of them in mind. Along with employees and shareholders, we serve hosts, guests, and the communities in which they live. We intend to make long-term decisions considering all of our stakeholders because their collective success is key for our business to thrive.
Our Business Model
We operate a global marketplace, where hosts offer guests stays and experiences on our platform. Our business model relies on the success of hosts and guests who join our community and generate consistent bookings over time. As hosts become more successful on our platform and as guests return over time, we benefit from the recurring activity of our community.
We experienced rapid growth since our founding through 2019. In 2019, we generated GBV of $38.0 billion, representing growth of 29% from $29.4 billion in 2018, and revenue of $4.8 billion, representing growth of 32% from $3.7 billion in 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our business was materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with GBV of $23.9 billion, down 37% year over year, and revenue of $3.4 billion, down 30% year over year. We expect continued volatility in these trends and fluctuations from month to month as the continued impact from COVID-19 is not linear across geographies and as COVID-19 is continuing to materially adversely affect our business and financial results.
Initial Public Offering
Our IPO was completed on December 14, 2020. Our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and for the year then-ended reflect the sale by us of an aggregate of 55,000,000 shares in our IPO, including the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase
additional shares, at the public offering price of $68.00 per share, for net proceeds to us of approximately $3.7 billion, after underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, and the conversion of all outstanding shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock into an aggregate of 240,910,588 shares of Class B common stock, including 1,286,694 shares of Class B common stock issuable pursuant to the anti-dilution adjustment provisions relating to our Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and for the year then-ended include stock-based compensation expense of $2.8 billion associated with the vesting of RSUs in connection with our IPO for which the requisite service-based vesting condition was met as of December 31, 2020. The liquidity-based vesting condition for RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement on December 9, 2020.
Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We track the following key business metrics and financial measures that are not calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP (“non-GAAP financial measures”) to evaluate our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. Accordingly, we believe that these key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of operations in the same manner as our management team. These key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly titled metrics or measures presented by other companies. A reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP is provided under the subsection titled “- Adjusted EBITDA” and “- Free Cash Flow” below.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating these key metrics, which may hinder comparability with other companies that may calculate similarly titled metrics in a different way.
Nights and Experiences Booked
Nights and Experiences Booked is a key measure of the scale of our platform, which in turn drives our financial performance. Nights and Experiences Booked on our platform in a period represents the sum of the total number of nights booked for stays and the total number of seats booked for experiences, net of cancellations and alterations that occurred in that period. For example, a booking made on February 15 would be reflected in Nights and Experiences Booked for our quarter ended March 31. If, in the example, the booking were canceled on May 15, Nights and Experiences Booked would be reduced by the cancellation for our quarter ended June 30. A night can include one or more guests and can be for a listing with one or more bedrooms. A seat is booked for each participant in an experience. Substantially all of the bookings on our platform to date have come from nights. We believe Nights and Experiences Booked is a key business metric to help investors and others understand and evaluate our results of operations in the same manner as our management team, as it represents a single unit of transaction on our platform.
In 2020, we had 193.2 million Nights and Experiences Booked, a 41% decrease from 326.9 million Nights and Experiences Booked in 2019, which in turn was a 31% increase from 250.3 million Nights and Experiences Booked in 2018. Nights and Experiences Booked grows as we attract new hosts and guests to our platform and as repeat guests increase their activity on our platform. Our Nights and Experiences Booked declined from prior levels as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decline in 2020 was most severe in the second quarter, with Nights and Experiences Booked declining 67% from the prior year period, and our business improved from those levels in the third and fourth quarters with declines of 28% and 39%, respectively, from the prior year period. This improvement was driven by stronger results in North America and Europe, in particular with resilience in domestic and short-distance travel, with more people gravitating toward Airbnb stays within driving distance of their homes.
Gross Booking Value
GBV represents the dollar value of bookings on our platform in a period and is inclusive of host earnings, service fees, cleaning fees, and taxes, net of cancellations and alterations that occurred during that period. The timing of recording GBV and any related cancellations is similar to that described in the subsection titled “- Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures - Nights and Experiences Booked” above. Revenue from the booking is recognized upon check-in; accordingly, GBV is a leading indicator of revenue. The entire amount of a booking is reflected in GBV during the quarter in which booking occurs, whether the guest pays the entire amount of the booking upfront or elects to use our Pay Less Upfront program.
Growth in GBV reflects our ability to attract and retain hosts and guests and reflects growth in Nights and Experiences Booked. In 2020, our GBV was $23.9 billion, a 37% decrease from $38.0 billion in 2019, which in turn was a 29% increase from $29.4 billion in 2018. The decrease in our GBV in 2020 was due to the reduction in Nights and Experiences Booked due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as described above. On a constant currency basis, the reduction in GBV was 37%. The decline was most severe in the second quarter, with GBV declining 67% from the prior year. We experienced an increase in GBV in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as domestic travel rebounded on our platform from
the second quarter levels, but below third and fourth quarter 2019 levels by 17% and 31%, respectively. In the third and fourth quarters of 2020, GBV declined less than Nights and Experiences Booked as a result of increased GBV per Night and Experience Booked driven by a shift towards North America compared to other regions and entire home bookings.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information, collectively, to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes.We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance, and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP is provided below. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
The following table summarizes our non-GAAP financial measures, along with the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each period presented below.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss adjusted for (i) provision for (benefit from) income taxes; (ii) interest income, interest expense, and other income (expense), net; (iii) depreciation and amortization; (iv) stock-based compensation expense and stock-settlement obligations related to the IPO; (v) acquisition-related impacts consisting of gains (losses) recognized on changes in the fair value of contingent consideration arrangements; (vi) net changes to the reserves for lodging taxes for which management believes it is probable that we may be held jointly liable with hosts for collecting and remitting such taxes; and (vii) restructuring charges.
The above items are excluded from our Adjusted EBITDA measure because these items are non-cash in nature, or because the amount and timing of these items is unpredictable, not driven by core results of operations and renders comparisons with prior periods and competitors less meaningful. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of operations, as well as provides a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business performance. Moreover, we have included Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measurement used by our management internally to make operating decisions, including those related to operating expenses, evaluating performance, and performing strategic planning and annual budgeting.
Adjusted EBITDA also excludes certain items related to transactional tax matters, for which management believes it is probable that we may be held jointly liable with hosts in certain jurisdictions, and we urge investors to review the detailed disclosure regarding these matters included in the subsection titled “-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Lodging Tax Obligations,” as well as the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as a financial measure, should be considered as supplemental in nature, and is not meant as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. These limitations include the following:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest income (expense) and other income (expense), net, which include unrealized and realized gains and losses on foreign currency exchange, investments, and financial instruments, including the warrants issued in connection with a term loan agreement entered into in April 2020;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges, such as depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of intangible assets, and although these are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect all cash requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy as well as stock-settlement obligations, which represent employer and related taxes related to the IPO;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes acquisition-related impacts consisting of gains (losses) recognized on changes in the fair value of contingent consideration arrangements. The contingent consideration, which was in the form of equity, was valued as of the
acquisition date and is mark-to-market at each reporting period based on factors including our stock price. The changes in fair value of contingent consideration was insignificant prior to the fourth quarter of 2020;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect net changes to reserves for lodging taxes for which management believes it is probable that we may be held jointly liable with hosts for collecting and remitting such taxes; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect restructuring charges, which include severance and other employee costs, lease impairments, and contract amendments and terminations.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net loss and our other GAAP results.
In 2020, Adjusted EBITDA was $(250.7) million, compared to Adjusted EBITDA in 2019 of $(253.3) million, primarily due to the reduction in Nights and Experiences Booked and GBV due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as described above, partially offset by a reduction in overall spend. In 2019, Adjusted EBITDA was $(253.3) million, compared to Adjusted EBITDA in 2018 of $170.6 million, primarily due to significant investments in growth initiatives and investments in our technical infrastructure in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation
The following is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP measure, net loss:
(1)Excludes stock-based compensation related to restructuring, which is included in restructuring charges in the table above.
Free Cash Flow
We define Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment. We believe that Free Cash Flow is a meaningful indicator of liquidity that provides information to our management and investors about the amount of cash generated from operations, after purchases of property and equipment, that can be used for investment in our business and for acquisitions as well as to strengthen our balance sheet. Our Free Cash Flow is impacted by the timing of GBV because we collect our service fees at the time of booking, which is generally before a stay or experience occurs. Funds held on behalf of our hosts and guests and amounts payable to our hosts and guests do not impact Free Cash Flow, except interest earned on these funds. Free Cash Flow has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities. Free Cash Flow does not reflect our ability to meet future contractual commitments and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
In 2020, Free Cash Flow was $(667.1) million compared to $97.3 million in 2019, representing 2% of revenue, and $504.9 million in 2018, representing 14% of revenue in 2018. Free Cash Flow decreased in 2020 due to the reduction in Nights and Experiences Booked and GBV due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as described above, partially offset by cost reductions. Free Cash Flow decreased in 2019 largely due to higher operating expenses, while it increased in 2018 compared to the prior year primarily due to higher operating income and to a lesser extent, lower capital expenditures.
Free Cash Flow Reconciliation
The following is a reconciliation of Free Cash Flow to the most comparable GAAP cash flow measure, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
COVID-19 Has Had a Disproportionately Negative Effect on the Travel Industry
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus disease was first reported. Only three months later, in March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has forced international, federal, state, and local governments to enforce prohibitions of non-essential activities. The outbreak will have a continued adverse impact on economic and market conditions and has already triggered a period of global economic slowdown, the depth and breadth of which are yet to be determined.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in global travel restrictions and a corresponding significant reduction in travel. While many industries have been adversely impacted, travel has been disproportionately affected, as governments have implemented travel restrictions and as people have become reluctant to travel irrespective of such restrictions.
Prior to the outbreak, we had seen strong year-over-year growth in Nights and Experiences Booked in the first three weeks of 2020. We first saw the impact of COVID-19 in China in the last week of January, which when contained to China, had a minor impact on the entire business. The outbreak spread throughout Asia, and then through Europe, North America, and the rest of the world by the end of the first quarter of 2020. In order to protect our business from these near-term market disruptions and the prospect of a prolonged business impact, we raised $2.0 billion in the form of term loans in April 2020 and took action to dramatically reduce our operating expenses as described below. We believe these incremental funds and our rapid management of expenses, in addition to our existing cash position, has helped and will continue to help us to prudently manage our business through the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to adversely impact our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows remains uncertain. Our financial results for 2020 were materially adversely affected, and we expect that COVID-19 will continue to materially impact our bookings, revenue, and business operations in future periods. While we experienced an increase in GBV and revenue in the third quarter of 2020 compared to the second quarter of 2020 as domestic travel rebounded, both were down compared to the same periods in 2019.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, another wave of COVID-19 infections emerged. As a result, countries imposed strict lockdowns. Similar to the impact of the initial COVID-19 wave in March 2020, we saw a decrease in bookings in the most affected regions. As a result, while the fourth quarter GBV and revenue were greater than the second quarter, there were greater year-over-year declines in Nights and Experiences Booked and GBV in the fourth quarter of 2020 than in the third quarter of 2020. The extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic over the longer term remain uncertain and dependent on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the severity and transmission rate of COVID-19, the extent and effectiveness of containment actions taken, including mobility restrictions, the timing, availability, and effectiveness of vaccines, and the impact of these and other factors on travel behavior in general, and on our business in particular.
Multiple Resilient Categories Were Less Impacted and Showed Strong Recovery
We believe that the recovery in GBV that we experienced in the second half of 2020 was attributable to the renewed ability and willingness for guests to travel, the resilience of our hosts, and relative strength of our business model. From December 31, 2019 through December 31, 2020, active listings remained stable at approximately 5.6 million despite the decline in booking activity on our platform due to COVID-19. Against an otherwise highly negative travel backdrop, there are several areas of our business that have shown resilience, notably, domestic travel, short-distance travel, travel outside of our top 20 cities, and long-term stays. While we believe that travel will change as a result of
COVID-19, the adaptability of our business suggests that we are well-positioned to serve this dynamic market as it continues to evolve and recover.
COVID-19 Cost Reductions Helped Position Our Business for Improved Financial Performance
In response to the spread of COVID-19 and the resulting material decrease in GBV, we undertook an internal review of our cost structure, ultimately making changes to improve the strength of our business in the long term. Specifically, we significantly reduced our fixed and variable costs in 2020, which we believe will result in improved operating leverage as we emerge from COVID-19. In 2020, we rapidly made changes to manage our expenses in a period of material business interruption, which included suspending substantially all discretionary marketing program spend, reducing full-time employee headcount by approximately 25%, and suspending all facilities build-outs and significantly reducing capital expenditures.
These headcount reductions and other restructuring actions resulted in charges of $151.4 million for 2020. In conjunction with these actions, we have realigned our organizational priorities to further increase our focus on individual hosts and brand marketing, while pausing our investments in newer areas such as transportation and content and reducing performance marketing. We have done this to sharpen our focus on investments that directly strengthen our community and to increase the efficiency of our operations as the travel industry begins to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe these changes should allow us to more effectively manage our business and improve our financial operating results.
Geographic Mix
Our operations are global, and certain trends in our business, such as Nights and Experiences Booked, GBV, revenue, GBV per Night and Experience Booked, and Nights per Booking vary by geography.
We measure Nights and Experiences Booked by region based on the location of the listing. As a result of COVID-19, the geographic mix of Nights and Experiences Booked, GBV, and revenue during 2020 reflected a shift toward North America, which saw the strongest recovery in the second half of the year. For 2020, Nights and Experiences Booked were 75.5 million, or 39% of the total, in North America compared to 67.7 million, or 35%, in EMEA, 27.6 million, or 14%, in Asia Pacific, and 22.4 million, or 12%, in Latin America. For 2020, GBV was $13.2 billion, or 55% of the total, in North America compared to $6.6 billion, or 28%, in EMEA, $2.4 billion, or 10%, in Asia Pacific, and $1.7 billion, or 7%, in Latin America. Similarly, for 2020, revenue was $1.8 billion, or 53% of the total, in North America compared to $1.0 billion, or 30%, in EMEA, $0.3 billion, or 10%, in Asia Pacific, and $0.3 billion, or 7%, in Latin America.
We saw an increase in GBV per Night and Experience Booked in 2020 compared to 2019, in part because our geographic mix shifted to these higher GBV per Night and Experience Booked regions. North America saw an increase in GBV per Night and Experience Booked as larger entire homes have been in greater demand. The average nights per booking also increased globally 2020, reflecting demand for longer stays. Specifically, GBV per Night and Experience Booked in 2020 was $174.43 for North America compared to $98.41 for EMEA, $85.83 for Asia Pacific, and $75.74 for Latin America, with a total global GBV per Night and Experience Booked of $123.69. Average nights per booking, excluding experiences, for 2020 were 4.4 nights for each of North America, EMEA, and Latin America and 2.8 nights for Asia Pacific, with a total average of 4.1 nights. We expect that our blended global average nights per booking will fluctuate based on our geographic mix and changes in traveler behaviors.
Seasonality
Our business is seasonal, reflecting typical travel behavior patterns over the course of the calendar year. In a typical year, the first, second,
and third quarters have higher Nights and Experiences Booked than the fourth quarter, as guests plan for travel during the peak travel season, which is in the third quarter for North America and EMEA. Our business metrics, including GBV and Adjusted EBITDA, can also be impacted by the timing of holidays and other events. We experience seasonality in our GBV that is generally consistent with the seasonality of Nights and Experiences Booked. Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA have historically been, and are expected to continue to be, highest in the third quarter when we have the most check-ins, which is the point at which we recognize revenue. Seasonal trends in our GBV impact Free Cash Flow for any given quarter. Our costs are relatively fixed across quarters or vary in line with the volume of transactions, and we historically achieve our highest GBV in the first and second quarters of the year with comparatively lower check-ins. As a result, increases in unearned fees make our Free Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow as a percentage of revenue the highest in the first two quarters of the year. We typically see a slight decline in GBV and a peak in check-ins in the third quarter, which results in a decrease in unearned fees and lower sequential level of Free Cash Flow, and a greater decline in GBV in the fourth quarter, where Free Cash Flow is typically negative. As our business matures, other seasonal trends may develop, or these existing seasonal trends may become more extreme.
In 2020, we saw COVID-19 overwhelm the historical patterns of seasonality in our GBV, revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, and Free Cash Flow as a result of travel restrictions and changing travel preferences relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect this impact on seasonality to continue as long as COVID-19 is impacting travel patterns globally.
Regulations Permitting or Limiting Our Offerings
Regulations that permit or limit our hosts’ ability to provide their listings impact our growth and penetration in certain geographies. In particular, among other regulations governing our short-term rentals, many large cities have placed night caps on short-term rentals of certain types of properties, limited short-term rentals to primary residences, or limited the length of a stay. No single city represented more than 1.1% of our revenue before adjustments for incentives and refunds during the year ended December 31, 2020 or 1.2% of our active listings as of December 31, 2020. An increase in short-term rental regulations could harm our business and negatively impact our financial performance. See the section titled “Risk Factors - Laws, regulations, and rules that affect the short-term rental and home sharing business may limit the ability or willingness of hosts to share their spaces over our platform and expose our hosts or us to significant penalties, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of service fees, net of incentives and refunds, charged to our customers. We consider both hosts and guests to be our customers. For stays, service fees, which are charged to customers as a percentage of the value of the booking, excluding taxes, vary based on factors specific to the booking, such as booking value, the duration of the booking, geography, and host type. For experiences, we only earn a host fee. Substantially all of our revenue comes from stays booked on our platform. Incentives include our referral programs and marketing promotions to encourage the use of our platform and attract new customers, while our refunds to customers are part of our customer support activities.
We experience a difference in timing between when a booking is made and when we recognize revenue, which occurs upon check-in. We record the service fees that we collect from customers prior to check-in on our balance sheet as unearned fees. Revenue is net of incentives and refunds provided to customers totaling $221.5 million, $274.5 million, and $384.2 million in 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, representing 6%, 6%, and 11% of revenue, respectively. The elevated level of incentives and refunds provided to customers during the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to payments made to support hosts impacted by increased guest cancellations and COVID-19 related guest cancellation coupons.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes payment processing costs, including merchant fees and chargebacks, costs associated with third-party data centers used to host our platform, and amortization of internally developed software and acquired technology. Because we act as the merchant of record, we incur all payment processing costs associated with our bookings, and we have chargebacks, which arise from account takeovers and other fraudulent activities. We expect our cost of revenue will continue to increase on an absolute dollar basis for the foreseeable future to the extent that we continue to see growth on our platform. Cost of revenue may vary as a percentage of revenue from year to year based on activity on our platform and may also vary from quarter to quarter as a percentage of revenue based on the seasonality of our business and the difference in the timing of when bookings are made and when we recognize revenue.
Operations and Support
Operations and support expense primarily consists of personnel-related expenses and third-party service provider fees associated with community support provided via phone, email, and chat to hosts and guests; customer relations costs, which include refunds and credits related to customer satisfaction and expenses associated with our host protection programs; and allocated costs for facilities and information technology. We expect that operations and support expense will continue to increase on an absolute dollar basis for the foreseeable future to the extent that we continue to see growth on our platform. We also expect operations and support to increase in the near-term as a percentage of revenue, as we continue to invest in trust and safety programs. We are also investing in the near-term in initiatives to reduce customer contact rates and improve the operational efficiency of our operations and support organization, which we expect will decrease operations and support expense as a percentage of revenue over the longer term. We incurred additional operations and support expense during 2020, the year in which we completed our IPO, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with our RSUs as described in the subsection titled “- Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Stock-Based Compensation-Restricted Stock Units,” and anticipate additional stock-based compensation expense going forward.
Product Development
Product development expense primarily consists of personnel-related expenses and third-party service provider fees incurred in connection with the development of our platform, and allocated costs for facilities and information technology. We expect that our product development expense will increase on an absolute dollar basis and will vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in product development activities relating to ongoing improvements to and maintenance of our technology platform and other programs, including the hiring of personnel to support these efforts. We incurred additional product development expense during 2020, the year in which we completed our IPO, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with our RSUs as described in the subsection titled “- Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Stock-Based Compensation-Restricted Stock Units,” and anticipate additional stock-based compensation expense going forward.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of brand and performance marketing, personnel-related expenses, including those related to our field operations, policy and communications, portions of referral incentives and coupons, and allocated costs for facilities and information technology. We expect our sales and marketing expense will vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue for the foreseeable future, and over the long term, we expect it will decline as a percentage of revenue relative to 2019. We expect that sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue in the first half of 2021 will be higher than that of the second half. This is partially due to the marketing campaign that we are running in the first half of 2021 in advance of the summer travel season. We incurred additional sales and marketing expense during 2020, the year in which we completed our IPO, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with our RSUs as described in the subsection titled “- Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Stock-Based Compensation-Restricted Stock Units,” and anticipate additional stock-based compensation expense going forward.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense primarily consists of personnel-related expenses for management and administrative functions, including finance and accounting, legal, and human resources. General and administrative expense also includes certain professional
services fees, general corporate and director and officer insurance, allocated costs for facilities and information technology, indirect taxes, including lodging tax reserves for which we may be held jointly liable with hosts for collecting and remitting such taxes, and bad debt expense. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expense as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses to comply with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Listing Rules of Nasdaq, as well as higher expenses for corporate insurance, director and officer insurance, investor relations, and professional services. Overall, we expect our general and administrative expense will vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue for the foreseeable future. We incurred additional general and administrative expense during 2020, the year in which we completed our IPO, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with our RSUs as described in the subsection titled “- Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Stock-Based Compensation-Restricted Stock Units,” and anticipate additional stock-based compensation expense going forward.
Restructuring Charges
Restructuring charges primarily consist of costs associated with a global workforce reduction in May 2020, lease impairments, and costs associated with amendments and terminations of contracts, including commercial agreements with service providers.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, and amounts held on behalf of customers.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of expense related to financing lease obligations in 2018 before the adoption of Accounting Standards Codification 842, Leases (“ASC 842”), interest associated with various indirect tax reserves, amortization of debt issuance costs associated with our $1.0 billion five-year unsecured revolving Credit and Guarantee Agreement (the “2016 Credit Facility”), as well as interest expense and amortization of debt issuance costs associated with our term loan agreements entered into in April 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and balances, the change in fair value of investments and financial instruments, including the warrants issued in connection with a term loan agreement entered into in April 2020, and our share of income or loss from our equity method investments.
Our platform generally enables guests to make payments in the currency of their choice to the extent that the currency is supported by Airbnb, which may not match the currency in which the host elects to be paid. As a result, in those cases, we bear the currency risk of both the guest payment as well as the host payment due to timing differences in such payments. In 2019, we began entering into derivative contracts to offset a portion of our exposure to the impact of movements in currency exchange rates on our transactional balances denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The effects of these derivative contracts are reflected in other income (expense), net.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and foreign jurisdictions in which we do business. Foreign jurisdictions have different statutory tax rates than those in the United States. Additionally, certain of our foreign earnings may also be taxable in the United States. Accordingly, our effective tax rate is subject to significant variation due to several factors, including variability in our pre-tax and taxable income and loss and the mix of jurisdictions to which they relate, intercompany transactions, changes in how we do business, acquisitions, investments, tax audit developments, changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities and their valuation, foreign currency gains and losses, changes in statutes, regulations, case law, and administrative practices, principles, and interpretations related to tax, including changes to the global tax framework, competition, and other laws and accounting rules in various jurisdictions, and relative changes of expenses or losses for which tax benefits are not recognized. Additionally, our effective tax rate can vary based on the amount of pre-tax income or loss. For example, the impact of discrete items and non-deductible expenses on our effective tax rate is greater when our pre-tax income is lower.
We have a valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets, including federal and state net operating loss carryforwards, tax credits, and intangible assets. We expect to maintain these valuation allowances until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income in the United States and Ireland. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in the provision for (benefit from) income taxes.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of $116.7 million and $5.1 billion, respectively. The federal net operating loss carryforwards will expire, if not utilized, beginning in 2034. As of December 31, 2019 and 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards for state income tax purposes of $167.6 million and $2.5 billion, respectively. The state net operating loss carryforwards will expire, if not utilized, beginning in 2033.
In the event that we experience an ownership change within the meaning of Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code, our ability to utilize net operating losses, tax credits, and other tax attributes may be limited. The most recent analysis of our historical ownership changes was completed through December 31, 2020. Based on the analysis, we do not anticipate a permanent limitation on the existing tax attributes under Section 382, although subsequent changes in our ownership structure may create such a limitation.
We are currently under examination for income taxes by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) for the years 2013, 2016, 2017, and 2018. In December 2020, we received a Notice of Proposed Adjustment from the IRS for the 2013 tax year relating to the valuation of our international intellectual property which was sold to a subsidiary in 2013. The notice proposes an increase to our U.S. taxable income that
could result in additional income tax expense and cash tax liability of $1.35 billion, plus penalties and interest, which exceeds our current reserve recorded in our consolidated financial statements by more than $1.0 billion. We intend to vigorously contest the IRS’s proposed adjustment, including through all administrative and, if necessary, judicial remedies which may include: entering into administrative settlement discussions with the IRS Independent Office of Appeals (“IRS Appeals”) in 2021, and if necessary petitioning the U.S. Tax Court (“Tax Court”) for redetermination if an acceptable outcome cannot be reached with IRS Appeals, and finally, and if necessary, appealing the Tax Court’s decision to the appropriate appellate court. If the IRS prevails in the assessment of additional tax due based on its position and such tax and related interest and penalties, if any, exceeds our current reserves, such outcome could have a material adverse impact on our financial position and results of operations, and any assessment of additional tax could require a significant cash payment and have a material adverse impact on our cash flow.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020
Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019. Revenue decreased $1.4 billion, or 30%, in 2020 compared to 2019, almost entirely due to a 41% decrease in the number of Nights and Experiences Booked on our platform due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a 6% increase in GBV per Night and Experience Booked. Service fees as a percentage of booking value, exclusive of taxes, remained relatively flat compared to the same prior year period. Also, contributing to the change was a $109.7 million increase in the reductions to revenue recorded for payments to hosts and coupons issued to guests resulting from elevated cancellations related to COVID-19. On a constant currency basis, revenue decreased 30% compared to 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. Revenue increased $1.2 billion, or 32%, in 2019 compared to 2018, almost entirely due to a 33% increase in the number of check-ins related to Nights and Experiences Booked on our platform. GBV per Night and Experience Booked and service fees as a percentage of booking value, exclusive of taxes, remained relatively flat compared to the prior year. On a constant currency basis, revenue increased 35% compared to 2018.
Cost of Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019. Cost of revenue decreased $320.3 million, or 27%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The change was primarily due to a $236.8 million decrease in payment processing costs, consisting of merchant fees and chargebacks and a $87.9 million decrease in the cost of data hosting services. In 2020 and 2019, payment processing costs totaled $600.2 million and $837.0 million, respectively, which represented 3% and 2% of GBV, respectively. The decrease in payment processing costs resulted from the decreased dollar value of
payments processed through our platform attributable to COVID-19 and lower payment processing fees. The decrease in data hosting resulted from lower usage and demand charges.
2019 Compared to 2018. Cost of revenue increased $332.3 million, or 38%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The change was primarily due to a $193.0 million increase in payment processing costs, consisting of merchant fees and chargebacks, a $90.2 million increase in the cost of data hosting services, and a $29.4 million increase in spend with other third-party service providers and technologies to support our platform. In 2019 and 2018, payment processing costs totaled $837.0 million and $644.0 million, respectively, which represented 2% of GBV for both periods. The increase in payment processing costs resulted from the increased dollar value of payments processed through our platform associated with the growth in GBV, while increases in data hosting and third-party service providers resulted from the associated growth in traffic on our platform. A portion of our increase in data hosting services was related to costs associated with our migration to a service-oriented architecture.
Operations and Support
2020 Compared to 2019. Operations and support expense increased $62.8 million, or 8%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The change was primarily due to a $139.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses, predominantly comprised of stock-based compensation related to RSUs, for which the liquidity-based vesting condition was satisfied in connection with our IPO, and a $34.0 million increase in insurance costs, partially offset by a $53.7 million decrease in spending on third-party community support personnel and a $57.4 million decrease in customer relations costs. The decrease in spending on third-party community support personnel and customer relations costs was largely the result of decline in GBV and associated check-ins in the period due to COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018. Operations and support expense increased $205.9 million, or 34%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The change was primarily due to a $125.8 million increase in spending on third-party community support personnel, a $33.0 million increase in customer relations costs, a $21.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses, and a $15.9 million increase in allocated costs for facilities and information technology, which are allocated based on headcount. The increase in spending on third-party community support personnel and customer relations costs was largely the result of growth in GBV and associated check-ins in the period.
Product Development
2020 Compared to 2019. Product development expense increased $1.8 billion, or 182%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The change was primarily due to a $1.8 billion increase in personnel-related expenses, predominantly comprised of stock-based compensation related to RSUs, for which the liquidity-based vesting condition was satisfied in connection with our IPO.
2019 Compared to 2018. Product development expense increased $397.5 million, or 69%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The change was primarily due to a $271.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses driven by an increase in product development headcount as we invested in existing offerings, new initiatives, including our China offering, Airbnb Experiences, Airbnb Plus, hotels, and Airbnb Luxe, and platform enhancements, a $58.1 million increase in allocated costs for facilities and information technology, a $26.1 million increase in spend for consultants and service providers, and a $23.0 million increase in spend for software, maintenance, and equipment. The growth in employee headcount supported our efforts to enhance the underlying architecture and scalability of our platform by upgrading our systems and moving to a new service-oriented architecture.
Sales and Marketing
2020 Compared to 2019. Sales and marketing expense decreased $446.2 million, or 28%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The change was primarily due to a $691.7 million decrease in marketing activities and a $52.4 million decrease in expenses for third-party service providers, partially offset by a $391.3 million increase in personnel-related expenses, predominantly comprised of stock-based compensation related to RSUs, for which the liquidity-based vesting condition was satisfied in connection with our IPO. Total brand and performance marketing decreased $661.8 million, of which $540.5 million was related to performance marketing and $121.2 million was related to brand marketing. In March 2020, driven by COVID-19, we paused our sales and marketing investments in new initiatives and our performance marketing spend. We implemented a marketing strategy that shifted our marketing mix more towards brand marketing spend and away from spending on performance marketing. Total field operations and policy expense increased $215.6 million from 2019, which included $30.9 million of changes in the fair value of contingent consideration arrangements related to an acquisition completed in 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. Sales and marketing expense increased $520.2 million, or 47%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The change was primarily due to a $358.8 million increase in marketing activities, a $77.8 million increase in personnel-related expenses, a $49.2 million increase in expenses for third-party service providers, and a $15.4 million increase in allocated costs for facilities and information technology. Total brand and performance marketing increased $473.9 million, of which $314.2 million was related to performance marketing, and $159.7 million was related to brand marketing. These increases were primarily due to our efforts to optimize our performance marketing bidding and to support the expansion of our China offering, Airbnb Experiences, Airbnb Plus, hotels, and Airbnb Luxe.
General and Administrative
2020 Compared to 2019. General and administrative expense increased $437.7 million, or 63%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The change was primarily due to a $601.9 million increase in payroll-related expenses, predominantly comprised of stock-based compensation related to RSUs, for which the liquidity-based vesting condition was satisfied in connection with our IPO and a $30.9 million increase in bad debt expense. These increases were partially offset by a net $117.8 million decrease in lodging and business tax expense and a $63.0 million decrease in spend for consultants and service providers. The decrease in lodging and business tax expense resulted largely from a $81.7 million reduction in our reserve for lodging taxes in jurisdictions in which management no longer believed a liability was probable following a favorable outcome in a related legal proceeding.
2019 Compared to 2018. General and administrative expense increased $217.7 million, or 45%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The change was primarily due to a $116.4 million increase in payroll-related expenses resulting from an increase in headcount as we prepared to become a public company, a $29.9 million increase in lease expense related to our build-to-suit leases due to the adoption of ASC 842 in 2019 whereby lease expense is reported as a component of costs and expenses rather than interest expense, a $28.0 million increase in bad debt expense, and a net $17.5 million increase in lodging and business tax expense.
Restructuring Charges
* Not meaningful
2020 Compared to 2019. Restructuring charges totaled $151.4 million for 2020. In May 2020, we announced a reduction in force of approximately 25% of employees, and the resulting restructuring charges primarily included severance and other employee-related costs, lease impairments, and contract amendments and terminations.
Interest Income and Expense
2020 Compared to 2019. Interest income decreased $58.8 million, or 68%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decline in average interest rates and our investment portfolio mix, which was largely invested in short-term, high quality bonds. Interest expense increased $161.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the interest owed on the term loans issued in April 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018. Interest income increased $19.1 million, or 29%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to higher invested balances and average interest rates. Interest expense decreased $16.2 million, or 62%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to the adoption of ASC 842 in 2019 whereby a component of lease expense for build-to-suit leases was no longer recorded in interest expense, but rather, as a component of general and administrative expense. In 2018, we recorded $13.5 million of lease expense related to certain build-to-suit leases within interest expense.
Other Income (Expense), Net
*Not meaningful
2020 Compared to 2019. Other expense, net was $947.2 million in 2020 compared to other income, net of $13.9 million in 2019. The unfavorable change was primarily driven by $868.5 million of fair value remeasurement on our warrants issued in 2020 in connection with our second lien loan. The warrants were issued with an initial exercise price of $28.355 per share and are remeasured to fair value at each reporting date as long as the warrants remain outstanding. The year-over-year change was also attributable to a $54.3 million increase of impairment charges related to non-marketable equity investments in privately-held companies and a $36.7 million increase in net realized and unrealized losses on our investments. Impairment charges recorded during 2020 totaled $82.1 million. Furthermore, a $24.6 million gain related to an equity method investment that was acquired by a third party was recorded during 2019. Partially offsetting these items was a $36.3 million increase in net realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains.
2019 Compared to 2018. Other income, net was $13.9 million in 2019 compared to other expense, net of $12.4 million in 2018. The change was primarily driven by $28.3 million of net realized and unrealized gains on our investments and other income and expense, including our share of income or loss from our equity method investments, as well as a $24.6 million gain related to an equity method investment that was acquired by a third party in 2019. Partially offsetting these amounts were impairment charges of $27.8 million recorded during 2019.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
2020 Compared to 2019. The benefit from income taxes totaled $97.2 million in 2020 compared to a provision for income taxes of $262.6 million in 2019. The benefit from income taxes was primarily due to the five-year net operating loss carryback provision of the CARES Act accrued for in 2020. See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
2019 Compared to 2018. The provision for income taxes increased $198.7 million, or 311%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to a remeasurement of uncertain tax positions relating to the valuation of our international intellectual property that was previously sold to a subsidiary. See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Selected Quarterly Financial Data
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for each of the quarterly periods for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. These unaudited quarterly results of operations have been prepared on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the financial information set forth in the table below reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for the fair statement of results of operations for these periods. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future, and the results of a particular quarter or other interim period are not necessarily indicative of the results for a full year. You should read the following unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Quarterly Unaudited Consolidated Statements of Operations
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2)For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $868.5 million of fair value remeasurement on our warrants issued in connection with our second lien loan, the majority of which was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020. Refer to Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Quarterly Unaudited Consolidated Statements of Operations, as a Percentage of Revenue
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In December 2020, upon the completion of our IPO, we received net proceeds of $3.7 billion after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $79.3 million and offering expenses of $9.8 million. We used a portion of these net proceeds to satisfy the tax withholding and remittance obligations of approximately $1.6 billion related to the settlement of our outstanding RSUs in connection with our IPO.
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $5.5 billion and marketable securities of $0.9 billion, which included $1.2 billion and $0.2 billion, respectively, held by foreign subsidiaries. Cash and cash equivalents consist of checking and interest-bearing accounts and highly-liquid securities with an original maturity of 90 days or less. Marketable securities consist of corporate debt securities, mutual funds, highly-liquid debt instruments of the U.S. government and its agencies, and certificates of deposit. These amounts do not include funds of $2.2 billion as of December 31, 2020 that we held for bookings in advance of guests completing check-ins that we record separately on our balance sheet in funds receivable and amounts held on behalf of customers with a corresponding liability in funds payable and amounts payable to customers.
Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities held outside the United States may be repatriated, subject to certain limitations, and would be available to be used to fund our domestic operations. However, repatriation of such funds may result in additional tax liabilities. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances in the United States are sufficient to fund our working capital needs in the United States.
Loan Agreements
In April 2020, we entered into a $1.0 billion First Lien Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “First Lien Credit Agreement,” and the loans thereunder, the “First Lien Loan”), resulting in proceeds of $961.4 million, net of debt discount and issuance costs. The loan is due and payable in April 2025. The underlying loan can be repaid in whole or in part prior to April 2025 at our option, subject to applicable prepayment premiums and make-whole premiums. Beginning in September 2020, we are required to repay the First Lien Loan in quarterly installments equal to 0.25% of the $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the First Lien Loan, with the remaining principal amount payable on the maturity date. Interest on the First Lien Loan is payable monthly or quarterly in arrears at our option depending on the chosen per annum interest rate equal to (i) in the case of LIBOR borrowings, 7.5% plus the London interbank offered rate (customarily defined, with LIBOR replacement provisions consistent with the April 2019 Alternative Reference Rates Commission recommended fallback language for syndicated loans, “LIBOR”), subject to a floor of 1%, or (ii) in the case of base rate borrowings, 6.5% plus the greatest of (a) the prime rate, (b) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%, and (c) LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1%, in each case subject to a floor of 2%.
In April 2020, we entered into a $1.0 billion Second Lien Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “Second Lien Credit Agreement,” and the loans thereunder, the “Second Lien Loan”), resulting in proceeds of $967.5 million, net of debt discount and issuance costs. The loan is due and payable in July 2025. The underlying loan can be repaid in whole or in part prior to July 2025 at our option, subject to applicable prepayment premiums and make-whole premiums and the priority of lenders under the First Lien Credit Agreement over any proceeds we receive from the sale of collateral. Interest on the Second Lien Loan is payable monthly or quarterly in arrears at our option depending on the chosen per annum interest rate equal to (i) in the case of LIBOR borrowings, 10% plus LIBOR, in each case subject to a floor of 1%, or (ii) in the case of base rate borrowings, 9% plus the greatest of (a) the prime rate, (b) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%, and (c) LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1%, subject to a floor of 3%. In addition, at our election, payment-in-kind interest up to 5.5% per annum may be paid by increasing the principal amount of the Second Lien Loan by such amount.
In connection with the Second Lien Loan, we issued warrants to purchase 7,934,794 shares of Class A common stock with an initial exercise price of $28.355 per share, subject to adjustments upon the occurrence of certain specified events, to the Second Lien Loan lenders. The warrants expire on April 17, 2030 and the exercise price can be settled in cash or in net shares at the holder’s option. The fair value of the warrants of $116.6 million at issuance was recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet, and the warrant liability is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date as long as the warrants remain outstanding and unexercised with changes in fair value recorded in other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the warrant totaled $985.2 million, or an increase in liability of $868.5 million since their issuance in April 2020.
The First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement include customary conditions to borrowing, events of default, and covenants, including those that restrict our and our subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, create or incur liens, merge or consolidate with other companies, liquidate or dissolve, sell or transfer assets, pay dividends or make distributions, make acquisitions, investments, loans or advances, or payments and prepayments of junior or unsecured indebtedness, subject to certain exceptions. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants of the First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement.
2020 Credit Facility
In November 2020, we entered into a $500.0 million five-year senior secured revolving Credit and Guarantee Agreement (the “Revolving Credit Agreement”), which provides for an initial borrowing commitment by a group of lenders led by Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc. of $500.0 million (the “2020 Credit Facility”). The 2020 Credit Facility provides a $200.0 million sub-limit for the issuance of letters of credit. The 2020 Credit Facility has a commitment fee of 0.15% per annum on any undrawn amounts, payable quarterly in arrears. Interest on borrowings is equal to (i) in the case of LIBOR borrowings, 1.5% plus LIBOR, subject to a floor of 0%, or (ii) in the case of base rate borrowings, 0.5% plus the greatest of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%, (b) the prime rate, and (c) LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1%, in each case subject to a floor of 1%.
The Revolving Credit Agreement includes customary conditions to borrowing, events of default, and covenants, including a minimum liquidity covenant requiring us to have liquidity of at least $200.0 million as of the last day of each fiscal quarter and those that restrict our and our subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, create or incur liens, merge or consolidate with other companies, liquidate or dissolve, sell or transfer assets, pay dividends or make distributions, subject to certain exceptions.
As of December 31, 2020, the principal amount of the borrowings outstanding under the First Lien Loan and Second Lien Loan totaled $1,995.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding on the 2020 Credit Facility and outstanding letters of credit totaled approximately $21.4 million.
2016 Credit Facility
In April 2020, we terminated our 2016 Credit Facility, which provided an initial borrowing commitment by a group of lenders led by Bank of America, N.A. of $1.0 billion. The 2016 Credit Facility also provided a $100.0 million sub-limit for the issuance of letters of credit. The 2016 Credit Facility had a commitment fee of 0.125% per annum on any undrawn amounts. Outstanding borrowings bore interest at a fluctuating rate per annum equal to the highest of (i) the federal funds effective rate plus one-half of 1.00%, (ii) the rate of interest in effect for such day by Bank of America as its “prime rate,” or (iii) the eurocurrency rate for one month plus 1.00%.
As of December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding on the 2016 Credit Facility and outstanding letters of credit totaled $53.0 million. The 2016 Credit Facility contained customary affirmative and negative covenants, including restrictions on our and certain of our subsidiaries’ ability to incur debt and liens, undergo fundamental changes, and pay dividends or other distributions, as well as certain financial covenants. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2019. On April 17, 2020, we terminated the 2016 Credit Facility. Certain letters of credit under the 2016 Credit Facility were transferred to new issuers upon the termination of the 2016 Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, letters of credit formerly under the 2016 Credit Facility totaled $32.9 million and were collateralized by $33.8 million of restricted cash on the consolidated balance sheet.
We believe that our current available cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our operational cash needs for the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements, however, will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our growth, headcount, ability to attract and retain hosts and guests on our platform, capital expenditures, acquisitions, introduction of new products and offerings, timing and extent of spending to support our efforts to develop our platform, and expansion of sales and marketing activities. Additionally, we may in the future raise additional capital or incur additional indebtedness to continue to fund our strategic initiatives. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may seek to raise additional funds at any time through equity, equity-linked arrangements, and/or debt, which may not be available on favorable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired and at reasonable rates, our business, results of operations, and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. We expect our capital expenditures in 2021 will be higher than that of 2020, but significantly lower than 2019. The majority of our expected investments are related to office improvements in North America, many of which were delayed in 2020.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for 2020 was $629.7 million. Our net loss for 2020 was $4.6 billion, adjusted for non-cash charges, primarily consisting of $3.0 billion of stock-based compensation expense, $868.5 million of fair value remeasurement on warrants issued in connection with a term loan agreement entered into in April 2020, $125.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $107.7 million of bad debt expense, and $82.1 million of impairment charges of investments. Additional uses of cash resulted from changes in working capital, including a $267.0 million decrease in unearned fees resulting from fewer bookings on our platform due to COVID-19.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 was $222.7 million. Our net loss for 2019 was $674.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges, primarily consisting of $114.2 million of depreciation and amortization, $97.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $77.1 million of bad debt expense. Additional sources of cash flows resulted from changes in working capital, including a $547.7 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities resulting from increased spending and headcount growth, as well as a $176.3 million increase in unearned fees resulting from increased bookings on our platform. The primary use of operating cash was a $186.4 million increase in prepaids and other assets associated with the growth in our operations.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2018 was $595.6 million. Our net loss for 2018 was $16.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges, primarily consisting of $82.4 million of depreciation and amortization, $53.9 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $49.0 million of bad debt expense. Additional sources of cash flows resulted from changes in working capital, including a $348.1 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities resulting from increased spending and headcount growth, as well as a $145.9 million increase in unearned fees resulting from increased bookings on our platform. The primary use of operating cash was a $102.8 million increase in prepaids and other assets associated with the growth in our operations.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was $79.6 million, which was primarily provided by proceeds resulting from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $1.3 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively, partially offset by cash used to purchase marketable securities of $3.0 billion and property and equipment of $37.4 million.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was $347.2 million, which was primarily used to purchase marketable securities of $1.0 billion and property and equipment of $125.5 million, to fund acquisitions of $192.1 million, and to make equity investments in privately-held companies of $208.2 million. These uses were partially offset by proceeds resulting from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $609.4 million and $551.6 million, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2018 was $668.2 million, which was primarily used to purchase marketable securities of $1.3 billion and property and equipment of $90.6 million, to fund acquisitions of $31.3 million, and to make equity investments in privately-held companies of $28.9 million. These uses were partially offset by proceeds resulting from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $555.2 million and $201.3 million, respectively.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $2.9 billion, primarily reflecting proceeds of $3.7 billion from the issuance of Class A common stock upon IPO, net of underwriting discounts and offering costs, $1.9 billion from the issuance of long-term debt and warrants, net of issuance costs, partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 billion for taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards and $1.0 billion in funds payable and amounts payable to customers.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 was $854.6 million, reflecting the change in funds payable and amounts payable to customers of $848.7 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $5.9 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2018 was $140.5 million, primarily reflecting the change in funds payable and amounts payable to customers of $117.6 million, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $16.0 million, and reimbursements for improvements we made at leased office facilities of $6.9 million.
Effect of Exchange Rates
The effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash on our consolidated statements of cash flows relates to certain of our assets, principally cash balances held on behalf of hosts and guests, that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of certain of our subsidiaries. During 2020, we recorded a $134.1 million increase in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash primarily due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar. During 2019 and 2018, we recorded a $25.3 million and a $158.9 million reduction in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash, respectively, primarily due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. The impact of exchange rate changes on cash balances can serve as a natural hedge for the effect of exchange rates on our liabilities to our guests and hosts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we include limited indemnification provisions under certain agreements with parties with whom we have commercial relations of varying scope and terms. Under these contracts, we may indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party in connection with breach of the agreements, or intellectual property infringement claims made by a third party, including claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that such marks are applicable to its performance under the subject agreement. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential loss under these indemnification provisions due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, no significant costs have been incurred, either individually or collectively, in connection with our indemnification provisions.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors, executive officers and certain other employees that require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, executive officers, or employees.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Excludes income tax matters as we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows related to uncertain tax positions. For further discussion of income taxes, refer to Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(2)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under operating lease obligations, excluding short-term leases. Refer to Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(3)Noncancelable purchase commitments include amounts related to our commercial agreement with a data hosting services provider, pursuant to which we committed to spend an aggregate of at least $1.2 billion for vendor services through 2027.
(4)Consists of two separate loan agreements entered into in April 2020, including principal and interest. Refer to Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. Amounts represent the future principal and interest payments based on contractual interest rates.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, which we adopted as of January 1, 2018 on a full retrospective basis. We generate substantially all of our revenue from facilitating guest stays at accommodations offered by hosts on the Airbnb platform. We consider both hosts and guests to be our customers. Our revenue is comprised of service fees from our customers. Our single performance obligation is identified as the facilitation of a stay, which occurs upon the completion of a check-in event. Revenue is recognized at a point in time when the performance obligation is satisfied upon check-in.
We evaluate the presentation of revenue on a gross versus net basis based on whether or not we are the principal in the transaction (gross) or whether we arrange for other parties to provide the service to guests and are the agent (net) in the transaction. We determined that we do not control the right to use the accommodations provided by us either before or after completion of our service. Accordingly, we concluded that we are acting in an agent capacity and revenue is presented net reflecting the service fees received from our customers to facilitate a stay.
Revenue is presented net of certain payments we make to customers as part of our referral programs and marketing promotions, collectively referred to as our incentive programs, and refund activities. The payments are generally in the form of coupon credits to be applied toward future bookings or as cash refunds. We encourage the use of our platform and attract new customers through our incentive programs. Under the referral program, the referring party (“referrer”) earns a coupon when the new host or guest (“referee”) completes their first stay on our platform. We record the incentive as a liability at the time the incentive is earned by the referrer with the corresponding charge recorded to sales and marketing expense. Any amounts paid in excess of the fair value of the referral service received are recorded as a reduction of revenue. Through marketing promotions, we issue customer coupon credits to encourage the use of our platform. After a customer redeems such incentives, we record a reduction to revenue at the date we record the corresponding revenue transaction. From time to time, we issue refunds to customers in the form of cash or credits to be applied toward a future booking. We reduce the transaction price by the estimated amount of the payments by applying the most likely outcome method based on known facts and circumstances and historical experience. These refunds are recorded as a reduction to revenue.
We evaluate whether the cumulative amount of payments made to customers that are not in exchange for a distinct good or service received from a customer exceeds the cumulative revenue earned since inception of the customer relationship. Any cumulative payments in excess of cumulative revenue are presented as operating expenses in our consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have granted stock-based awards consisting primarily of stock options, restricted common stock, and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to employees, members of our board of directors, and non-employees. We estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires certain subjective inputs and assumptions, including the fair value of our common stock, the expected term, risk-free interest rates, expected stock price volatility, and expected dividend yield of our common stock. The fair value of stock options is recognized as stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
These assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, other than the fair value of our common stock (see the subsection titled “- Common Stock Valuations” below), are estimated as follows:
•Expected term. We estimate the expected term based on the simplified method.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
•Expected volatility. We estimate the volatility of our common stock on the date of grant based on the average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly-traded companies.
•Expected dividend yield. Expected dividend yield is zero, as we have not paid and do not anticipate paying dividends on our common stock.
We continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility and expected term utilized in our stock-based compensation expense calculation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimates of expected volatility and expected term, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Restricted Stock Units
The fair value of RSUs is estimated based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. Substantially all of our RSUs vest upon the satisfaction of both a service-based vesting condition and a liquidity-based vesting condition. In November 2019, we also began granting RSUs with a service-based vesting condition only. The service-based vesting condition for the majority of these awards is
satisfied over four years, generally on or around each of February 25, May 25, August 25, and November 25. The liquidity-based vesting condition for RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO Registration Statement on December 9, 2020.
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards based on the estimated fair value of the award. Prior to our IPO in December 2020, no stock-based compensation expense had been recognized for RSUs with both service-based and liquidity-based vesting conditions because the liquidity-based vesting condition had not been probable of being satisfied. Upon our IPO in December 2020, we recorded a cumulative one-time stock-based compensation expense of $2.8 billion, determined using the grant-date fair values. As of December 31, 2020, the total unrecognized compensation cost related to RSUs was $1.0 billion, which we expect to recognize over the remaining weighted-average period of approximately 1.9 years.
Common Stock Valuations
Subsequent to our IPO in December 2020, the fair value of common stock is determined on the grant date using the closing price of our Class A common stock.
Prior to our IPO, given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised its reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of fair value of our common stock underlying the stock options and RSUs, including:
•independent third-party valuations of our common stock;
•the prices at which others have purchased our redeemable convertible preferred stock in arm’s-length transactions;
•the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•our financial condition, results of operations, and capital resources;
•the likelihood and timing of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of the company, given prevailing market conditions;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•our estimates of future financial performance;
•valuations of comparable companies;
•the hiring or loss of key personnel;
•the status of our development, product introduction, and sales efforts;
•industry information, such as market growth and volume and macro-economic events; and
•additional objective and subjective factors relating to our business.
To determine the fair value of our common stock, we first determined our enterprise value and then allocated that enterprise value to our common stock and common stock equivalents. Our enterprise value was estimated using two generally accepted approaches: the income approach and the market approach.
The income approach estimates enterprise value based on the estimated present value of future cash flows the business is expected to generate over its remaining life. The estimated present value is calculated using a discount rate reflective of the risks associated with an investment in a similar company in a similar industry or having a similar history of revenue growth. The market approach measures the value of a business through an analysis of recent sales or offerings of comparable investments or assets, and in our case, focused on comparing us to a group of our peer companies. In applying this method, valuation multiples are derived from historical operating data of the peer company group. We then apply multiples to our operating data to arrive at a range of indicated values of the company.
For each valuation, we prepared a financial forecast to be used in the computation of the value of invested capital for both the income approach and market approach. The financial forecast considered our past results and expected future financial performance. The risk associated with achieving this forecast was assessed in selecting the appropriate discount rate. There is inherent uncertainty in these estimates as the assumptions used are highly subjective and subject to changes as a result of new operating data and economic and other conditions that impact our business.
As an additional indicator of fair value, we provided weighting to arm’s-length transactions involving issuances of our securities near the respective valuation dates in connection with acquisitions.
Lodging Tax Obligations
Some states, cities, and localities in the United States and elsewhere in the world impose transient occupancy or lodging accommodations taxes (“lodging taxes”) on the use or occupancy of lodging accommodations or other traveler services. We collect and remit lodging taxes in more than 29,800 jurisdictions on behalf of our hosts, and lodging taxes are primarily collected in the United States. Such lodging taxes are generally remitted to tax jurisdictions within a 30 to 90-day period following the end of each month.
In jurisdictions where we do not collect and remit lodging taxes, the responsibility for collecting and remitting these taxes, if applicable, generally rests with hosts. We estimate liabilities for a certain number of jurisdictions with respect to state, city, and local taxes related to lodging where we believe it is probable that Airbnb could be held jointly liable with hosts for collecting and remitting such taxes and the related amounts can be reasonably estimated. Our accrued obligations related to lodging taxes, including estimated penalties and taxes, totaled $138.4 million and $52.9 million as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, respectively, and changes to this reserve are recorded in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
We are currently involved in a number of lawsuits brought by certain states and localities involving the payment of lodging taxes. These jurisdictions are asserting that we are liable or jointly liable with hosts to collect and remit lodging taxes. These lawsuits are in various stages and we continue to vigorously defend these claims. We believe that the statutes at issue impose a lodging tax obligation on the person exercising the taxable privilege of providing accommodations, our hosts. The ultimate resolution of these lawsuits cannot be determined at this time.
Evaluating potential outcomes for lodging taxes is inherently uncertain and requires us to utilize various judgments, assumptions and estimates in determining our reserves. A variety of factors could affect our potential obligation for collecting and remitting such taxes which include, but are not limited to, whether we determine, or any tax authority asserts, that we have a responsibility to collect lodging and related taxes on either historic or future transactions; the introduction of new ordinances and taxes which subject our operations to such taxes; or the ultimate resolution of any historic claims that may be settled through negotiation. Accordingly, the ultimate resolution of lodging taxes may be greater or less than reserve amounts we have established.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and foreign jurisdictions. We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. We account for uncertainty in tax positions by recognizing a tax benefit from uncertain tax positions when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination. Evaluating our uncertain tax positions, determining our provision for (benefit from) income taxes, and evaluating the impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, are inherently uncertain and require making judgments, assumptions, and estimates.
While we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for (benefit from) income taxes and the effective tax rate in the period in which such determination is made.
The provision for (benefit from) income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves as well as the related net interest and penalties. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the United States Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities that may assert assessments against us. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations and assessments to determine the adequacy of our provision for (benefit from) income taxes.
Goodwill and Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. We have one reporting unit. We test goodwill for impairment at least annually, in the fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. As a result of the goodwill impairment assessment, management concluded goodwill was not impaired as of December 31, 2020 and does not believe that its reporting unit is at risk of failing the impairment test since the fair value of the reporting unit substantially exceeded the carrying value.
Long-lived assets that are held and used by us are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability of long-lived assets is based on an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows resulting from the use of the asset group and its eventual disposition. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, we recognize impairment to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. We determine fair value through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values, and third-party independent appraisals.
Any impairments to right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, leasehold improvements, or other assets as a result of a sublease, abandonment, or other similar factor are initially recognized when a decision to do so is made and recorded as an operating expense. Similar to other long-lived assets, management tests ROU assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets. For lease assets, such circumstances would include subleases that do not fully recover the costs of the associated leases or a decision to abandon the use of all or part of an asset. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $35.8 million of ROU asset impairment charges within restructuring charges in the consolidated statement of operations.
Significant judgment and estimates are required in assessing impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets, including identifying whether events or changes in circumstances require an impairment assessment, estimating future cash flows, and determining appropriate discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based on assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.