ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of ACCO Brands Corporation and the accompanying notes contained in Item 8. of this report. The following discussion and analysis are for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the same period in 2019 unless otherwise stated. For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with the same period in 2018, please refer to "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" included in Part II, Item 7. of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") on February 27, 2020.
Overview of the Company
ACCO Brands designs, markets, and manufactures well-recognized consumer, school, technology and office products. Our widely known brands include AT-A-GLANCE®, Barrilito®, Derwent®, Esselte®, Five Star®, Foroni®, GBC®, Hilroy®, Kensington®, Leitz®, Marbig®, Mead®, NOBO®, PowerA®, Quartet®, Rapid®, Rexel®, Swingline®, Tilibra®, TruSens® and Wilson Jones®. Approximately 75 percent of our sales come from brands that occupy the No. 1 or No. 2 position in the product categories in which we compete. Our top 12 brands represented $1.3 billion of our 2020 net sales. We distribute our products through a wide variety of retail and commercial channels to ensure that our products are readily and conveniently available for purchase by consumers and other end-users, wherever they prefer to shop. These channels include mass retailers, e-tailers, discount, drug/grocery and variety chains; warehouse clubs; hardware and specialty stores; independent office product dealers; office superstores; wholesalers; contract stationers, technology specialty businesses, and our direct-to-consumer channel. Our products are sold primarily in the U.S., Europe, Brazil, Australia, Canada, and Mexico. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 44 percent of our net sales were in the U.S.
ACCO Brands is in the midst of a substantive transformation of its business. Today we are a global enterprise focused on developing innovative branded consumer and technology products for use in businesses, schools, and homes. Sales in the commercial channels have been declining for several years, and customers within the channel have been consolidating. Therefore, we have refocused our business to sell more in the mass merchant, e-commerce and technology channels to increase growth and profitability and to reduce reliance on declining customers and commoditized product categories. The commercial channel was also significantly impacted by COVID-19 in 2020. As a result of both of these factors, our top five customers represented 34 percent of our sales in 2020, compared with 43 percent in 2016.
We have been strategically transforming our business to be more consumer- and brand-centric, product differentiated, and geographically diverse. We are successfully achieving this transformation through both organic initiatives and acquisitions. Organically, we have grown our Kensington® computer accessories offerings and entered the wellness category with TruSens® branded air purifiers, which we plan to expand over the next few years. ACCO remains a leading supplier of school products, including our top-selling Five Star® line of school notebooks, laminating machines, and stapling and punching products, among others. We have refreshed most of our line of shredders in EMEA over the past three years, improving consumer designs. This refresh includes a new line of personal shredders to capitalize on the work-from-home environment. Shredder sales have remained strong, and we plan to leverage our platforms globally. During 2020, EMEA also launched organization and storage products for home offices under the Leitz® WOW and Leitz® Cosy brands.
Our approach to acquisitions has been focused on consolidation, geographic expansion, and adjacency opportunities that meet our strategic and financial criteria. Strategically, we are focusing on categories or geographies that provide opportunities for growth, leading brands, and channel diversity. We have made five acquisitions over the past five years. These acquisitions have meaningfully expanded our portfolio of well-known brands, enhanced our competitive position from both a product and channel perspective, and added scale to our operations. As a result, our foreign businesses contributed over half of our sales in 2020, up from 43 percent in 2016.
Our most recent acquisition of PowerA in late 2020 is about accelerating growth and entering into an attractive consumer product adjacency of third-party video game controllers, power charging stations, and headsets. The addition of PowerA will meaningfully improve our organic sales growth and profitability and increase our presence in faster growing mass and e-commerce channels. PowerA is expected to provide strong double-digit sales growth in the U.S., as well as opportunities for expansion internationally, particularly in Europe. It greatly advances our strategic shift toward consumer, school and technology products as more than half of our sales will now come from these product categories, which offer faster growing
demand. On a pro forma basis, including full year PowerA sales for 2020, computer and gaming products would represent approximately 22 percent of our sales.
Our leading product category positions provide the scale to invest in marketing and product innovation to drive profitable growth. We now expect to grow in mature markets in consumer, technology, and adjacent categories driven by new product development. We will also continue to grow in emerging markets once the impact of COVID-19 subsides in Latin America and parts of Asia, the Middle East, and Eastern Europe. In all of our markets, we see opportunities for sales growth through share gains, channel and geographic expansion, and product enhancements.
We generate strong operating cash flow, and will continue to leverage our cost structure through acquisitions, synergies and productivity savings to drive long-term profit and operating cash flow improvement.
Overview of 2020 Performance
As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, "COVID-19 impacts" include the operational, financial, and other effects on ACCO Brands, our customers and end users of our products, of school and business closures, work from home, remote and hybrid learning, government orders and manufacturing, distribution, supply chain and other disruptions resulting from COVID-19, and the actions ACCO Brands, our customers and end users have taken in response to the pandemic, including actions we have taken to manage our inventory and credit risk under the circumstances.
The COVID-19 impacts on our business have varied and continue to vary significantly by geographic region and country depending upon a range of factors, including how seriously the pandemic is affecting public health in the country and whether and to what degree businesses and schools are open, the general seasonality of our business in that country, the nature and level of government support, and the channel structure. During 2020, all segments were impacted by COVID-19, but EMEA experienced lower impacts and our International segment experienced, and continues to experience, the highest impacts, largely in Latin America due to the seriousness of the pandemic and the dependence of our Brazilian and Mexican businesses on the sale of school products. Many schools and offices in Latin America have been closed since the onset of the pandemic and access to online learning is limited. In North America, following good sell-in of back-to-school products in the second quarter, our third quarter sales were adversely affected by weaker sell-out.
Our net sales declined $300.5 million, or 15.4 percent in 2020 primarily from COVID-19 impacts. Those impacts vary based upon the channel.
Operating income declined 42.7 percent, primarily due to the lower sales, partially offset by Company-wide cost reductions and government assistance in certain countries, generally in return for maintaining employment, pay and benefits. Foreign exchange had a minimal impact on sales. From a net profit perspective, foreign exchange was unfavorable by $0.8 million.
Operating cash inflow for 2020 was $119.2 million compared with last year's operating cash inflow of $203.9 million. The $84.7 million year-over-year difference was due to lower net income. Operating cash flow in 2020 was used to fund:
COVID-19 Impact
COVID-19 and the actions being taken by national, state and local governments, businesses, schools and others to address it (including work from home, quarantines, travel restrictions, business and school closures, remote and hybrid learning, and cancellations of, and limitations on, public gatherings) have caused and continue to cause significant disruptions to normal business operations and have had, and are expected to continue to have, significant adverse impacts on our customers and end-users worldwide. Similarly, our business, sales, earnings, and results of operations have been and will continue to be materially adversely affected by these events, as well as the current and expected continued negative impact on the global economy. We expect that uncertainties regarding when the risks of the pandemic will subside and how geographies, distribution channels and consumer behaviors will evolve over time in response to the pandemic will continue. We expect the Company to be in a stronger competitive position after the pandemic because of our strong brands, more diversified and healthier channels, investments in innovative products, solid financial position, and disciplined execution.
We are assessing likely changes to consumer behavior post pandemic and will continue to adjust our business and product strategy to align with evolving consumer preferences. These consumer changes will likely include: more purchases through online and convenience channels and less through specialty channels; more working, education, and playing at home; more awareness of physical and mental health issues and searching for ways to improve both; and more emphasis on local products and services.
These consumer behavior modifications are likely to lead us to: continue to develop and improve our direct to consumer capabilities; make additional investments in such product categories as wellness, video gaming, computer accessories, school, arts and crafts, and other products for working, education and playing from home; change colorways from office to home colors; and implement smaller pack sizes to facilitate efficient shipments of consumer-sized product quantities.
Health and Safety of Our People
Our top priority is the health and safety of our employees and we continue to follow the modified operating procedures we implemented in 2020 to address their safety. We will continue to modify our operations based on local conditions and consistent with government mandates regarding employee health and safety.
Since the onset of the pandemic, most of our office and administrative employees continued to work from home, but many employees outside North America, particularly in EMEA and Australia, began returning to work in our offices. We have implemented modifications to our normal office procedures similar to those used at our plants and distribution facilities to protect the health and safety of our employees returning to our office locations.
Facilities and Supply Chain
During the first quarter of 2020, COVID-19 impacted our Chinese supply chain, which resulted in some product availability issues that were resolved early in the second quarter. We had no significant supply chain issues in meeting our back-to-school orders in North America. Throughout 2020, we continued manufacturing and shipping at reduced levels based on lower demand in our North America and International segments.
During the fourth quarter, we experienced disruption in our supply chain due to a shortage of available ocean shipping containers in China, as well as delays at ports of arrival due to labor shortages and inefficiencies resulting from the impact of COVID-19. We expect they will continue to affect our supply chain in 2021. This resulted in a lack of product availability, higher inbound freight costs, and customer fines for late deliveries. It remains uncertain when these supply chain impacts will be resolved and to what extent they may negatively impact sales. There can be no assurance that there will not be future disruptions as a result of COVID-19.
Cost Reductions
To begin to address the financial impact of the pandemic on our results of operations, we initially implemented temporary cost-cutting initiatives to better align our cost structure with the expected decline in 2020 sales. Effective July 1, 2020, we reinstated employee salaries, which had been reduced as one of the temporary measures taken early in the year. Most employees have returned from temporary furloughs, and 2020 merit increases originally scheduled for April took effect in December. However, suspension of matching contributions for the U.S. 40l(k) continued through year end, but were reinstated for 2021. Likewise, actions to reduce discretionary spending, delay hiring and curtail non-essential capital spending remain in effect and we continue to manage the number of employees working in our manufacturing and distribution facilities based upon demand. Finally, we implemented more permanent structural changes that are necessary in light of the anticipated longer-term
impacts of COVID-19 on our business. Our worldwide headcount was down approximately 900 people, or 13 percent, compared with year end 2019. These cost reduction actions, when combined with our normal productivity savings, reduced costs approximately $83.0 million for the year. We continue to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on our business and expect to make additional structural changes and take associated restructuring charges.
Where we qualify, we have taken full advantage of government assistance available to employers in the countries outside the U.S. Most of this assistance is designed to encourage and enable companies to sustain employment, including pay and working conditions of employees, by providing cash benefits to employers. During 2020, we received $8.6 million in government assistance to offset the payroll and other costs of retaining our employees. This assistance was accounted for on a cash-received basis. As the pandemic appears to be abating in some regions, these government assistance programs are being reduced or eliminated and there can be no assurance that government assistance programs will continue or that we will continue to meet the performance criteria to obtain benefits.
There can be no assurance that these cost-savings measures, and any additional cost-savings measures we may implement in the future, will be sufficient to offset the current and future adverse financial impacts of COVID-19 on our business, results of operation or financial condition.
Working Capital
We are monitoring our working capital, including accounts receivable and inventory. We have and are continuing to experience an increased level of late payments and potential bad debts in certain geographies as our customers deal with the COVID-19 impacts on their businesses. In 2020, our bad debt expense was $8.4 million, $7.1 million higher than in 2019. We are actively managing our receivables and have restricted and will continue to restrict our own sales if necessary to mitigate our risk. In addition, the drop in demand has increased the need to make additional provisions for slow moving inventory. In 2020, we had a $16.9 million charge for inventory provisions, $1.2 million higher than in the prior year. The higher charge is a result of a combination of $4.0 million for additional slow moving inventory, partly offset by $3.0 million lower dated product provisions that mainly impacted the North America segment. We anticipate that these trends for increased bad debt and inventory provisions will continue.
Outlook
For 2021, we expect the business impacts from COVID-19 will continue to vary significantly by geographic region and country depending upon a range of factors, including how seriously the pandemic is affecting public health in the country and whether and to what degree businesses and schools are open, the general seasonality of our business in that country, the nature and level of government support, and the channel structure.
We have limited visibility into 2021, but excluding PowerA, which will benefit each quarter, we expect overall demand in the first quarter to be down relative to 2020, especially for commercial products and for back-to-school products in Latin America. There is great uncertainty as to how the recent variants in COVID-19 will impact potential sales outcomes for 2021 and beyond. We are hopeful that as mass vaccinations roll out, we will see reduced impacts from COVID-19, particularly in the second half of 2021. For North America, we anticipate the first half sell-in for back-to-school products will be lower than 2020 due to customers having inventory remaining from 2020; however, we anticipate a stronger sell-out in the second half of 2021 as we expect children will return to in-person education. We also anticipate an increase in our sales of commercial products when more employees return to their offices. For Latin America, while we anticipate some additional return to schools and offices in 2021, we believe that this will happen gradually and be determined locally. We anticipate a continued improvement in comparable year-on-year seasonal demand that will vary by channel and geography, from the second quarter of 2021 into 2022.
We expect that the pandemic will continue to materially and adversely affect our business, sales, and results of operations for some time, but we cannot reasonably estimate its financial impact at this time. We are also uncertain as to the magnitude of the longer-term impact on our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, customers, consumers, suppliers, industry and employees. Even after the pandemic has subsided, we may experience materially adverse impacts on our business due to any resulting economic recession or depression, a change in the competitive landscape or changes in the behavior of customers, consumers and other end users.
Acquisitions
PowerA Acquisition
Effective December 17, 2020, we completed the acquisition (the "PowerA Acquisition") of PowerA, a leading provider of third-party video gaming console accessories in North America. The preliminary purchase price was $340.0 million, plus an additional earnout of up to $55.0 million in cash, and is subject to working capital and other adjustments. The earn-out is contingent upon PowerA achieving one and two year sales and profit growth objectives. The results of PowerA are included in all three of the Company's segments effective December 17, 2020.
Indústria Gráfica Foroni Ltda. Acquisition
Effective August 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition (the "Foroni Acquisition") of Indústria Gráfica Foroni Ltda. ("Foroni"), a leading provider of Foroni® branded notebooks and paper-based school and office products in Brazil. The purchase price was $41.5 million, inclusive of working capital adjustments. We also assumed $7.6 million of debt. The Foroni Acquisition increased our share of the back-to-school market in Brazil. The results of Foroni are included in the ACCO Brands International segment effective August 1, 2019.
GOBA Internacional, S.A. de C.V. Acquisition
On July 2, 2018, we completed the acquisition (the "GOBA Acquisition") of GOBA Internacional, S.A. de C.V. ("GOBA") for a purchase price of $37.2 million, net of cash acquired and working capital adjustments. GOBA is a leading provider of Barrilito® branded school and craft products in Mexico. The acquisition increased the breadth and depth of our distribution throughout Mexico, especially with wholesalers and retailers and added a strong offering of school and craft products to our product portfolio in Mexico. The results of GOBA are included in the ACCO Brands International segment as of July 2, 2018.
For further information on the acquisitions, see "Note 3. Acquisitions" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8. of this report.
Operating Segments
The Company has three operating business segments, each of which is comprised of different geographic regions. The Company's three operating segments are as follows:
Each business segment designs, markets, sources, manufactures, and sells recognized consumer, technology and other end-user demanded branded products used in businesses, schools, and homes. Product designs are tailored to end-user preferences in each geographic region, and where possible, leverage common engineering, design, and sourcing.
Our product categories include computer and gaming accessories; storage and organization; notebooks; laminating, shredding, and binding machines; calendars; stapling; punching; dry erase boards; and do-it-yourself tools, among others. Our portfolio includes both globally and regionally recognized brands.
We distribute our products through a wide variety of retail and commercial channels to ensure that our products are readily and conveniently available for purchase by consumers and other end-users, wherever they prefer to shop. These channels include mass retailers, e-tailers, discount, drug/grocery and variety chains, warehouse clubs, hardware and specialty stores, independent office product dealers, office superstores, wholesalers, contract stationers, and specialist technology businesses. We also sell directly to commercial and consumer end-users through e-commerce sites and our direct sales organization.
Foreign Exchange Rates
Approximately 56 percent of our net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, were transacted in a currency other than the U.S. dollar. Additionally, we source approximately 60 percent of our products mainly from China, Vietnam and other Far Eastern countries using U.S. dollars. As a result, the sales, profitability and cash flow of our foreign operations which transact business in their local currency are affected by the fluctuation in foreign currency rates relative to the U.S. dollar.
Foreign exchange rates for the currencies in most of our major markets have fluctuated during the year relative to the U.S. dollar from prior-year periods. Most currencies declined in the first half of 2020, but several of our important markets local currencies strengthened versus the U.S. dollar during the second half. The weighted average impact on sales and net income were both adverse despite there being a small benefit to operating income. Changes to average exchange rates for principal currencies are detailed below:
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
(1) The Company acquired PowerA effective December 17, 2020; the results of PowerA are included as of that date.
(2) The Company acquired Foroni effective August 1, 2019; the results of Foroni are included as of that date.
Net Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales decreased primarily due to lower demand resulting from COVID-19 impacts in all three segments, primarily from office and school closures and a general economic slowdown. Adverse foreign exchange contributed $16.6 million, or 0.8 percent, to the decline. Net sales benefited from the PowerA and Foroni Acquisitions, which collectively added $24.6 million.
Cost of Products Sold
Cost of products sold includes all manufacturing, product sourcing and distribution costs, including depreciation related to assets used in the manufacturing, procurement, and distribution processes; allocation of certain information technology costs supporting those processes; inbound and outbound freight; shipping and handling costs; purchasing costs associated with materials and packaging used in the production processes, and inventory valuation adjustments.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the PowerA and Foroni Acquisitions added $21.8 million, or 1.6 percent. Foreign exchange reduced cost of products sold $13.8 million, or 1.0 percent. Excluding both acquisitions and foreign exchange, cost of products sold decreased, primarily due to lower comparable sales, which were partly offset by higher costs. The higher costs resulted from inflation and inefficiencies related to lower volume, both of which were partially offset by expense reductions and $3.4 million in government assistance, primarily provided in return for maintaining employment and wages.
Gross Profit
For the year ended December 31, 2020, foreign exchange reduced gross profit $2.8 million, or 0.4 percent, and the acquisitions contributed $2.8 million, or 0.4 percent. Excluding the acquisitions and foreign exchange, gross profit decreased primarily due to lower comparable sales and inefficiencies related to lower volume.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross profit as a percent of net sales decreased 270 basis points. Gross profit margin declined in all segments, primarily due to an unfavorable customer and product mix and lower fixed cost absorption.
Selling, General and Administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") include advertising, marketing, selling (including commissions), research and development, customer service, depreciation related to assets outside the manufacturing and distribution processes, and all other general and administrative expenses outside the manufacturing and distribution functions (e.g., finance, human resources, information technology).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, foreign exchange reduced SG&A $3.9 million, or 1.0 percent, and the acquisitions added $7.4 million, or 1.9 percent, including $4.4 million of integration and transaction costs. The prior-year period included $2.3 million in integration costs related to prior acquisitions. Excluding the acquisitions, integration and transaction costs, and foreign exchange, SG&A benefited from cost reductions and lower incentive accruals, partly offset by increases for bad debts. We received $5.2 million in government assistance, primarily provided in return for maintaining employment and wages.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A as a percentage of net sales increased, primarily due to lower net sales.
Restructuring Charges
For the year ended December 31, 2020, restructuring charges were $10.9 million. Costs associated with severance expense in North America were $6.2 million. The remainder of the severance charges were primarily in Brazil, Mexico, and Australia. Lease abandonment charges were $1.5 million related to facilities in North America. The prior-year charges were related to severance costs associated with changes in the operating structure of our North America and International segments.
Operating Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating income decreased, primarily due to lower net sales from COVID-19 impacts, which were partially offset by cost reductions. Foreign exchange benefited operating income $1.5 million, or 0.8 percent. Foroni contributed a loss of $2.7 million and PowerA added operating income of $0.4 million.
Interest Expense and Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower average debt outstanding and lower interest rates on our variable rate debt. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower cash balances being held in Brazil.
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net was an expense of $1.6 million compared with income of $1.8 million in 2019. The increase in expense was primarily due to the higher foreign exchange loss in 2020 and a lower benefit from using our Brazilian operating tax credits.
Income Tax Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $16.6 million on income before taxes of $78.6 million for an effective tax rate of 21.1 percent. The decrease in the effective rate versus 2019 was primarily due to an increase in reserves for uncertain tax positions in the prior year, the election to exclude high-taxed intangible income from the global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI") computation, and beneficial adjustments to deferred taxes resulting from statutory tax rate changes.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the high effective tax rate was primarily due to $5.6 million in additional reserves for uncertain tax positions in connection with the Brazil Tax Assessments that were recorded in the first quarter of 2019.
See "Note 12. Income Taxes - Brazil Tax Assessments" to the condensed consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8. of this report for additional details.
Net Income/Diluted Income per Share
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income decreased primarily due to lower operating income. Foreign exchange decreased net income $0.8 million, or 0.7 percent. Diluted income per share benefited from fewer outstanding shares.
Segment Net Sales and Operating Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
ACCO Brands North America
(1) Segment operating income excludes corporate costs. See "Note 18. Information on Business Segments" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8. of this report for a reconciliation of total "Segment operating income" to "Income before income tax."
(2) See reconciliation to GAAP, contained in Part II, Item 6. "Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales and comparable sales decreased primarily from lower demand due to COVID-19 impacts. The PowerA acquisition added $5.8 million. Kensington® and TruSens® branded products had strong sales growth. Back-to-school sales for the year were approximately 9.0 percent below 2019 primarily due to a reduction in the total back-to-school market as a result of the pandemic. In addition, sales of private label products and sales to certain retailers decreased. We experienced more severe COVID-19 impacts in our commercial product lines while sales to mass/retail customers decreased mainly due to lower back-to-school sales. Unfavorable foreign exchange reduced net sales $1.0 million, or 0.1 percent.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating income and operating margin decreased primarily due to lower sales related to COVID-19 impacts, cost inflation, inefficiencies related to lower volume, unfavorable customer and product mix, and increased reserves for bad debts. Restructuring charges were $7.6 million versus $5.6 million in the prior year. Partially offsetting these items were cost reductions, and $1.7 million in Canadian government assistance, primarily provided in return for maintaining employment and wages.
ACCO Brands EMEA
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales and comparable sales decreased primarily from lower demand due to COVID-19 impacts. The PowerA acquisition added $1.9 million. Favorable foreign exchange increased net sales $10.4 million, or 1.8 percent.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating income and operating margin declined primarily due to lower sales from COVID-19 impacts, inefficiencies due to lower volume, and higher reserves for inventory and bad debts. Partially offsetting these items were cost reductions and $2.8 million in government assistance, primarily provided in return for maintaining employment and wages. Foreign exchange benefited operating income $2.6 million, or 4.4 percent.
ACCO Brands International
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales and comparable sales decreased primarily as a result of lower demand related to COVID-19 impacts. The Foroni and PowerA acquisitions contributed $16.9 million, or 4.0 percent, which was more than offset by unfavorable foreign exchange of $26.0 million, or 6.2 percent.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, foreign exchange decreased operating income $1.0 million, or 2.1 percent. Foroni contributed a loss of $2.7 million. Excluding Foroni and foreign exchange, operating income decreased primarily from lower sales, inefficiencies due to lower demand, and higher bad debt expense. Partially offsetting these factors were cost reductions and $4.1 million in government assistance, primarily provided in return for maintaining employment and wages.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary liquidity needs are to support our working capital requirements, service indebtedness, fund capital expenditures, and fund acquisitions. Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows from operating activities, cash and cash equivalents held and seasonal borrowings under our $600 million multi-currency revolving credit facility (the "Revolving Facility"). As of December 31, 2020, there was $332.6 million in borrowings outstanding under the Revolving Facility ($42.2 million reported in "Current portion of long-term debt" and $290.4 million reported in "Long-term debt, net") and the amount available for borrowings was $256.8 million (allowing for $10.6 million of letters of credit outstanding on that date). We maintain adequate financing arrangements at market rates.
We are in a strong financial position with $36.6 million cash on hand and $256.8 million available for borrowings under our Revolving Facility as of the end of 2020. In connection with the PowerA acquisition, effective November 10, 2020, we amended our bank debt maintenance covenant increasing the maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio by 0.5x for each of the six fiscal quarters beginning March 31, 2021, and ending June 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, our Consolidated Leverage Ratio was approximately 4.30x. We have no debt maturities before May 2024.
Given the debt incurred in connection with our acquisition of the PowerA Acquisition, our near-term use of cash will be to fund our dividend and reduce debt. As a result, we currently do not anticipate repurchasing shares of our common stock in 2021. Our long-term strategy remains to deploy cash to fund dividends, reduce debt, make acquisitions and repurchase stock.
The $755.9 million of debt currently outstanding under our senior secured credit facilities has a weighted average interest rate of 2.61 percent as of December 31, 2020, and $375.0 million outstanding principal amount of our senior unsecured notes (the "Senior Unsecured Notes") has a fixed interest rate of 5.25 percent.
Summary of Cash Flow by Quarter and Full-Year for 2020 and 2019:
Because of the seasonality of our business, we typically generate much of our cash flow from operating activities in the third and fourth quarters, as accounts receivable are collected, and we typically use cash in the second quarter to fund working capital in order to support the North America back-to-school season. We experienced this seasonality pattern in 2020. However, we had a different cash flow pattern in 2019, with a large operating cash outflow in the first quarter and a smaller outflow in the second quarter, which resulted from our decision to purchase raw materials and finished goods inventory for the 2019 year in late 2018 to secure supply and partially mitigate the effect of anticipated inflation and tariffs. As expected and as shown above, in the third quarter of 2019 we generated significantly higher operating cash inflow than we did in 2020, due to payments for inventory having been made in earlier quarters in 2019 versus 2020. We expect our cash flow in 2021 to largely follow the timing patterns we saw in 2020, except that PowerA will use cash in the first quarter and will contribute in the later quarters.
Consolidated cash and cash equivalents were $36.6 million as of December 31, 2020, approximately $12.6 million of which was held in Brazil. Our Brazilian business is highly seasonal due to the timing of the back-to-school season, which coincides with the calendar year-end in the fourth quarter. Due to various tax laws, it is costly to transfer short-term working capital in and out of Brazil; therefore, our normal practice is to hold seasonal cash requirements in Brazil, and invest in short-term Brazilian government securities.
Debt
Recent Amendments
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a Third Amendment (the "Third Amendment") to the Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement"), dated as of January 27, 2017, among the Company, certain subsidiaries of the Company, Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, and the other lenders party thereto. Pursuant to the Third Amendment, the Credit Agreement was amended to, among other things:
•increase the maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement, as amended) from 3.75:1.00 to 4.75:1.00, stepping back down to 3.75:1.00 for the first fiscal quarter ending after June 30, 2021;
•amend the pricing based on the Company’s Consolidated Leverage Ratio, with a scaled increase in fees, effective May 1, 2020:
•reduce the Company’s capacity to incur certain other indebtedness, and impose additional limitations on certain restricted payments (other than dividends) and permitted acquisitions; and
•require that the Company pay down any amounts on the Revolving Facility when cash and cash equivalents of the loan parties exceed $100.0 million.
In connection with the PowerA Acquisition, effective November 10, 2020, the Company entered into a Fourth Amendment (the "Fourth Amendment") to the Credit Agreement, among the Company, certain subsidiaries of the Company, Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, and the other lenders party thereto. Pursuant to the Fourth Amendment, the Credit Agreement was amended to, among other things:
•provide flexibility under the permitted acquisition provisions to accommodate the acquisition of PowerA;
•further amend the maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio financial covenant by 0.50:1.00 from current levels for each of the six fiscal quarters beginning March 31, 2021 and ending June 30, 2022, as follows:
•exempt the borrowings made under the Credit Agreement, as amended, to fund the PowerA Acquisition from the Credit Agreement’s anti-cash hoarding clause.
Under the Fourth Amendment, pricing is locked at LIBOR plus 2.50 percent from the date of closing of the PowerA Acquisition until the Company publishes its financial results for the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2021, and is subject to the existing leverage-based pricing grid thereafter.
Financial Covenants
As of December 31, 2020, our Consolidated Leverage Ratio was approximately 4.30 to 1.00 versus our maximum covenant of 4.75 to 1.00. Our Interest Coverage Ratio was approximately 5.44 to 1.00 versus the minimum financial covenant of 3.00 to 1.00.
Other Covenants and Restrictions
The Credit Agreement, as amended, contains customary affirmative and negative covenants as well as events of default, including payment defaults, breach of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults, certain bankruptcy or insolvency events, certain ERISA-related events, changes in control or ownership and invalidity of any loan document. The Credit Agreement, as amended, also establishes limitations on the aggregate amount of Permitted Acquisitions and Investments (each as defined in the Credit Agreement, as amended) that the Company and its subsidiaries may make during the term of the Credit Agreement, as amended.
As of and for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company was in compliance with all applicable loan covenants under its senior secured credit facilities and the Senior Unsecured Notes.
Guarantees and Security
Generally, obligations under the Credit Agreement, as amended, are guaranteed by certain of the Company's existing and future subsidiaries, and are secured by substantially all of the Company's and certain guarantor subsidiaries' assets, subject to certain exclusions and limitations.
For further information, see "Note 4. Long-term Debt and Short-term Borrowings" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8. of this report.
Restructuring and Integration Activities
From time to time the Company may implement restructuring, realignment or cost-reduction plans and activities, including those related to integrating acquired businesses.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $10.9 million in restructuring expenses: $7.6 million of restructuring expense for our North America segment, $0.6 million for our EMEA segment, $2.6 million for our International segment, and $0.1 million for Corporate. Restructuring charges primarily related to severance costs associated with cost reduction programs in North America, Mexico, Brazil, EMEA and Australia. For further information, see "Note 11. Restructuring" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8. of this report.
In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an aggregate $4.4 million in integration and transaction expenses related to the acquisitions of PowerA and Foroni.
Cash Flow for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $119.2 million, a reduction of $84.7 million compared to cash provided by operating activities of $203.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction of $84.7 million included a reduction of net income of $44.8 million, $46.3 million of additional cash used for paying accrued expenses, including income taxes, partially offset by an increase in cash provided by net working capital of $11.2 million.
The table below shows our cash flow provided (used) by accounts receivable, inventories and accounts payable for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
•Accounts receivable was a source of cash of $101.6 million in 2020, a favorable change of $116.4 million compared to a use of cash of $14.8 million in the prior year. The $116.4 million improvement resulted primarily from the collection of 2019 receivables in early 2020 and the impact of lower sales in 2020 due to COVID-19, compared to a use of cash in the year ended December 31, 2019. Accounts receivable was a use of cash during 2019 primarily because of the receivable balance being $25.3 million higher at the end of 2019 compared to the end of 2018.
•Inventories was a source of cash of $2.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, an unfavorable change of $69.2 million when compared with the $71.4 million cash provided during the year ended December 31, 2019. This was due to the Company acquiring inventory during the fourth quarter of 2018 that would normally be acquired during 2019 in order to secure supply and to partially reduce anticipated inflation and import tariffs that went into effect during 2019. Higher levels of inventory during the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily due to lower sales volume due to COVID-19 impacts.
•Accounts payable was a use of cash of $68.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, an unfavorable change of $36.0 million when compared to a use of cash of $32.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to higher payables at the end of 2019 that were paid during 2020 and due to lower payables during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to lower demand as a result of COVID-19 impacts.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Cash used by investing activities was $354.7 million and $79.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Cash used for capital expenditures was down $17.5 million primarily due to the completion of certain IT projects during 2020. Cash used for acquisitions during 2020 was $339.4 million, which included $340.0 million for the acquisition of PowerA, partially offset by a $0.6 million purchase price reduction for the Foroni Acquisition. During 2019, cash used for the Foroni Acquisition was $41.3 million and cash used for the acquisition of certain assets of the Cumberland brand in Australia was $6.0 million.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $244.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $408.1 million, compared with cash used of $163.4 million by financing activities during the prior year. The increase of $408.1 million primarily relates to a reduction of cash used for share repurchases of $46.1 million and an increase in cash provided by our incremental net borrowings of $359.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the prior year.
Capitalization
The Company had 94.9 million and 96.4 million shares of common stock outstanding as of December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Adequacy of Liquidity Sources
Based on our 2021 business plan and current forecasts, we believe that cash flow from operations, our current cash balance and borrowings available under our Revolving Facility will be adequate to support our requirements for working capital, capital expenditures, dividend payments and debt service for the foreseeable future. Our future operating performance is dependent on many factors, some of which are beyond our control, including prevailing economic, financial and industry conditions. For further information on these risks, see "Part I, Item1A. Risk Factors."
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Financial Obligations
The Company does not have any material off-balance-sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Our contractual obligations and related payments by period as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
(1)Interest calculated at December 31, 2020, rates for variable rate debt.
(2)For further information on leases, see "Note 5. Leases" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8. of this report.
(3)Purchase obligations primarily consist of contracts and non-cancelable purchase orders for raw materials and finished goods.
(4)The U.S. Tax Act requires companies to pay a one-time Transition Toll Tax, which is payable over eight years.
(5)Other long-term liabilities consist of estimated expected employer contributions for 2021, along with estimated future payments, for pension and post-retirement plans that are not paid from assets held in a plan trust.
Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2020, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective
taxing authorities. Therefore, $45.1 million of unrecognized tax benefits have been excluded from the contractual obligations table above. For further information, see "Note 12. Income Taxes" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Part II Item 8. of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ("GAAP"). Preparation of our financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses presented for each reporting period in the financial statements and the related accompanying notes. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. We regularly review our assumptions and estimates, which are based on historical experience and, where appropriate, current business trends. We believe that the following discussion addresses our critical accounting policies, which require significant, subjective and complex judgments to be made by our management.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers in an amount reflective of the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Taxes we collect concurrent with revenue producing activities are excluded from revenue. Incidental items incurred that are immaterial in the context of the contract are expensed.
At the inception of each contract, the Company assesses the products and services promised and identifies each distinct performance obligation. To identify the performance obligations, the Company considers all products and services promised regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or implied within the contract or by standard business practices.
For our products, we transfer control and recognize a sale primarily when we either ship the product from our manufacturing facility or distribution center, or upon delivery to a customer specified location depending upon the terms in the customer agreement. In addition, we recognize revenue for private label products as the product is manufactured (or overtime) when a contract has an enforceable right to payment. For consignment arrangements, revenue is not recognized until the products are sold to the end customer.
Customer programs and incentives ("Customer Program Costs") are a common practice in our industry. We incur Customer Program Costs to obtain favorable product placement, to promote sell-through of products and to maintain competitive pricing. The amount of consideration we receive and revenue we recognize is impacted by Customer Program Costs, including sales rebates (which are generally tied to achievement of certain sales volume levels); in-store promotional allowances; shared media and customer catalog allowances; other cooperative advertising arrangements; freight allowance programs offered to our customers; allowances for discounts and reserves for returns. We recognize Customer Program Costs, primarily as a deduction to gross sales, at the time that the associated revenue is recognized. Customer Program Costs are based on management's best estimates using the most likely amount method and is an amount that is probable of not being reversed. In the absence of a signed contract, estimates are based on historical or projected experience for each program type or customer. We adjust our estimate of revenue when the most likely amount of consideration we expect to receive changes.
Inventories
Inventories are priced at the lower of cost (principally first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. When necessary, the write-down of inventory to its net realizable value is recorded for obsolete or slow-moving inventory based on assumptions about future demand and marketability of products, the impact of new product introductions and specific identification of items, such as product discontinuance or engineering/material changes. These estimates could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from actual requirements if future economic conditions, customer inventory levels or competitive conditions differ from our expectations.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are comprised primarily of indefinite-lived and amortizable intangible assets acquired and arising from the application of purchase accounting. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, but are evaluated at least annually to determine whether the indefinite useful life is appropriate. Certain of our trade names have been assigned an indefinite life as we currently anticipate that these trade names will contribute cash flows to ACCO Brands indefinitely. Amortizable intangible assets are amortized over their useful lives.
We test indefinite-lived intangibles for impairment annually, during the second quarter, and during any interim period when market or business events indicate there may be a potential adverse impact on a particular intangible. The test may be on a qualitative or quantitative basis as allowed by GAAP. We consider the implications of both external factors (e.g., market growth, pricing, competition, and technology) and internal factors (e.g., product costs, margins, support expenses, and capital investment) and their potential impact on cash flows in both the near and long term, as well as their impact on any identifiable intangible asset associated with the business. Based on recent business results, consideration of significant external and internal factors, and the resulting business projections, indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed to determine whether they are likely to remain indefinite-lived, or whether a finite life is more appropriate. In addition, based on events in the period and future expectations, management considers whether the potential for impairment exists. Finite lived intangibles are amortized over 5, 7, 10, 15, 23 or 30 years.
We performed our annual assessment, in the second quarter of 2020, on a qualitative basis, and concluded that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of any indefinite-lived intangibles was less than its carrying amounts. In addition, we have not identified a triggering event through December 31, 2020 that more likely than not would result in impairment.
Goodwill
Goodwill has been recorded on our balance sheet and represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition when compared with the fair value of the net assets acquired. The authoritative guidance on goodwill and other intangible assets requires that goodwill be tested for impairment at a reporting unit level. We have determined that our reporting units are ACCO Brands North America, ACCO Brands EMEA and ACCO Brands International.
We test goodwill for impairment annually, during the second quarter, or any interim period when market or business events indicate there may be a potential adverse impact on goodwill. As permitted by GAAP, we may perform a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test as required by GAAP. We performed our annual assessment in the second quarter of 2020, on a qualitative basis, and concluded that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit was less than its carrying amount.
If the qualitative assessment determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if it is determined that a qualitative assessment is not appropriate, we would perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test where we calculate the fair value of the reporting units. When applying a fair-value-based test, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared with its carrying value. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to a reporting unit, goodwill is considered not impaired and no further testing is required. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to a reporting unit exceeds the fair value of a reporting unit, an impairment charge is recognized; however, the loss recognized is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Given the current economic environment and the uncertainties regarding its impact on our business, there can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of our qualitative impairment testing during 2020 will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. If our assumptions regarding forecasted revenue or margin growth rates of certain reporting units are not achieved, we may be required to record impairment charges in future periods, whether in connection with our next annual impairment testing in the second quarter of fiscal year 2021 or prior to that, if a triggering event is identified outside of the quarter when the annual impairment test is performed. It is not possible at this time to determine if any such future impairment charge would result or, if it does, whether such charge would be material.
Employee Benefit Plans
We provide a range of benefits to our employees and retired employees, including pension, post-retirement, post-employment and health care benefits. We record annual amounts relating to these plans based on calculations specified by GAAP, which include various actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, assumed rates of return, mortality rate tables, compensation increases, turnover rates and health care cost trends. Actuarial assumptions are reviewed on an annual basis and modifications to these assumptions are made based on current rates and trends when it is deemed appropriate. As required by GAAP, the effect of our modifications and unrecognized actuarial gains and losses are generally recorded to a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) ("AOCI") in stockholders’ equity and amortized over future periods. We believe that the assumptions utilized in recording our obligations under the plans are reasonable based on our experience. The actuarial assumptions used to record our plan obligations could differ materially from actual results due to changing economic and market conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates or other factors which may impact the amount of retirement-related benefit expense recorded by us in future periods.
The discount rate assumptions used to determine the pension and post-retirement obligations of the benefit plans are based on a spot-rate yield curve that matches projected future benefit payments with the appropriate interest rate applicable to the timing of the projected future benefit payments. The assumed discount rates reflect market rates for high-quality corporate bonds currently available. Our discount rates were determined by considering the average of pension yield curves constructed of a large population of high quality corporate bonds. The resulting discount rates reflect the matching of plan liability cash flows to the yield curves.
For the ACCO Europe Pension Plan, the Company’s discount rate assumption methodology was based on the yield curve that uses a dataset of bonds with an average AA rating from main ratings agencies. Effective December 31, 2020, we changed our basis to estimate the discount rate assumption to the yield curve that uses a dataset of bonds rated AA by at least one of the main rating agencies, as we determined it better reflects the duration of the plan.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects management’s expectations of long-term average rates of return on funds invested based on our investment profile to provide for benefits included in the projected benefit obligations. The expected return is based on the outlook for inflation, fixed income returns and equity returns, while also considering historical returns over the last 10 years, asset allocation and investment strategy.
We estimate the service and interest components of net periodic benefit cost (income) for pension and post-retirement benefits utilizing a full yield curve approach by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used in the determination of the benefit obligation to the relevant projected cash flows.
At the end of each calendar year an actuarial evaluation is performed to determine the funded status of our pension and post-retirement obligations and any actuarial gain or loss is recognized in AOCI and then amortized into the income statement in future periods, based on the average remaining lifetime or average remaining service expected.
Pension income was $2.1 million, $2.5 million and $5.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Post-retirement income was $0.4 million, $0.2 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in pension income was due to lower expected rates of return on plan assets in our foreign pension plans.
The weighted average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 were as follows:
The weighted average assumptions used to determine net periodic benefit cost for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In 2021, we expect pension income of approximately $5.0 million and post-retirement income of approximately $0.4 million.
A 25-basis point decrease (0.25 percent) in our discount rate assumption would lead to an increase in our pension and post-retirement expense of approximately $0.3 million for 2021. A 25-basis point change in our long-term rate of return
assumption would lead to an increase or decrease in pension and post-retirement expense of approximately $1.2 million for 2021.
Pension and post-retirement liabilities of $317.1 million as of December 31, 2020, increased from $283.2 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower discount rate assumptions compared to the prior year. In addition, lower discount rates were the primary reason for the actuarial losses of $78.6 million that were recognized in 2020.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax liabilities or assets are established for temporary differences between financial and tax reporting bases and are subsequently adjusted to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Facts and circumstances may change and cause us to revise our conclusions regarding our ability to realize certain net operating losses and other deferred tax attributes.
The amount of income taxes that we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. Our estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax position is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts and circumstances existing at that time. We believe that we have adequately provided for reasonably foreseeable outcomes related to these matters. However, our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities in the period any assessments are received, revised or resolved.
Recent Accounting Standards Updates and Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
For information on recent accounting pronouncements, see "Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies, Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Adopted Accounting Standards" to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8. of this report.