ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion provides information that management believes is relevant to an understanding and assessment of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. You should read this discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations also contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Company Overview
We believe Accel is the leading distributed gaming operator in the United States on an Adjusted EBITDA basis, and a preferred partner for local business owners in the Illinois market. Accel’s business consists of the installation, maintenance and operation of gaming terminals, redemption devices that disburse winnings and contain ATM functionality, and other amusement devices which are located in authorized non-casino locations such as restaurants, bars, taverns, convenience stores, liquor stores, truck stops, and grocery stores, which are referred to collectively as “licensed establishments.” Accel also operates a small number of stand-alone ATMs in gaming and non-gaming locations. Accel has been licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board since 2012 and holds a license from the PA Board since November 2020. Accel operates 12,247 video gaming terminals across 2,435 locations in the State of Illinois as of December 31, 2020. In July 2020, the Georgia Lottery Corporation approved one of the Company's consolidated subsidiaries as a licensed operator, or a Master Licensee, which allows the Company to begin the installation and operation of coin operated amusement machines for commercial use by the public for play throughout the State of Georgia. The Company is subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations in addition to gaming regulations.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 outbreak is having a significant impact on global markets as a result of government-mandated business closures, supply chain and production disruptions, workforce restrictions, travel restrictions, reduced consumer spending and sentiment, amongst other factors, which are, individually or in the aggregate, negatively affecting the financial performance, liquidity and cash flow projections of many companies in the United States and abroad.
In response to the COVID19 outbreak, the IGB made the decision to shut down all gaming terminals across the State of Illinois starting at 9:00 p.m. on March 16, 2020 and ultimately extended the shutdown through June 30, 2020. As a result, we borrowed $65 million on our delayed draw term loan in March 2020 to increase our cash position and help preserve our financial flexibility. As COVID-19 began a resurgence in the fall, the virus spread exponentially in every geographical region (currently 11 regions) in the State of Illinois. In response, the IGB suspended all video gaming operations until further notice across the entire state of Illinois starting at 11:01 PM on Thursday November 19, 2020. Video gaming operations resumed in certain regions of the state beginning on January 16, 2021, and fully resumed in all regions on January 23, 2021. Even though video gaming operations resumed across all regions, certain regions still had government-imposed restrictions that, among other things, limited hours of operation and restricted the number of patrons allowed within in the licensed establishments.
These temporary shutdowns of Illinois video gaming impacted 148 of the 365 gaming days (or 40% of gaming days) during the year ended December 31, 2020. In light of these events and their effect on our employees and licensed establishment partners, we took action to position the Company to help mitigate the effects of the temporary cessation of operations. During the initial shutdown the Company furloughed approximately 90% of its employees and deferred certain payments to major vendors. Additionally, members of the Company's senior management decided to voluntarily forgo their base salaries until the resumption of video gaming operations. Beginning in early June, the Company started reinstating employees from furlough in anticipation of resuming operations on July 1, 2020. During the second shutdown, the Company furloughed idle staff as appropriate and deferred certain payments to major vendors.
As a result of these developments, our revenues, results of operations and cash flows have been materially affected. The situation is rapidly changing and additional impacts to the business and financial results may arise that we are not aware of currently.
In close consultation with the Illinois Department of Public Health and the governor, the IGB issued resumption protocols to guide casino and terminal operators in keeping players safe. Based on those protocols, we worked with our licensed establishment partners to, among other things:
•Follow social distancing requirements within the gaming area by moving the gaming equipment or installing spacers that meet IGB guidelines;
•determine how personal protective equipment usage requirements will be observed and enforced;
•develop procedures and schedules for cleaning, disinfecting and sanitizing the establishment as well the gaming area, including the gaming terminals; and
•proper signage to remind patrons of social distancing requirements, proper hand washing, use of sanitizers, use of personal protective equipment, and to stay at home if feeling sick.
Accel supports these measures to protect the safety of our fellow Illinois citizens, as the health and safety of players and licensed partner establishments is of paramount importance to us. We have been in constant contact with our licensed partner establishments to keep them aware of current developments and have been working with them through these difficult times.
We incurred non-recurring, one-time expenses of $1.2 million ($2.5 million of costs less recoveries under the CARES Act of $1.3 million) for the year ended December 31, 2020, for costs to provide benefits (e.g. health insurance) for furloughed employees during COVID-19 operational disruptions. These costs are included within other expenses, net. The Company also spent $2.0 million in capital costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the purchase of IGB-mandated spacers for its gaming terminals to promote social distancing requirements within the gaming area and incurred operating expenses of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to cleaning, disinfecting and sanitizing supplies.
While the IGB has announced the resumption of all video gaming activities, it is possible that it or the State of Illinois may order a shutdown by region, or a complete suspension of video gaming in the state, or institute stay-at-home, closure or other similar orders or measures in the future in response to a resurgence of COVID-19 or other events. Under the guidelines provided by the IL Department of Health and Governor’s office, the IGB has been closely monitoring Illinois' COVID-19 related statistics including the positivity rate, hospital admissions, and hospital bed availability in each region. We will continue to monitor the situation and its potential impact on our operations.
Components of Performance
Revenues
Net gaming. Net gaming revenue represents net cash received from gaming activities, which is the difference between gaming wins and losses. Net gaming revenue includes the amounts earned by the licensed establishments and is recognized at the time of gaming play.
Amusement. Amusement revenue represents amounts collected from amusement devices operated at various licensed establishments and is recognized at the point the amusement device is used.
ATM fees and other revenue. ATM fees and other revenue represents fees charged for the withdrawal of funds from Accel’s redemption devices and stand-alone ATMs and is recognized at the time of the ATM transaction.
Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Cost of revenue consists of (i) a 34% tax on net gaming revenue (such tax increased from 30% beginning on July 1, 2019 and from 33% beginning on July 1, 2020) that is payable to the IGB, (ii) an administrative fee (0.8513% currently) payable to Scientific Games International, the third-party contracted by IGB to maintain the central system to which all gaming terminals across Illinois are connected, (iii) establishment revenue share, which is defined as 50% of gross gaming revenue after subtracting the tax and administrative fee, (iv) ATM and amusement commissions payable to locations, (v) ATM and amusement fees, and (vi) licenses and permits required for the operation of gaming terminals and other equipment.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of operating expense and general and administrative (“G&A”) expense. Operating expense includes payroll and related expense for service technicians, route technicians, route security, and preventative maintenance personnel. Operating expense also includes vehicle fuel and maintenance, and non-capitalizable parts expenses. Operating expenses are generally proportionate to the number of licensed establishments and gaming terminals. G&A expense includes payroll and related expense for account managers, business development managers, marketing, and other corporate personnel. In addition, G&A expense also includes marketing, information technology, insurance, rent and professional fees.
Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the individual assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the useful life or the lease.
Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired. Route and customer acquisition costs consist of fees paid at the inception of contracts entered into with third parties and licensed video gaming establishments, which allow Accel to install and operate gaming terminals. The route and customer acquisition costs and route and customer acquisition costs payable are recorded at the net present value of the future payments using a discount rate equal to Accel’s incremental borrowing rate associated with its long-term debt. Route and customer acquisition costs are amortized on a straight-line basis beginning on the date the location goes live and amortized over the estimated life of the contract, including expected renewals.
Location contracts acquired in a business combination are recorded at fair value and then amortized as an intangible asset on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of 10 years.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net consists of interest on Accel’s current and prior credit facilities, amortization of financing fees, and accretion of interest on route and customer acquisition costs payable. Interest on the current credit facility is payable monthly on unpaid balances at the variable per annum LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin, as defined under the terms of the credit facility, ranging from 1.75% to 2.75% depending on the first lien net leverage ratio. Interest on our prior credit facility was payable monthly on unpaid balances at the variable per annum LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin, as defined under the terms of the prior credit facility, ranging from 1.70% to 2.50% depending on the ratio of total net debt to EBITDA. Interest expense, net also consists of interest income on convertible promissory notes from another terminal operator that bear interest at 3% per annum.
Income tax (benefit) expense
Income tax (benefit) expense consists mainly of taxes (receivable) payable to national, state and local authorities. Deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of the assets and liabilities.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes Accel’s results of operations on a consolidated basis for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
Total net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $316.4 million, a decrease of $112.3 million, or 26.2%, compared to the prior-year period. This decrease was driven by a decrease in net video gaming revenue of $110.1 million, or 26.8%, a decrease in ATM fees and other revenue of $1.7 million, or 20.8%, and a decrease in amusement revenue of $0.5 million, or 5.1%. The decrease in net gaming revenue is primarily attributable to the IGB mandated temporary shutdowns of Illinois gaming due to the COVID-19 outbreak which impacted 148 of the 365 gaming days (or 40% of gaming days) during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by the acquisition of Grand River Jackpot on September 16, 2019, which contributed an increase in net gaming revenue of $24.5 million during the first nine months of 2020. Excluding Grand River Jackpot, net gaming revenue decreased in 2020 by $134.6 million, or 32.8%, compared to the prior-year period, largely attributable to the previously mentioned IGB mandated temporary shutdowns, partially offset by an increase in the number of licensed establishments and gaming terminals.
Cost of revenue
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $211.1 million, a decrease of $70.9 million, or 25.1%, compared to the prior-year period. The decrease of $70.9 million was the result of the previously mentioned IGB mandated temporary shutdowns of Illinois video gaming due to the COVID-19 outbreak. The components of cost of revenue as a percentage of total revenues of 66.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher than the 65.8% for the prior-year period primarily due to the increase in the gaming tax from 33% to 34% on July 1, 2020.
General and administrative
Total general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $77.4 million, an increase of $8.1 million, or 11.7%, compared to the prior-year period. We experienced higher costs related to professional fees and stock-based compensation, partially offset by a reduction in our monthly expenses during the IGB mandated temporary shutdowns which included furloughing some of our employees.
Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment
Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21.0 million, a decrease of $5.4 million, or 20.6%, compared to the prior-year period. The decrease in depreciation and amortization is the result of a change in estimate in which we extended the useful lives of our video gaming terminals and equipment from 7 to 10 years. The impact of this change in estimate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a net decrease in depreciation expense of $7.7 million. Partially offsetting this decrease was an increased number of licensed establishments and gaming terminals. Depreciation and amortization as a percentage of revenue was 6.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 6.2% for the prior year period.
Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired
Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.6 million, an increase of $4.6 million, or 25.8%, compared to the prior-year period. The increase is primarily attributable to our business and asset acquisitions and their related performance. Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired as a percentage of revenue increased to 7.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 4.2% in the prior-year period.
Other expenses, net
Other expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $8.9 million, a decrease of $10.7 million, or 54.5%, compared to the prior-year period. The decrease was largely attributed to one-time expenses in the prior year period for the reverse recapitalization and lower fair value adjustments associated with the revaluation of contingent consideration liabilities related to acquisitions, partially offset by non-recurring, one-time expenses of $1.2 million ($2.5 million of costs less recoveries under the CARES Act of $1.3 million) for costs to provide benefits (e.g. health insurance) for furloughed employees during the COVID-19 shutdown as well as additional non-recurring costs related to public company registration statements.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.7 million, an increase of $0.8 million, or 6.6%, compared to the prior-year period primarily due to an increase in borrowings, partially offset by lower rates and interest income on the convertible notes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the weighted-average interest rate was approximately 3.3% compared to the weighted-average interest rate of approximately 4.5% for the prior year.
(Gain) loss on change in fair value of contingent earnout shares
Gain on change in fair value of contingent earnout shares for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8.5 million, an increase of $18.3 million, or 186.2%, compared to the prior-year which had a loss of $9.8 million. The increase was primarily due to the change in the market value of our A-1 common stock which is the primary input to the valuation of the contingent earnout shares.
Loss on debt extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was recorded in connection with the extinguishment of our Prior Credit Facility in November 2019. For more information on the extinguishment of our Prior Credit Facility see Liquidity and Capital Resources later in this section.
Income tax (benefit) expense
Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.9 million, a decrease of $22.1 million, or 425.4%, compared to income tax expense of $5.2 million in the prior-year period. In addition to our net loss, the income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a benefit of $8 million from a change in estimate that resulted in favorable return-to-provision adjustments during the preparation of our 2019 federal and state income tax returns. Income tax expense for the prior year was impacted by permanent differences attributable to non-deductible transaction costs associated with the reverse recapitalization and executive compensation.
The following table summarizes Accel’s results of operations on a consolidated basis for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Revenues
Total net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $428.7 million, an increase of $93.6 million, or 27.9%, compared to the prior year. This growth was driven by an increase in net gaming revenue of $88.9 million, or 27.6%, an increase in amusement revenue of $2.7 million, or 39.3% and an increase in ATM fees and other revenue of $1.9 million, or 30.5%. The increase in net gaming revenue is partially attributable to the acquisitions of Skyhigh Gaming on August 1, 2018, G3 Gaming on October 16, 2018, (collectively, the “2018 Acquisitions”) and Grand River Jackpot on September 16, 2019, which collectively contributed $39.6 million in net gaming revenue to the above comparative increase. Excluding all acquisitions, net gaming revenue increased in 2020 by $49.5 million, or 14.8%, compared to the prior year, largely due to an increase in the number of licensed establishments and VGTs.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $282.0 million, an increase of $64.6 million, or 29.7%, compared to the prior year. The components of cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue of 65.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019 was slightly higher than the 64.9% for the prior year due to the increase in the gaming tax from 30% to 33%
on July 1, 2019. The increase of $64.6 million was the result of an increase in net gaming revenue and corollary increase in gaming tax at a higher tax rate, as well as, establishment revenue share costs and required payments to the IGB’s third-party system administrator.
General and administrative
Total general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $69.3 million, an increase of $15.0 million, or 27.7%, compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to a $8.0 million increase in operating costs that increase variably based on the number of licensed establishments and VGTs, which includes increases in payroll and employee related expenses and marketing expenses.
Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment
Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $26.4 million, an increase of $5.6 million, or 27.0%, compared to the prior year. The increase in depreciation and amortization is the result of increased number of licensed establishments and VGTs. Depreciation and amortization as a percentage of revenue was 6.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 6.2% for the prior year.
Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired
Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $18.0 million, an increase of $3.3 million, or 22.4%, compared to the prior year. The increase is primarily attributable to our business and asset acquisitions and their related performance, partially offset by the favorable impact from the adoption of Topic 606 of $1.0 million which increased the period over which route and customer acquisition costs are amortized to include expected renewals. Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired as a percentage of revenue was 4.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 4.4% for the prior year .
Other expenses, net
Other expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $19.6 million, an increase of $16.7 million, or 555.6%, compared to the prior year. The increase was largely attributed to one-time expenses for the Business Combination and larger fair value adjustments associated with the revaluation of contingent consideration liabilities related to acquisitions.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $12.9 million, an increase of $3.2 million, or33.3%, compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in borrowings related to our business and asset acquisitions. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the weighted average interest rate was approximately 4.5% compared to the weighted average interest rate of approximately 4.6% for the prior year.
(Gain) loss on change in fair value of contingent earnout shares
Loss on change in fair value of contingent earnout shares for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $9.8 million. The loss was due to the change in the market value of our A-1 common stock which is the primary input to the valuation of the contingent earnout shares.
Loss on debt extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was recorded in connection with the extinguishment of our Prior Credit Facility in November 2019. For more information on the extinguishment of our Prior Credit Facility see Liquidity and Capital Resources later in this section.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $5.2 million, an increase of $0.8 million, or 17.6%, compared to the prior year. Income tax expense increased due to permanent differences attributable to transaction costs associated with the Business Combination and executive compensation.
Key Business Metrics
Accel uses a variety of statistical data and comparative information commonly used in the gaming industry to monitor the performance of the business, none of which are prepared in accordance with GAAP, and therefore should not be viewed as indicators of operational performance. Accel’s management uses this information for financial planning, strategic planning and employee compensation decisions. The key indicators include:
•Number of licensed establishments;
•Number of VGTs;
•Average remaining contract term (years); and
•Location hold-per-day.
Number of licensed establishments
The number of licensed establishments is calculated based on data provided by Scientific Games, a contractor of the IGB. Terminal operator portal data is updated at the end of each gaming day and includes licensed establishments that may be temporarily closed but still connected to the central system. Accel utilizes this metric to continually monitor growth from organic openings, purchased licensed establishments, and competitor conversions. Competitor conversions occur when a licensed establishment chooses to change terminal operators.
Number of video game terminals (VGTs)
The number of VGTs in operation is based on Scientific Games terminal operator portal data which is updated at the end of each gaming day and includes VGTs that may be temporarily shut off but still connected to the central system. Accel utilizes this metric to continually monitor growth from existing licensed establishments, organic openings, purchased licensed establishments, and competitor conversions.
Average remaining contract term
Average remaining contract term is calculated by determining the average expiration date of all outstanding contracts with Accel’s current licensed establishment partners, and then subtracting the applicable measurement date. The IGB limited the length of contracts entered into after February 2, 2018 to a maximum of eight years and prohibits automatic renewals.
Location hold-per-day
Location hold-per-day is calculated by dividing the difference between cash deposited in all VGTs at each licensed establishment and tickets issued to players at each licensed establishment by the number of locations in operation each day during the period being measured. Then divide the calculated amount by the number of operating days in such period.
The following tables set forth information with respect to Accel’s licensed establishments, number of VGTs, average remaining contract term and location hold-per-day as of and for the years ended December 31.
(1) Excluding the Grand River Jackpot acquisition, the average remaining contract life was 7.2 years as of December 31, 2019.
(2) Excluding the Grand River Jackpot acquisition, location hold-per-day was $635 and $609 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Location hold-per day for the year ended December 31, 2020 is computed based on 217 eligible gaming days (excludes 148 non-gaming days due to the IGB mandated COVID-19 shutdown).
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted net income are non-GAAP financial measures and are key metrics used to monitor ongoing core operations. Management of Accel believes Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted net income enhance the understanding of Accel’s underlying drivers of profitability and trends in Accel’s business and facilitate company-to-company and period-to-period comparisons, because these non-GAAP financial measures exclude the effects of certain non-cash items or represent certain nonrecurring items that are unrelated to core performance. Management of Accel and Pace also believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are used by investors, analysts and other interested parties as measures of financial performance and to evaluate Accel’s ability to fund capital expenditures, service debt obligations and meet working capital requirements. For more information see “Selected Historical Financial Data of Accel and Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA
(1) Route and customer acquisition costs consist of upfront cash payments and future cash payments to third-party sales agents to acquire the licensed video gaming establishments that are not connected with a business combination. Accel amortizes the upfront cash payment over the life of the contract, including expected renewals, beginning on the date the location goes live, and recognizes non-cash amortization charges with respect to such items. Future or deferred cash payments, which may occur based on terms of the underlying contract, are generally lower in the aggregate as compared to established practice of providing higher upfront payments, and are also capitalized and amortized over the remaining life of the contract. Future cash payments do not include cash costs associated with renewing customer contracts as Accel does not generally incur significant costs as a result of extension or renewal of an existing contract. Location contracts acquired in a business combination are recorded at fair value as part of the business combination accounting and then amortized as an intangible asset on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of the contract of 10 years. “Amortization of route and customer acquisition costs and location contracts acquired” aggregates the non-cash amortization charges relating to upfront route and customer acquisition cost payments and location contracts acquired.
(2) Stock-based compensation consists of options, restricted stock units and warrants.
(3) (Gain) loss on change in fair value of contingent earnout shares represents an unrealized fair value adjustment at each reporting period end related to the value of these contingent shares. Upon achieving such contingency, A-2 shares convert to A-1 common stock resulting in a non-cash settlement of the obligation.
(4) Other expenses, net consists of (i) non-cash expenses including the remeasurement of contingent consideration liabilities, (ii) non-recurring expenses relating to lobbying efforts and legal expenses in Pennsylvania and lobbying efforts in Missouri, (iii) non-recurring costs associated with COVID-19 and (iv) other non-recurring expenses.
(5) Calculated by excluding the impact of the non-GAAP adjustments from the current period tax provision calculations.
(6) Emerging markets consist of the results, on an adjusted EBITDA basis, for non-core jurisdictions where our operations are developing. Markets are no longer considered emerging when Accel has installed or acquired at least 500 gaming terminals in the jurisdiction, or when 24 months have elapsed from the date Accel first installs or acquires gaming terminals in the jurisdiction, whichever occurs first.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $33.9 million, a decrease of $45.7 million, or 57.4%, compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the previously mentioned temporary shutdowns of gaming in the state of Illinois due to the COVID-19 outbreak that impacted 148 of the 365 gaming days (or 40% of gaming days) during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $79.6 million, an increase of $15.8 million, or 24.7%, compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in licensed establishments and gaming terminals.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In order to maintain sufficient liquidity, Accel reviews its cash flow projections and available funds with its Board of Directors to consider modifying its capital structure and seeking additional sources of liquidity, if needed. The availability of additional liquidity options will depend on the economic and financial environment, Accel’s credit, its historical and projected
financial and operating performance, and continued compliance with financial covenants. As a result of possible future economic, financial and operating declines, possible declines in Accel’s creditworthiness and potential non-compliance with financial covenants, Accel may have less liquidity than anticipated, fewer sources of liquidity than anticipated, less attractive financing terms and less flexibility in determining when and how to use the liquidity that is available.
Accel believes that its cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowing availability under its senior secured credit facility will be sufficient to meet its capital requirements for the next twelve months. Accel’s primary short-term cash needs are paying operating expenses, servicing outstanding indebtedness and funding near term acquisitions. As of December 31, 2020, Accel had $134.5 million in cash and cash equivalents.
In response to the decision by the IGB to temporarily suspend all video gaming across the State of Illinois due to the COVID-19 outbreak, we took action to reduce our projected monthly cash expenses during the shutdowns to help position us to mitigate the effects of the temporary cessation of operations. The actions taken include furloughing our employees and deferring certain payments to major vendors. Additionally, members of our management team decided to voluntarily forgo their salaries during the first shutdown. We also borrowed $65 million on our delayed draw term loan in March 2020 to increase our cash position and help preserve our financial flexibility.
2019 Senior Secured Credit Facility
On November 13, 2019, in order to refinance our prior credit facility, for working capital and other general purposes, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) as borrower, Accel and our wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries, as a guarantor, the banks, financial institutions and other lending institutions from time to time party thereto, as lenders, the other parties from time to time party thereto and Capital One, National Association, as administrative agent (in such capacity, the “Agent”), collateral agent, issuing bank and swingline lender, providing for a:
•$100.0 million revolving credit facility, including a letter of credit facility with a $10.0 million sublimit and a swing line facility with a $10.0 million sublimit,
•$240.0 million initial term loan facility and
•$125.0 million additional term loan facility.
As of December 31, 2020, there remained approximately $100.0 million of availability under the Credit Agreement.
The obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by Accel and our wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions (collectively, the “Guarantors”). The obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of assets of the Guarantors, subject to certain exceptions. Certain future-formed or acquired wholly owned domestic subsidiaries of the Company will also be required to guarantee the Credit Agreement and grant a security interest in substantially all of its assets (subject to certain exceptions) to secure the obligations under the Credit Agreement.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest, at Accel’s option, at a rate per annum equal to either (a) the adjusted LIBOR rate (“LIBOR”) (which cannot be less than zero) for interest periods of 1, 2, 3 or 6 months (or if consented to by (i) each applicable Lender, 12 months or any period shorter than 1 month or (ii) the Agent, a shorter period necessary to ensure that the end of the relevant interest period would coincide with any required amortization payment ) plus the applicable LIBOR margin or (b) the alternative base rate (“ABR”) plus the applicable ABR margin. ABR is a fluctuating rate per annum equal to the highest of (i) the Federal Funds Effective Rate plus 1/2 of 1.0%, (ii) the prime rate announced from time to time by Capital One, National Association and (iii) LIBOR for a 1-month Interest Period on such day plus 1.0%. The Credit Agreement also includes provisions for determining a replacement rate when LIBOR is no longer available. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted-average interest rate was approximately 3.3%.
Interest is payable quarterly in arrears for ABR loans, at the end of the applicable interest period for LIBOR loans (but not less frequently than quarterly) and upon the prepayment or maturity of the underlying loans. Accel is required to pay a commitment fee quarterly in arrears in respect of unused commitments under the revolving credit facility and the additional term loan facility.
The applicable LIBOR and ABR margins and the commitment fee rate are calculated based upon the first lien net leverage ratio of Accel and its restricted subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, as defined in the Credit Agreement. The revolving loans and term loans bear interest, at either (a) ABR (150bps floor) plus a margin of 1.75% or (b) LIBOR (50bps floor) plus a margin of 2.75% at our option.
The additional term loan facility was available for borrowings until November 13, 2020. Each of the revolving loans and the term loans mature on November 13, 2024.
The term loans and, once drawn, the additional term loans will amortize at an annual rate equal to approximately 5.00% per annum. Upon the consummation of certain non-ordinary course asset sales, we may be required to apply the net cash proceeds thereof to prepay outstanding term loans and additional term loans. The loans under the Credit Agreement may be prepaid without premium or penalty, subject to customary LIBOR “breakage” costs.
The Credit Agreement contains certain customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default and requires Accel and certain of its affiliates obligated under the Credit Agreement to make customary representations and warranties in connection with credit extensions thereunder.
In addition, the Credit Agreement requires Accel to maintain (a) a ratio of consolidated first lien net debt to consolidated EBITDA no greater than 4.50 to 1.00 and (b) a ratio of consolidated EBITDA to consolidated fixed charges no less than 1.20 to 1.00, in each case, tested as of the last day of each full fiscal quarter ending after the Closing Date and determined on the basis of the four most recently ended fiscal quarters of Accel for which financial statements have been delivered pursuant to the Credit Agreement, subject to customary “equity cure” rights.
If an event of default (as such term is defined in the Credit Agreement) occurs, the lenders would be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the Credit Agreement, termination of the lenders’ commitments thereunder, foreclosure on collateral, and all other remedial actions available to a secured creditor. The failure to pay certain amounts owing under the Credit Agreement may result in an increase in the interest rate applicable thereto.
We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of December 31, 2020. Given our assumptions about the future impact of COVID-19 on the gaming industry, which could be materially different due to the inherent uncertainties of future restrictions on the industry, we expect to remain in compliance with all debt covenants for the next 12 months. However, given the uncertainty of COVID-19 and the resulting potential impact to the gaming industry and our future assumptions, as well as to provide additional financial flexibility, we and the other parties thereto amended the Credit Agreement on August 4, 2020 to provide a waiver of financial covenant breach for the periods ended September 30, 2020 through March 31, 2021 of the First Lien Net Leverage Ratio and Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (each as defined under the Credit Agreement). The amendment also raised the floor for the adjusted LIBOR rate to 0.50% and the floor for the Base Rate to 1.50%. We incurred costs of $0.4 million associated with the amendment of the Credit Agreement, of which $0.3 million was capitalized and will be amortized over the remaining life of the Facility.
Prior Credit Facility
Accel’s prior credit facility was a senior secured first lien credit facility, as amended, that consisted of a $125.0 million term loan, a contract draw loan facility of $170.0 million and a revolving credit facility of $85.0 million. Accel’s prior credit facility was with a syndicated group of banks with CIBC Bank USA, as administrative agent for the Lenders. Included in the revolving credit facility and contract draw loan were swing line sub-facilities of $5.0 million each.
The prior credit facility was paid off with the proceeds from the 2019 Senior Secured Credit Facility. In connection with the extinguishment of the prior credit facility, the Company recorded a loss from debt extinguishment of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes Accel’s net cash provided by or used in operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the periods indicated and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
Net cash provided by operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $3.7 million, a decrease of $49.3 million over the prior year. In addition to our decrease in net income, we had a $16.8 million decrease attributable to the impact of deferred income taxes and $1.8 million in payments on contingent consideration.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $45.6 million, an increase of $1.2 million over the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in gaming revenue from licensed establishments acquired from the 2018 Acquisitions and the 2019 acquisition of Grand River Jackpot.
Net cash used in investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $61.4 million, a decrease of $90.1 million over the prior year and was primarily attributable to less cash used for business and asset acquisitions, partially offset by higher purchases of property and equipment. We also invested $30.0 million in convertible notes in 2019. We anticipate our capital expenditures will be approximately $20-25 million in 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $151.5 million, an increase of $78.0 million over the prior year and was primarily attributable to more cash used to fund business and asset acquisitions and our investment in convertible notes of $30 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $74.2 million, a decrease of $65.0 million over the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net borrowings on Accel’s credit facility, lower proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants, and higher payments on consideration payable, partially offset by proceeds received from issuing common stock and lower debt issuance costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $139.1 million, an increase of $93.0 million over the prior year. The increase was due to increased borrowings on Accel’s credit facility to fund our business and asset acquisitions and the proceeds from the capital infusion in the reverse recapitalization.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Accel prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In applying accounting principles, it is often required to use estimates. These estimates consider the facts, circumstances and information available, and may be based on subjective inputs, assumptions and information known and unknown to Accel. Material changes in certain of the estimates that Accel uses could affect, by a material amount, its consolidated financial position and results of operations. Although results may vary, Accel believes its estimates are reasonable and appropriate. The following describes certain significant accounting policies that involve more subjective and complex judgments where the effect on Accel’s consolidated financial position and operating performance could be material.
Revenue recognition
Accel generates revenues in the State of Illinois from the following types of services: Video gaming terminals, Amusements and ATMs. Revenue is disaggregated by type of revenue and is presented on the face of the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income. Net gaming revenue is the win from gaming activities, which is the difference between gaming wins and losses. Amusement revenue represents amounts collected from machines operated at various licensed establishments. ATM fees and other revenue represents fees charged for the withdrawal of funds from Accel’s redemption devices and stand-alone ATMs.
Accel determined that in a gaming environment, whenever a customer’s money has been accepted by a machine, we have an obligation (an implied contract) to provide the customer access to the game and honor the outcome of the game (in the case of video gaming terminals). Accel determined that the implied contract is entered into between us and customers satisfies the requirements of a contract under Topic 606, as (i) the contract is legally enforceable with the customer, (ii) the arrangement identifies the rights of the parties, (iii) the contract has commercial substance, and (iv) the cash is received upfront from the customer so its collectability is probable. The gaming service is a single performance obligation in each implied contract with the customer. Accel applies the portfolio approach of all wins and losses by VGT daily to determine the total transaction price of the portfolio of implied contracts. Accel recognizes revenue when the single performance obligation is satisfied, which is at the completion of each game.
Route and customer acquisition costs
Accel’s route and customer acquisition costs consist of fees paid, typically an upfront payment and future installment payments over the life of the contract, entered into with third parties and licensed establishments throughout the State of Illinois. These contracts are non-cancelable and allow Accel to install and operate VGTs in various establishments throughout the State of Illinois. The upfront payment and future installment payments are recorded at the net present value using a discount rate equal to Accel’s incremental borrowing costs. Route acquisition costs are amortized on a straight-line basis beginning on the date the location goes live and amortized over the life of the contract, which upon adoption of Topic 606, includes expected renewals. Accel records the accretion of interest on the route installment payments in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income as a component of interest expense, net. For locations that close prior to the end of the contractual term, Accel writes-off the net book value of the route and the related installment payables not yet paid and records a gain or loss in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income as a component of general and administrative expense. Additionally, most of the route acquisition contracts allow Accel to clawback some upfront and installment payments over the first few years of a contract if the location is unable to secure the appropriate licensing or it goes out of business prior to the end of the contract term. In the case of instances where a claw-back is triggered and Accel assesses it as recoverable, a receivable will be recorded. Upfront payments with a claw-back prior to a location going live are capitalized and will not begin amortization until the respective licensed establishment commences operations.
Consideration payable
Consideration payable consists of amounts payable related to certain business acquisitions as well as contingent consideration for future licensed establishment performance related to certain business acquisitions. The contingent consideration is measured at fair value on a recurring basis. Accel uses a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the value of
contingent consideration upon acquisition and updates this estimate on a recurring basis. The significant assumptions in the cash flow analysis include the probability adjusted projected revenues after state taxes, a discount rate as applicable to each acquisition, and the estimated number of licensed establishments at which Accel commences operations during the contingent consideration period. The changes in the fair value of contingent consideration are recognized within Accel’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income as other expenses, net.
Business combinations and goodwill
For acquisitions meeting the definition of a business combination, the acquisition method of accounting is used. The acquisition date is the date on which Accel obtains operating control over the acquired business. The consideration paid is determined on the acquisition date and is the sum of the fair values of the assets acquired by Accel and the liabilities assumed by Accel, including the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a deferred consideration arrangement. Acquisition-related costs, such as professional fees, are excluded from the consideration transferred and are expensed as incurred. Any contingent consideration is measured at its fair value on the acquisition date, recorded as a liability and accreted over its payment term in Accel’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income as other expenses, net. Goodwill is measured as the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually, as of October 1st, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the goodwill may not be recoverable. When performing the annual goodwill impairment test, we conduct a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the goodwill is impaired. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider both positive and negative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry events, financial performance, and we make a determination of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the goodwill is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the qualitative factors, we determine it is more likely than not the goodwill is impaired, we then perform a quantitative test. When performing the quantitative test, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, the Company would record an impairment loss equal to the difference. To determine the fair value of the reporting units, we would engage a third-party valuation specialist. If a valuation by a third-party valuation specialist was performed, it would have been required for us to make significant estimates and assumptions such as company forecasts, discount rates and growth rates, among others. Changes in assumptions concerning future financial results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on either the fair value of the goodwill, the amount of the goodwill impairment charge, or both.
Convertible notes
At acquisition, an entity shall classify debt securities as trading, available-for-sale, or held-to-maturity. While the Company has no intention of selling the convertible notes it holds, it cannot classify them as held-to-maturity due to the conversion feature. Therefore, the Company has classified its investment in convertible notes as available for sale and they are recorded at their fair market value. To compute the fair value of the convertible notes, a binomial lattice model is utilized in which a convertible instrument is split into two separate components: a cash-only (debt) component and an equity component. The binomial lattice trees are constructed using a methodology that assigns up and downward movement factors and probabilities based on rates of return, volatility, and time. It allows for the optional conversion features of the convertible promissory notes to be captured by determining whether conversion or continuing to hold is the most economically advantageous to the holder. Upon conversion, future values in the equity component are subject to only the risk-free rate, while the cash-only component associated with continuing to hold the debt instrument is subject to the selected risk-adjusted discount rate. Solving backwards through the trees associated with the equity component and the trees associated with the debt component yields an aggregate discounted value for each. The sum of these values yields the indicated fair value of the convertible promissory notes.
The discount rate is the risk-adjusted discount rate that is implied by the rate that allows the discounted cash flows with all terms and conditions modeled to equal the total cash consideration. As such, after modeling the features of convertible promissory notes as of the issuance date using the lattice model framework outlined above, the Company solved for the discount rate that resulted in a value for the note equal to the total cash consideration. The significant inputs used in determining the fair
value are unobservable and require significant judgment or estimation. Changes in in these inputs or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the convertible notes.
Contingent earnout shares liability
Our A-2 common stock is classified as a contingent earnout shares liability due to the fact that the conversion of the A-2 common stock would be accelerated on a change of control regardless of the transaction value. The liability is stated at fair value and any change in the fair value is recognized as a gain or loss in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income. We determine the fair value of the contingent earnout shares based on the market price of our A-1 common stock. The liability, by tranche, is then stated at present value based on i.) an interest rate derived from our borrowing rate and the applicable risk-free rate and ii.) an estimate on when we expect the contingent earnout shares to convert to A-1 common stock. Changes in in these inputs or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the contingent earnout shares liability.
Change in estimate
During the first quarter of 2020, we conducted a review of our estimate of depreciable lives for our video gaming terminals and equipment. As a result of this review, we extended the useful lives of our video gaming terminals and equipment from 7 to 10 years as the equipment is lasting longer than originally estimated. We have many video gaming terminals and equipment that were purchased when the Company started operations that are still being used today. The impact of this change in estimate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was a net decrease to depreciation expense of $7.7 million and $3.3 million net of tax.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table presents unaudited consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income data for each of the four quarters ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We believe that all necessary adjustments have been included to fairly present the quarterly information when read in conjunction with our annual consolidated financial statements and related notes. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results for any subsequent quarter.
(1) Quarterly results for 2020 and for the last quarter of 2019 have been restated for the items that are discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2) Quarterly results for the first three quarters of 2019 have been adjusted for an immaterial correction discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
(3) Per share amounts have been retroactively restated to give effect to the reverse recapitalization that is discussed in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Our 2020 quarterly results were adversely impacted by the previously mentioned temporary shutdowns of Illinois video gaming due to the COVID-19 outbreak. These temporary shutdowns impacted 15 out of 91gaming days in the first quarter, all of the 91 gaming days in the second quarter and 42 out of 92 gaming days in the fourth quarter. In 2020, we also incurred non-recurring, one-time expenses, net of recoveries under the CARES Act, for costs to provide benefits (e.g., health insurance) for furloughed employees during COVID-19 operational disruptions. We also incurred capital costs related to the purchase of IGB-mandated spacers for our gaming terminals to promote social distancing requirements within the gaming area and incurred operating expenses related to cleaning, disinfecting and sanitizing supplies.
As previously discussed, we incurred higher operating expenses in the third and fourth quarter of 2019 attributable to one-time expenses related to the Business Combination. The loss in the fourth quarter of 2019 was also impacted by larger fair value adjustments associated with the revaluation of contingent consideration liabilities related to acquisitions. Revenues in the fourth quarter of 2019 were positively impacted by the Grand River Jackpot acquisition.
As an EGC, we elected to use the non-public effective date and adopted the Topic 606 in the fourth quarter of 2019 for the annual period ended December 31, 2019. Our quarterly financial statement disclosure for the first nine months of 2019 reflect the previous accounting standard of Topic 605 and will not be restated for the adoption of Topic 606. The cumulative impact of the new revenue standard for fiscal year 2019 was recorded in the fourth quarter and reflects the adjustment as if we adopted the standard as of January 1, 2019.
Seasonality
Accel’s results of operations can fluctuate due to seasonal trends and other factors. For example, the gross revenue per machine per day is typically lower in the summer when players will typically spend less time indoors at licensed establishment partners, and higher in cold weather between February and April, when players will typically spend more time indoors at licensed establishment partners. Holidays, vacation seasons, and sporting events may also cause Accel’s results to fluctuate.