Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements and the related footnotes thereto.
Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company focused on the acquisition, development, and commercialization of therapies for serious rare and life-threatening diseases with significant unmet medical needs. Our pipeline includes four programs: ACER-001 (sodium phenylbutyrate) for the treatment of various inborn errors of metabolism, including urea cycle disorders (“UCDs”) and Maple Syrup Urine Disease (“MSUD”); EDSIVO™ (celiprolol) for the treatment of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (“vEDS”) in patients with a confirmed type III collagen (COL3A1) mutation; ACER-801 (osanetant) for the treatment of induced Vasomotor Symptoms (“iVMS”); and ACER-2820 (emetine), a host-directed therapy against a variety of infectious diseases, including COVID-19. Our product candidates are believed to present comparatively de-risked programs as evidenced by having one or more of the following: favorable safety profile, clinical proof-of-concept data, mechanistic differentiation, and/or accelerated pathways for development through specific programs and procedures established by the United States (“U.S.”) Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”), which contemplate our continuation as a going concern. We have not established a source of revenues and, as such, have been dependent on funding operations through the sale of equity securities. Since inception, we have experienced significant losses and incurred negative cash flows from operations. We have an accumulated deficit of $99.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and expect to incur further losses over the foreseeable future as we develop our business. We have spent, and expect to continue to spend, a substantial amount of funds in connection with implementing our business strategy, including our planned product development efforts and potential precommercial activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $5.8 million and current liabilities of $6.1 million. Our cash and cash equivalents available at December 31, 2020, combined with the funds raised subsequent to December 31, 2020, are expected to fund operations into the third quarter of 2021.
We will need to raise additional capital to fund continued operations in the second half of 2021. We may not be successful in our efforts to raise additional funds or achieve profitable operations. We continue to explore potential opportunities and alternatives to obtain the additional resources that will be necessary to support our ongoing operations through and beyond the next 12 months, including and raising additional capital through either private or public equity or debt financing, or non-dilutive funding, as well as using our ATM facility and/or our $15.0 million equity line facility entered into on April 30, 2020 with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), which is subject to certain limitations and conditions. From May 19, 2020 through the date of this report, we have raised gross proceeds of $10.0 million from the ATM facility and gross proceeds of $2.9 million from the agreement with Lincoln Park.
In addition, as described below, on January 25, 2021, we entered into an option agreement with Relief Therapeutics Holding AG (“Relief”), under the terms of which we received a $1.0 million upfront non-refundable payment and Relief provided to us a 12-month $4.0 million secured loan, repayable by us in cash on January 25, 2022 unless a definitive agreement is negotiated and executed prior to June 30, 2021 with respect to a potential collaboration and license agreement with us for the development, regulatory approval and commercialization of ACER-001 for UCDs and MSUD. At Relief’s option, the outstanding balance of the $4.0 million loan can be used to offset the $14.0 million payment that may otherwise be payable to us from Relief if a definitive agreement is executed. We have no commitments for any additional financing, except for the agreement with Lincoln Park. Any amounts raised will be used for further development of our product candidates, precommercial activities, potential acquisitions of additional product candidates, and for other working capital purposes.
If we are unable to obtain additional funding to support our current or proposed activities and operations, we may not be able to continue our operations as proposed, which may require us to suspend or terminate any ongoing development activities, modify our business plan, curtail various aspects of our operations, cease operations, or seek relief under applicable bankruptcy laws. In such event, our stockholders may lose a substantial portion or even all of their investment.
These factors individually and collectively raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least twelve months from the date these financial statements are available, or March 1, 2021. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments or classifications that may result from our possible inability to continue as a going concern.
Restructuring
In June 2019, we received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA regarding our New Drug Application (“NDA”) for EDSIVOTM (celiprolol) for the treatment of vEDS. The Complete Response Letter stated that it will be necessary to conduct an adequate and well-controlled trial to determine whether celiprolol reduces the risk of clinical events in patients with vEDS. In order to reduce operating expense and conserve cash resources, in June 2019, we initiated a corporate restructuring, which included a reduction of approximately 60% of our full-time workforce of 48 employees and halted precommercial activities for EDSIVOTM. We recorded a one-time severance-related charge of $1.5 million associated with the workforce reduction in the quarter ended June 30, 2019.
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize any of our product candidates.
In the future, we may generate revenue by entering into licensing or similar arrangements or strategic alliances. To the extent we enter into any license arrangements or strategic alliances, we expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter as a result of the timing of achievement of preclinical, clinical, regulatory and commercialization milestones, if at all, the timing and amount of payments relating to such milestones, as well as the extent to which any products are approved and successfully commercialized.
If our product candidates are not developed in a timely manner, if regulatory approval is not obtained for them, or if such product candidates are not commercialized, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with the development of our product candidates. Our research and development expenses include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation;
•
external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, consultants, and our scientific advisors; and
•
license fees and other direct costs of acquiring intellectual property.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received.
At any time, we are working on multiple programs. Our internal resources, employees, and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one research or drug discovery project and are typically deployed across multiple projects. As such, we do not generate meaningful information regarding the costs incurred for these early stage research and drug discovery programs on a specific project basis.
Since our inception in December 2013, we have spent a total of $54.2 million in research and development expenses through December 31, 2020. Of that amount, $31.9 million was directly related to EDSIVOTM, $14.4 million was directly related to ACER-001, $4.3 million was directly related to emetine, and $3.3 million was directly related to osanetant.
We expect our research and development expenses to be substantial for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct our ongoing regulatory activities, initiate new preclinical and clinical trials, and build upon our pipeline. The process of conducting clinical trials and preclinical studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval, preparing to seek regulatory approval, and preparing for commercialization in the event of regulatory approval, is costly and time-consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
Successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain and may not result in approved products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to our ability to enter into new strategic alliances with respect to each program or potential product candidate, the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, the timing and ability to obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates (if any), and ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise additional capital and may seek to do so through public or private equity or debt financings, government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements or a combination of these approaches. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidates, pursue regulatory approvals, and operate our business as planned.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation; precommercial costs; and professional fees for legal, business consulting, auditing, and tax services. We expect that general and administrative expenses will be substantial in the future.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net consists primarily of interest income and of gains and losses resulting from the revaluation of assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. We earn interest income from interest-bearing accounts and money market funds, which we classify as cash and cash equivalents. We record as part of other (expense) income, net, transaction gains and losses on foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities when they are revalued each period due to changes in underlying exchange rates.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving our judgments and estimates.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price (consideration paid plus net liabilities assumed) of an acquired business over the fair value of the underlying net tangible and intangible assets. We evaluate the recoverability of goodwill according to Accounting Standards Update No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), which we adopted in the fourth quarter of 2018, annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill might be impaired. We may opt to perform a qualitative assessment or a quantitative impairment test to determine whether goodwill is impaired. Our goodwill is allocated to a single reporting unit. If we were to determine based on a qualitative assessment that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value, a quantitative impairment test would then be performed. The quantitative impairment test compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a goodwill impairment would be recognized for the difference.
In-process Research and Development
In-process research and development (“IPRD”) represents the value of the three G-protein-coupled receptor targets from the GPCR Target Pools of Anchor that we obtained the rights to in the March 20, 2015, acquisition of Anchor. IPRD was recorded at fair value in conjunction with the Anchor acquisition during 2015 and is an indefinite-lived intangible asset. As such, it is tested at least annually for impairment. We determined that the asset was impaired as of December 31, 2020 and wrote off the value of the IPRD accordingly.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense related to stock options under our 2018 Stock Incentive Plan, our 2013 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended, and our 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended and restated, by estimating the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes model, which involves making the selection of inputs such as expected volatility of our stock, the anticipated term of the option, and a risk-free interest rate. The establishment of these inputs inherently require judgment and estimates and can change from time to time depending on market factors and actual experience. We recognize stock-based compensation expense for stock options and restricted stock units on a straight-line basis over the vesting term.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include compensation and related benefits, license fees and outside contracted research and manufacturing consultants. We sometimes make nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities. These payments are capitalized and recorded as an expense in the period that we receive the goods or when the services are performed.
Clinical Trial and Preclinical Study Expenses
We make estimates of prepaid and/or accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on certain facts and circumstances at that time. Our accrued expenses for preclinical studies and clinical trials are based on estimates of costs incurred for services provided by contract research organizations (“CRO”), manufacturing organizations, and for other trial- and study-related activities. Payments under our agreements with external service providers depend on a number of factors such as site initiation, patient screening, enrollment, delivery of reports, and other events. In accruing for these activities, we obtain information from various sources and estimate the level of effort or expense allocated to each period. Adjustments to our research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods as our estimates change. As these activities are generally material to our overall financial statements, subsequent changes in estimates may result in a material change in our accruals. No material changes in estimates were recognized in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our accounts payable and accrued expenses included $1.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively, for costs associated with preclinical or clinical study expense.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease of $2.1 million was primarily due to decreases in employee-related expenses and in spending related to clinical and other consulting services, partially offset by an increase in contract research expenses. This decrease in employee-related expenses resulted from a decrease in headcount as a result of the restructuring after we received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA in June 2019. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were comprised of $4.6 million related to ACER-001, $4.3 million related to emetine, $2.1 million related to osanetant, and $0.8 million related to EDSIVOTM.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease of $5.0 million was primarily due to decreases in employee-related expenses and precommercial activities, partially offset by an increase in legal expenses. This decrease in employee-related expenses resulted from a decrease in headcount as a result of the restructuring after we received a Complete Response Letter from the FDA in June 2019.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net of $(0.1) million and $0.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was primarily attributable to interest income and to transactional gains and losses related to remeasurement of trade accounts payable and accruals denominated in foreign currencies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. From inception to December 31, 2020, we have raised net cash proceeds of $92.3 million, primarily from common stock offerings, private placements of convertible preferred stock, and debt financings. As of December 31, 2020, we had $5.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and current liabilities aggregating to $6.1 million. Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $22.9 million and $29.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $99.1 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $12.5 million was principally the result of a decrease in net loss as well as decreased use of cash due to the timing of accrued expenses and accounts payable.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 relates to the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $10.2 million from the issuance of common stock, comprised of $6.9 million net proceeds from our ATM facility, $2.4 million proceeds from our equity line facility entered into with Lincoln Park, and $0.9 million proceeds from a private placement of shares of our common stock. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of proceeds of $0.1 million from the exercise of stock options.
Future Capital Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize any of our product candidates. At the same time, we expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacture and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of any of our product candidates and thereafter successfully commercializing any such product candidates, we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $5.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and current liabilities of $6.1 million. Based on available resources, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents currently on hand, combined with the funds raised subsequent to December 31, 2020, are sufficient to fund our currently anticipated operating and capital requirements into the third quarter of 2021.
On January 25, 2021, we and Relief entered into an option agreement pursuant to which we granted Relief an exclusive option to pursue a potential collaboration and license agreement with us for the development, regulatory approval and commercialization for ACER-001 for the treatment of UCDs and MSUD. The option agreement provides a period of time up to June 30, 2021 for the parties to perform additional due diligence and to work toward negotiation and execution of a definitive agreement with respect to the potential collaboration for ACER-001. In consideration for the grant of the exclusivity option, (i) we received from Relief an upfront nonrefundable payment of $1.0 million, (ii) Relief provided to us a 12-month secured loan in the principal amount of $4.0 million, as evidenced by a promissory note we issued to Relief, and (iii) we granted to Relief a security interest in all of our assets to secure performance of the promissory note, as evidenced by a security agreement. The note is repayable in
one lump sum within 12 months from issuance and bears interest at a rate equal to 6% per annum. If a definitive agreement with respect to the potential collaboration is not executed by the parties on or before June 30, 2021, the exclusivity option will terminate and the note is repayable by us upon maturity. The note contains certain customary events of default (including, but not limited to, default in payment of principal or interest thereunder or a material breach of the security agreement). Under the terms of the proposed collaboration and license agreement, the key terms of which are set forth in the option agreement, if a definitive agreement is executed pursuant to these terms and closed by June 30, 2021, we will receive $14.0 million in cash (which can be offset at Relief’s option by the outstanding balance of the $4.0 million loan from Relief to us). In addition, Relief will agree to pay up to $20.0 million in U.S. development and commercial launch costs for the UCDs and MSUD indications. Further, we will retain development and commercialization rights in the U.S., Canada, Brazil, Turkey and Japan. The companies will split net profits from Acer’s territories 60%:40% in favor of Relief. Relief will also license the rights for the rest of the world, where we will receive from Relief a 15% net sales royalty on all revenues received in Relief’s territories. We could also receive a total of $6.0 million in milestones based on the first European marketing approvals for UCDs and MSUD. There can be no assurance, however, that a definitive agreement will be successfully negotiated and executed between the parties on these terms, on other mutually acceptable terms, or at all. Except for the $1.0 million upfront payment to Acer and the $4.0 million 12-month secured loan from Relief to Acer, the remaining proposed terms of the collaboration are not binding and are subject to change as a result of further diligence by Relief and negotiation of a definitive collaboration and license agreement between the parties.
On July 24, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement for the sale and issuance of an aggregate of 244,998 shares of our common stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $0.9 million, in a Private Placement transaction with certain directors, officers, and employees at a price per share of $3.50. The shares of common stock issued in the Private Placement constitute “restricted securities” under the federal securities laws and are subject to a minimum six-month holding period. The proceeds from the Private Placement will be used by us for working capital and general corporate purposes.
On April 30, 2020, we entered into a $15.0 million purchase agreement and registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park an aggregate of up to $15.0 million in shares of our common stock, subject to certain conditions and limitations. Under the terms and subject to the conditions of the purchase agreement, Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to an aggregate of $15.0 million in shares of common stock (subject to certain limitations) from time to time over a 36-month period commencing on June 8, 2020. We may direct Lincoln Park, at our sole discretion and subject to certain conditions, to purchase up to 50,000 shares of common stock in regular purchases, increasing to amounts of up to 100,000 shares depending upon the closing sale price of our common stock. In addition, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase additional amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases. The purchase price of shares of common stock related to this future funding will be based upon the market price of our common stock preceding the time of sale as computed under purchase agreement. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to receive all of the funds from Lincoln Park because the purchase agreement contains limitations, restrictions, requirements, events of default and other provisions that could limit our ability to cause Lincoln Park to buy common stock from us. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 900,000 shares of common stock under the under the purchase agreement at an average gross sale price of $2.64 per share, for gross proceeds of $2.4 million. Proceeds, net of $0.2 million of offering costs, were $2.2 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and through the date of this report, we have sold an additional 200,000 shares under the purchase agreement for additional proceeds of $0.5 million.
On March 18, 2020, we entered into an amended and restated sales agreement with JonesTrading and Roth Capital. This agreement provides a facility for the offer and sale of shares of common stock from time to time depending upon market demand, in transactions deemed to be an “at-the-market” (“ATM”) offering. We will need to keep current our shelf registration statement and the offering prospectus relating to the ATM facility, in addition to providing certain periodic deliverables under the sales agreement, in order to use such facility. Due to the SEC’s “baby shelf rules,” which prohibit companies with a public float of less than $75 million from issuing securities under a shelf registration statement in excess of one-third of such company’s public float in a 12-month period, we are only able to issue a limited number of shares which aggregate no more than one-third of our public float using our shelf registration statement at this time. From May 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 1,838,957 shares of common stock at an average gross sale price of $3.9228 per share, for gross proceeds of $7.2 million. Proceeds, net of $0.3 million of fees and offering costs, were $6.9 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 during multiple trading days through the date of this report, we sold an aggregate of 877,107 additional shares of common stock through the ATM facility, resulting in additional gross proceeds of $2.8 million and additional net proceeds of $2.7 million after an additional $0.1 million of fees and offering costs.
In June 2019, in order to reduce operating expenses and conserve cash resources following the receipt of the FDA’s Complete Response Letter, we implemented a corporate restructuring which included a reduction of approximately 60% of our full-time workforce of 48 employees and halted precommercial activities of EDSIVO™. We recorded a one-time severance-related charge of $1.5 million associated with the workforce reduction. In December 2019, we submitted a Formal Dispute Resolution Request to the FDA’s Office of New Drugs appealing the FDA’s decision as outlined in the Complete Response Letter. In March 2020, we received a response to our Formal Dispute Resolution Request from the Office of New Drugs of the FDA stating that it had denied our appeal of the Complete Response Letter in relation to the NDA for EDSIVO™. In its Appeal Denied letter, the Office of New Drugs described possible paths forward for us to explore that could provide the substantial evidence of effectiveness needed to support a potential resubmission of the EDSIVO™ NDA for the treatment of patients with vEDS with a confirmed COL3A1 mutation. In its Appeal Denied letter, the Office of New Drugs referred to the FDA Guidance document issued in December 2019, where substantial evidence of effectiveness can be provided by two or more adequate and well-controlled studies demonstrating efficacy, or a single positive adequate and well-controlled study plus confirmatory evidence. We believe we have identified a plan to collect additional data that supports the results from the COL3A1-positive analysis from the BBEST trial and could help meet the standard set forth in the FDA Guidance document issued in December 2019. In February 2021, we submitted a meeting request to the FDA to discuss Acer’s proposed plan to provide sufficient confirmatory evidence. If successful, data provided under our proposal could potentially satisfy the additional confirmatory evidence needed to support a resubmission of our NDA, assuming the additional data analysis is positive. There can be no assurance that FDA will accept our plan or, if accepted, that the resulting data would be adequate to support resubmission, filing or approval of our NDA. We may also conclude at any point that the cost, risk and uncertainty of obtaining that additional data does not justify continuing with the development of EDSIVO™.
Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•
whether or not we are able to successfully negotiate and enter into a definitive agreement with Relief for the potential collaboration and license of ACER-001, which will impact our requirement to repay in cash the $4.0 million 12-month secured loan from Relief
•
any development of emetine we may choose to pursue, depending on capital needs, scope of development, FDA conditions, the availability of non-dilutive funding, the cost of any such development, and other factors
•
any continued development, including preparing for or initiation of a planned emetine Phase 2/3 clinical trial, which is also subject to ongoing discussions with the FDA
•
any continued development, including the initiation of one or more clinical trials for osanetant
•
any continued development of EDSIVO™ we may or may not decide to pursue in light of the FDA’s June 2019 Complete Response Letter and the March 2020 denial of our appeal of the Complete Response Letter
•
our ability to obtain adequate levels of financing to meet our operating plan
•
the costs associated with filing, outcome, and timing of regulatory approvals
•
the terms and timing of any strategic alliance, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish
•
the cost and timing of hiring any new employees to support our business operations
•
the costs and timing of having clinical supplies of our product candidates manufactured
•
the initiation and progress of ongoing preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates
•
the costs involved in patent filing, prosecution, and enforcement
•
the number of programs we pursue
We will continue to require substantial additional capital to continue our clinical development and pursuit of regulatory approval activities. Accordingly, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to continue to fund
our operations. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our development, regulatory conditions and requirements, and commercialization efforts. Failure to raise capital as and when needed, on favorable terms or at all, would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidates, pursue regulatory approvals, potentially commercialize (if approved) our product candidates, and operate our business as planned.
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the foreseeable future as we initiate and continue the clinical development of, seek regulatory approval for, and potentially commercialize (if approved) our product candidates. In addition, operating as a publicly-traded company involves upgrading financial information systems and incurring costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year due to the timing of clinical development programs, efforts to achieve regulatory approval and planning for potential commercialization (if approved) of our product candidates.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, which would require us to obtain regulatory approval for and successfully commercialize one or more of our product candidates, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through the issuance of additional equity and potentially through borrowing, non-dilutive funding, and strategic alliances. Other than the purchase agreement we entered into with Lincoln Park, which is subject to certain limitations and conditions, our ATM facility, and our option agreement and related $4.0 million 12-month secured loan from Relief, we do not maintain any lines of credit or have any sources of debt or equity capital committed for funding.
We continue to explore potential opportunities and alternatives to obtain the additional resources that will be necessary to support our ongoing operations through and beyond the next 12 months, including raising additional capital through either private or public equity or debt financing, or non-dilutive funding, as well as using our ATM facility and/or our equity line facility. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
If we are unable to raise additional funds through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, such as non-dilutive funding or strategic collaborations, when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or pursuit of regulatory approval efforts or provide rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and, if applicable, market ourselves. Further, if we are unable to obtain additional funding to support our current or proposed activities and operations, we may not be able to continue our operations as proposed, which may require us to suspend or terminate any ongoing development activities, modify our business plan, curtail various aspects of our operations, cease operations, or seek relief under applicable bankruptcy laws. In such event, our stockholders may lose a substantial portion or even all of their investment.
Contractual Commitments
License Agreements
In April 2014, we obtained exclusive rights to patents and certain other intellectual property relating to ACER-001 and preclinical and clinical data, through an exclusive license agreement with Baylor College of Medicine (“BCM”). Under the terms of the agreement, as amended, we have worldwide exclusive rights to develop, manufacture, use, sell and import products incorporating the licensed intellectual property. The license agreement requires us to make upfront and annual payments to BCM, reimburse certain of BCM’s legal costs, make payments upon achievement of defined milestones, and pay low single-digit percent royalties on net sales of any developed product over the royalty term.
In June 2016, we entered into an agreement with Aventis Pharma SA (now Sanofi) granting us the exclusive access and exclusive right to use the data included in the marketing authorization application dossier filed with and approved by the MHRA in 1986 for the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension pursuant to the UK regulatory approval procedure, for the sole purpose of allowing us to further develop, manufacture, register and commercialize celiprolol in the U.S. and Brazil for the treatment of EDS, Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. We have paid in full for the exclusive access and right to use the data. Subsequently we amended our agreement with Sanofi to provide the same rights to data access and use for potential marketing approval in all of North and South America.
In August 2016, we entered into an agreement with AP-HP granting us the exclusive worldwide rights to access and use data from a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open trial related to the use of celiprolol for the treatment of vEDS. We utilized this clinical data to support an NDA filing for EDSIVOTM for the treatment of vEDS. The agreement requires us to make certain upfront payments to AP-HP, reimburse certain of AP-HP’s costs, make payments upon achievement of defined milestones and pay low single-digit percent royalties on net sales of celiprolol over the royalty term.
In September 2018, we entered into an additional agreement with AP-HP to acquire the exclusive worldwide intellectual property rights to three European patent applications relating to certain uses of celiprolol including (i) the optimal dose of celiprolol in treating vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (“vEDS”) patients, (ii) the use of celiprolol during pregnancy, and (iii) the use of celiprolol to treat kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type VI). Pursuant to the agreement, we will reimburse AP-HP for certain costs and will pay annual maintenance fee payments. Subject to a minimum royalty amount, we will also pay royalty payments on annual net sales of celiprolol during the royalty term in the low single digit percent range, depending upon whether there is a valid claim of a licensed patent. Under the agreement, we will control and pay the costs of ongoing patent prosecution and maintenance for the licensed applications. We subsequently filed three U.S. patent applications on this subject matter in October 2018. We may choose to limit our pursuit of patent applications to specific territories, in which case AP-HP would have the right to revise our territorial license rights accordingly.
In December 2018, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Sanofi granting us worldwide rights to osanetant, a clinical-stage, selective, non-peptide tachykinin NK3 receptor antagonist. The agreement requires us to make certain upfront payments to Sanofi, make payments upon achievement of defined development and sales milestones and pay royalties on net sales of osanetant over the royalty term. We plan to initially pursue development of osanetant as a potential treatment for iVMS.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material impact on our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 since inflation rates have generally remained at relatively low levels and our operations are not otherwise uniquely affected by inflation concerns.