Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements of Achison Inc, and the related notes included elsewhere in this statement. The historical financial data discussed below reflects the historical results and financial position of Achison Inc. In addition, this discussion and analysis contains forward looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including those described under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statement” and “Risk Factors”. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward looking statements.
Overview
Achison Inc. is a New York corporation formed on December 29, 2014.
On July 1, 2019 Lansdale Inc, the principal stockholder of the Company (“Seller”) and controlled by the Company’s prior President, Mr. Wanjun Xie, entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Dazhong 368 Inc, (the “Buyer”), pursuant to which, among other things, Seller agreed to sell to the Buyer, and the Buyer agreed to purchase from Seller, a total of 9,000,000 shares of Class A common stock of the Company of record and beneficially by Seller. The Purchased Shares represented approximately 90% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of Class A common stock, resulting in a change of the control of the Company. Mr. Dingshan Zhang was appointed as the President and CEO of the Company at the same date.
Prior to July of 2019 the Company primarily engaged in trading spot gold and silver in Singapore Markets, crypto currency and US equity stocks, however, the Company currently engages only in internet advertising through www.dazhong368.com (the “Website”) in the New York area and has plans to acquire a vineyard to distribute and sell wines in the future.
Results of Operation for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
During the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company generated revenue in the amount of $3,800 and $nil, respectively. The increase was mainly due to our online advertising business formally launched in the second half of year 2020. During the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred operating expenses of $75,939 and $55,448, respectively. The increase was due to the increase in professional fee. For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, our net loss was $66,512 and $59,111, respectively. The increase in net loss was mainly due to the increase in operating expenses for the years ended March 31, 2021, compared to 2020, partially offset by the increase in increase in revenue.
Equity and Capital Resources
As of March 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $196,266. As of March 31, 2021, we had cash of $17,496 and working capital of $64,959, compared to cash of $61,471 and a working capital of $131,471 on March 31, 2020. The decrease in the working capital was primarily due to cash used to pay for operating expenses.
Going Concern Assessment
The Company demonstrates adverse conditions that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. These adverse conditions are negative financial trends, specifically cash outflow from operating activities, operating losses, accumulated deficit and other adverse key financial ratios.
Management’s plan to alleviate the substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern include attempting to improve its business profitability, its ability to generate sufficient cash flow from its operations to meet its operating needs on a timely basis, obtain additional working capital funds from the majority shareholder and the President of the Company to eliminate inefficiencies in order to meet its anticipated cash requirements. However, there can be no assurance that these plans and arrangements will be sufficient to fund the Company’s ongoing capital expenditures and other requirements.
The unaudited condensed financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event that the Company cannot continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management’s application of accounting policies. We believe that understanding the basis and nature of the estimates and assumptions included in footnote 2 of our financial statements is critical to an understanding of our financial statements.