Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements, including those that will be set forth in our preliminary prospectus/proxy statement to be included in a Registration Statement on Form S-4 that we will file with the SEC relating to our proposed business combination with Archer. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 26, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Annual Report as our "initial business combination". We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Proposed Business Combination
On February 10, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among Atlas, Artemis Acquisition Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Artemis Merger Sub”), and Archer Aviation Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Archer”).
The Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of Atlas and Archer.
The Business Combination
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on the date of closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”): (i) Atlas will amend and restate its certificate of incorporation (the “Post-Closing Atlas Certificate of Incorporation”), pursuant to which, among other things, Atlas will have a dual class share structure with (A) shares of Class A common stock that will carry voting rights in the form of one vote per share (the “New Class A Common Stock”), and (B) shares of Class B common stock that will carry voting rights in the form of ten votes per share (the “New Class B Common Stock” and, together with the New Class A Common Stock, the “New Atlas Common Stock”), and (ii) Artemis Merger Sub will merge with and into Archer, with Archer as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas (the “Merger”).
The Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Business Combination”.
The Business Combination is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, following the receipt of the required approval by Atlas’ stockholders and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
Business Combination Consideration
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger, (i) outstanding shares of common stock and preferred stock of Archer will be converted into a right to receive a number of shares of New Class B Common Stock determined on the basis of an implied Archer equity value of $2,525,000,000 (the “Implied Equity Value”), (ii) all stock awards (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Archer common stock will be converted into stock awards to purchase a number of shares of New Class B Common Stock based on an exchange ratio derived from the Implied Equity Value, and (iii) outstanding warrants (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Archer common stock will be converted into warrants to purchase a number of shares of New Class B Common Stock determined on the basis of the Implied Equity Value. The former Archer equity holders will have the right to convert their shares of New Class B Common Stock into shares of New Class A Common Stock pursuant to the Post-Closing Atlas Certificate of Incorporation.
Representations and Warranties; Covenants
The Business Combination Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants of each of the parties thereto that are customary for transactions of this type. Atlas has also agreed to take all action within its power as may be necessary or appropriate such that, effective immediately after the Closing, the Atlas board of directors will be divided into three classes and be composed of a total of seven directors, which directors shall include an individual designated by Atlas, three individuals designated by Archer and three individuals to be identified by Archer in consultation with Atlas who qualify as “independent directors” under the listing rules of the New York Stock Exchange.
Conditions to Each Party’s Obligations
The obligations of Atlas and Archer to consummate the Business Combination are subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the expiration or termination of the applicable waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended, (ii) the absence of any law or governmental order or other legal restraint or prohibition preventing the consummation of the Business Combination, (iii) the Registration Statement (as defined below) being declared effective under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), (iv) the shares of New Class A Common Stock to be issued in connection with the Business Combination having been approved for listing on the New York Stock Exchange, (v) the approval of Atlas’ stockholders, (vi) the approval of Archer’s stockholders and (vii) Atlas having at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets (as determined in accordance with Rule 3a51-1(g)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) remaining after the Closing.
In addition, the obligation of Archer to consummate the Business Combination is subject to, among other conditions, the aggregate cash proceeds from Atlas’ trust account, together with the proceeds from the PIPE Financing (as defined below), equaling no less than $600,000,000 (after deducting any amounts paid to Atlas shareholders that exercise their redemption rights in connection with the Business Combination).
Termination
The Business Combination Agreement may be terminated under certain circumstances prior to the Closing, including, but not limited to, (i) by mutual written consent of Atlas and Archer, (ii) by either Atlas or Archer if the other party breaches its representations, warranties or covenants such that the conditions set forth in the Business Combination Agreement would not be satisfied, and such party fails to cure such breach (other than for certain limited exceptions), (iii) by either Atlas or Archer if the Business Combination is not consummated by September 10, 2021, (iv) by either Atlas or Archer if any governmental entity issues an order or taken any other action permanently enjoining, restraining or otherwise prohibiting the Business Combination and such order or other action has become final and non-appealable, (v) by either Atlas or Archer if certain required approvals are not obtained from the Atlas stockholders after the conclusion of a meeting of Atlas’ stockholders held for such purpose at which such shareholders voted on such approvals, and (vi) by Atlas if (A) the Transaction Support Agreements are not executed and delivered to Atlas within one business day of the signing date of the Business Combination Agreement, (B) Archer’s stockholders do not deliver, within one business day of the Registration Statement being declared effective under the Securities Act, to Atlas a written consent approving the Business Combination (the “Stockholder Written Consent”) or (C) Archer does not deliver, within one business day of the Registration Statement being declared effective under the Securities Act, to Atlas a written consent approving the conversion of all shares of preferred stock of Archer into shares of common stock of Archer immediately prior to the Closing (the “Conversion Written Consent”).
If the Business Combination Agreement is validly terminated, none of the parties to the Business Combination Agreement will have any liability or any further obligation under the Business Combination Agreement, other than customary confidentiality obligations, except in the case of Willful Breach or Fraud (each, as defined in the Business Combination Agreement).
PIPE Financing (Private Placement)
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Atlas entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, each investor agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and Atlas agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the Closing Date (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) immediately following the Closing (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), an aggregate of 60,000,000 shares of Atlas’ Class A Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $600 million (the “PIPE Financing”).
The closing of the PIPE Financing is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Business Combination. The Subscription Agreements provide that Atlas will grant the investors in the PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $131,310, which resulted from operating and formation costs of $159,947 and franchise tax expense of $69,945, which was partially offset by an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in Trust Account in the amount of $98,582.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 30, 2020, we consummated an Initial Public Offering of 50,000,000 units generating gross proceeds to the Company of $500,000,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of 8,000,000 warrants to Atlas Crest Investment LLC at a purchase price of $1.50 per warrant (the "Private Placement Warrants"), generating gross proceeds of $12,000,000. The proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in a trust account (the "Trust Account"). If we do not complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $564,933, which was due to our net loss of $131,310, unrealized gain on investments in the Trust Account of $98,582 and changes in working capital of $335,041.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $500,000,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering being deposited to the Trust Account.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 of $501,490,856 was comprised of $490,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of Units in the Initial Public Offering net of underwriter's discount paid, $12,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of warrants in a private placement to our Sponsor, proceeds from the issuance of a promissory note to our Sponsor of $300,000, and $25,000 from the issuance of Class B common stock to our Sponsor, offset by the payment of $534,144 for offering costs associated with the Initial Public Offering and repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to our Sponsor of $300,000.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $925,923 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required on a non-interest basis. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the Initial Public Offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement units and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement that was effective with the Initial Public Offering, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
We engaged the representative of the underwriters and Moelis & Company LLC, an affiliate of the Sponsor, in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay the representative of the underwriters and Moelis & Company LLC a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of the Business Combination of 2.25% ($11,250,000) and 1.25% ($6,250,000), respectively, or 3.5% ($17,500,000), in the aggregate, of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering. A portion of such fee may be re-allocated or paid to members of FINRA that assist us in consummating our Business Combination.
Advisory and Placement Agent Services Engagement Letters
We engaged Moelis & Company LLC, an affiliate of our Sponsor, in connection with the Business Combination to act as our financial advisor and exclusive placement agent for the PIPE financing pursuant to engagement letters entered into between Atlas and Moelis & Company LLC. Upon completion of the Business Combination, approximately $24,000,000 in aggregate M&A advisory fees and placement agent fees will be payable to Moelis & Company LLC pursuant to these engagement letters.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common stock subject to possible redemption
We account for common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. As of December 31, 2020, 49,635,954 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Earnings ( Loss) Per Share
Net earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 24,666,667 shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of earnings (loss) per share for common shares subject to possible redemption and applies the two-class method in calculating earnings (loss) per share. Net earnings per common share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the allocable interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for Class A and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Class B non-redeemable common stock includes the Founder Shares as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.