Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Background
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing therapies that restore function and improve the lives of people with neurological disorders. We market Inbrija (levodopa inhalation powder), which is approved in the U.S. for intermittent treatment of OFF episodes, also known as OFF periods, in people with Parkinson’s disease treated with carbidopa/levodopa. Inbrija is for as needed use and utilizes our ARCUS pulmonary delivery system, a technology platform designed to deliver medication through inhalation that we believe has potential to be used in the development of a variety of inhaled medicines. We also market branded Ampyra (dalfampridine) Extended Release Tablets, 10 mg.
Inbrija
Our New Drug Application, or NDA, for Inbrija was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, on December 21, 2018. The approval is for a single dose of 84 mg (administered as two capsules), which may be taken up to five times per day. Inbrija became commercially available in the U.S. on February 28, 2019. Currently, Inbrija is available in the U.S. without the need for a medical exception for approximately 96% of commercial health insurance plan and approximately 25% of Medicare plan lives. Approximately one million people in the U.S. and 1.2 million Europeans are diagnosed with Parkinson’s; it is estimated that approximately 40% of people with Parkinson’s in the U.S. experience OFF periods. Net revenue for Inbrija was $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We project peak U.S. annual net revenue of Inbrija to be in the range of $300 to $500 million.
In September 2019, we announced that the European Commission, or EC, approved our Marketing Authorization Application, or MAA, for Inbrija. The approved dose is 66 mg (administered as two capsules) up to five times per day (per European Union, or EU, convention, this reflects emitted dose and is equivalent to the 84 mg labelled dose in the U.S.). Under the MAA, Inbrija is indicated in the EU for the intermittent treatment of episodic motor fluctuations (OFF episodes) in adult patients with Parkinson’s disease treated with a levodopa/dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor. Following the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement between the United Kingdom and the EU, the UK left the EU on January 31, 2020. Effective January 1, 2021, Acorda was granted a grandfathered Marketing Authorization (MA) by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK which is subject to certain administrative filings that are due by December 31, 2021. We are in discussions with potential partners regarding the distribution of Inbrija outside of the U.S., with potential partners in Europe and Japan.
Ampyra
Ampyra became subject to competition from generic versions of Ampyra starting in late 2018 as a result of an adverse U.S. federal district court ruling that invalidated certain Ampyra Orange Book-listed patents. We have experienced a significant decline in Ampyra sales due to competition from several generic versions of Ampyra. Additional manufacturers may market generic versions of Ampyra, and we expect our Ampyra sales will continue to decline over time. Net revenue for Ampyra was $98.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On October 30, 2020, we received a $15 million milestone payment from Biogen International GmbH under our license and collaboration with Biogen. Biogen markets Ampyra outside the U.S. as Fampyra. We became entitled to the milestone payment based on Biogen’s ex-U.S. net sales of Fampyra exceeding $100 million over the four consecutive quarters ending with the third quarter of 2020. This payment was recorded as milestone revenue in the third quarter. We retained approximately $14 million of the milestone payment net of our payment obligations to another party.
Convertible Notes
In December 2019, we announced the successful completion of a private exchange of $276 million of our convertible senior notes due in 2021 in exchange for a combination of approximately $207 million aggregate principal amount of newly-issued convertible senior secured notes due 2024 and $55.2 million in cash. The convertible senior secured notes due 2021 have an adjusted conversion price of approximately $21.00 per share. As a result of the exchange, approximately $69 million of convertible senior notes due in 2021, with an adjusted conversion price of approximately $255.35, remain outstanding. Addressing the remaining portion of the convertible notes due 2021 is a top priority in addition to our focus on the Inbrija launch. More information about the terms and conditions of the 2021 and 2024 convertible notes is set forth in Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report as well as in Financing Arrangements in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this report.
Sale of Chelsea, Massachusetts Manufacturing Operations
In February 2021, we completed the sale of our Chelsea, Massachusetts manufacturing operations to Catalent Pharma Solutions. Pursuant to the transaction, Catalent paid us $80 million in cash, resulting in net proceeds to us of approximately $74 million after transaction fees and expenses and settlement of customary post-closing adjustments. In connection with the sale of the manufacturing operations, we entered into a long-term, global manufacturing services agreement with a Catalent affiliate for the supply of Inbrija. As part of the transaction, Catalent hired substantially all of our prior employees at the Chelsea facility as well as certain of our other employees at our Waltham, Massachusetts facility. We intend to use the net proceeds received from the transaction for general corporate purposes, subject to compliance with the terms of the 2024 notes, which may include funding capital expenditures and the repayment of indebtedness. Also, we expect to save approximately $10 million in annual operating expenses related to the operation of the manufacturing facility. More information about the Catalent transaction is set forth in Part I of this report under Catalent Transaction. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for additional information on the assets classified as held for sale as a result of the transaction.
Financial Management
In January 2021, we announced a corporate restructuring to reduce costs and focus our resources on Inbrija, which is our key strategic priority for 2021. As part of the restructuring, we reduced headcount by approximately 16% through a reduction in force (excluding the employees that transferred to Catalent at the closing of the sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations). All of the reduction in personnel will take place in the first quarter of 2021. As a result, we expect to realize estimated annualized cost savings related to headcount reduction of approximately $6 million beginning in the second quarter of 2021. We estimate that we will incur approximately $3.2 million of pre-tax charges, substantially all of which will be cash expenditures, for severance and other employee separation-related costs in the first quarter of 2021.
In January 2021, we entered into an At The Market (ATM) Offering Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC as sales agent. Pursuant to the ATM agreement, we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate value of up to $15.25 million in an at-the-market offering, subject to a 3% sales commission payable to H.C. Wainwright. If we elect to use the ATM agreement, H.C. Wainwright would be obligated to use commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices and applicable law and regulations to sell shares in accordance with our instructions (including as to price, time or size limit or other parameters or conditions that we may impose).
On July 13, 2020, we received a U.S. income tax refund from the Internal Revenue Service of approximately $12.4 million plus interest of $0.3 million, pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act). Under the CARES Act, among other things, net operating losses arising in a taxable year beginning after December 31, 2017, and before January 1, 2021, can be carried back to the preceding five years to apply against taxable income reported in such years. Pursuant to this provision of the CARES Act, the Company was eligible to carry back 2019 net operating losses to tax years 2017 and 2018, resulting in the refund.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and restricted cash of approximately $102.9 million. Restricted cash includes $31.1 million in escrow related to the 6% semi-annual interest portion of the convertible senior secured notes due 2024, payable in cash or stock. As further described in Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report as well as in Financing Arrangements in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this report, if we are permitted under the notes indenture and we elect to pay interest due in stock, the cash equivalent will be released from escrow. In December 2020, we issued
1,484,871 shares to the holders of the 2024 notes in satisfaction of approximately $6.2 million in interest due on December 1, 2020, and a corresponding amount was released from the escrow in late December 2020.
Nasdaq Listing Rules and Reverse Stock Split
On January 19, 2021, we received a letter from The Nasdaq Stock Market, LLC notifying us that we had regained compliance with Listing Rule 5450(a)(1), which requires that listed securities maintain a minimum closing bid price of at least $1.00 per share (the “Minimum Bid Requirement”). We regained compliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement based on the closing bid price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market between January 4, 2021 and January 15, 2021. We had previously been notified, on July 23, 2020, of our non-compliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement.
On December 31, 2020, we filed an amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation which effected, as of 4:01 p.m. Eastern Time on December 31, 2020, a 1-for-6 reverse stock split of the shares of our outstanding common stock and proportionate reduction in the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 370,000,000 to 61,666,666. Our Board of Directors approved the reverse stock split as part of plan to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement. The reverse stock split had previously been authorized by our stockholders at a special meeting convened on July 31, 2020.
Our common stock began trading on a split-adjusted basis on The Nasdaq Global Select Market commencing upon market open on January 4, 2021. The common stock continued to trade under the symbol “ACOR” after the reverse stock split became effective. The reverse stock split applied equally to all outstanding shares of the common stock and did not modify the rights or preferences of the common stock. The reverse stock split also resulted in a corresponding adjustment to outstanding equity awards as well as shares reserved for future issuance under our incentive compensation plans.
All figures in this report relating to shares of our common stock (such as share amounts, per share amounts, and conversion rates and prices), including in the financial statements and accompanying notes to the financial statements, have been retroactively restated to reflect the 1-for-6 reverse stock split of our common stock.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our business and financial condition have been impacted by, and are subject to risks resulting from, the COVID-19 (novel coronavirus) pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruptions in the healthcare industry. The duration of the pandemic is difficult to predict, and it is likely to have ongoing impacts as it continues. The travel restrictions, “shelter in place” orders, quarantine policies, and general concerns about the spread of COVID-19 have disrupted the delivery of healthcare to patients, for example making it more difficult for some patients to visit with their physician and obtain pharmaceutical prescriptions. Also, healthcare office staffing shortages may delay the administrative work, and particularly insurance-related documentation, needed to obtain reimbursement for prescriptions. We believe these factors contributed to volatility in new Inbrija prescriptions during 2020.
The COVID-related policies, restrictions and concerns may disrupt our operations and those of our customers and suppliers. Also, our operations could be interrupted if we or our customers or suppliers lose the services of key employees or consultants who become ill from COVID-19. These types of disruptions could potentially affect any of our critical business functions, and thus harm our business, including for example our manufacturing, sales and marketing operations as well compliance and certain general and administrative functions. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or any other health epidemic, is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. As the pandemic continues, it may result in a sustained economic downturn that could affect demand for our products and our ability to access capital on reasonable terms, or at all.
Inbrija (levodopa inhalation powder)/Parkinson’s Disease
Inbrija (levodopa inhalation powder) is the first and only inhaled levodopa, or L-dopa, for intermittent treatment of OFF episodes, also known as OFF periods, in people with Parkinson’s disease treated with carbidopa/levodopa regimen. Our New Drug Application, or NDA, for Inbrija was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, on December 21, 2018. The approval is for a single dose of 84 mg (administered as two capsules), which may be taken up to five times per day. Inbrija became commercially available in the U.S. on February 28, 2019. Currently, Inbrija is available in the U.S. without the need for a medical exception for approximately 96% of commercial health insurance plan and approximately
25% of Medicare plan lives. Net revenue for Inbrija was $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We project peak U.S. annual net revenue of Inbrija to be in the range of $300 to $500 million.
In September 2019, we announced that the European Commission, or EC, approved our Marketing Authorization Application, or MAA, for Inbrija. The approved dose is 66 mg (administered as two capsules) up to five times per day (per European Union, or EU, convention, this reflects emitted dose and is equivalent to the 84 mg labelled dose in the U.S.). Under the MAA, Inbrija is indicated in the EU for the intermittent treatment of episodic motor fluctuations (OFF episodes) in adult patients with Parkinson’s disease treated with a levodopa/dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor. The MAA approved Inbrija for use in what were then the 27 countries of the EU, as well as Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein. Following the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement between the United Kingdom and the EU, the UK left the EU on January 31, 2020. Following the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement between the United Kingdom and the EU, the UK left the EU on January 31, 2020. Effective January 1, 2021, Acorda was granted a grandfathered Marketing Authorization (MA) by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK which is subject to certain administrative filings that are due by December 31, 2021. We are in discussions with potential partners regarding the distribution of Inbrija outside of the U.S., with potential partners in Europe and Japan.
Inbrija is marketed in the U.S. through our own specialty sales force and commercial infrastructure, which we are supplementing with sales representatives provided by a contract commercial organization. Inbrija is distributed in the U.S. primarily through: Alliance Rx Walgreens Prime, or Walgreens, a specialty pharmacy that delivers the medication to patients by mail; and ASD Specialty Healthcare, Inc. (an AmeriSource Bergen affiliate). During 2020, we transitioned from a network of several specialty pharmacies to Walgreens as the sole specialty pharmacy for U.S. sales of Inbrija, which we believe has potential benefits to patients and our business. Our neuro-specialty sales and marketing team includes our own sales representatives as well as established teams of Medical Science Liaisons, Regional Reimbursement Directors, and Market Access Account Directors who provide information to payers and physicians on our marketed products; and Market Development Managers who work collaboratively with field teams and corporate personnel to assist in the execution of the Company’s strategic initiatives. Our sales representatives (with the contracted representatives) are targeting approximately 5,000 healthcare providers, currently focusing on a priority list of approximately 2,000 physicians who are high volume prescribers of levodopa/carbidopa. Our Inbrija launch activities are focused on physician awareness and market access as well as patient awareness, education and training.
We have established Prescription Support Services for Inbrija, which we sometimes refer to as the Inbrija hub. Prescription Support Services is designed to help patients navigate their insurance coverage and offer reimbursement support services, when appropriate. Services fall into one of these categories: insurance verification, to research patient insurance benefits and confirm insurance coverage; prior authorization support, to identify prior authorization requirements; and appeals support. For patients that may need assistance paying for their medication, Prescription Support Services offers several support options, including: a program that provides no cost medication to patients who meet specific program eligibility requirements; co-pay support, which may help commercially insured (non-government funded) patients lower their out-of-pocket costs; and a bridge program, for federally-insured patients who experience a delay in coverage determination. We have implemented a no-cost sample program, available at physician offices, to enable patients and their physicians to assess the value of Inbrija before the patient incurs out-of-pocket co-pay or co-insurance costs. In addition, we have implemented a free trial program, available through the Inbrija hub, for commercially insured patients who cannot access the free samples because of offices and institutions that have policies that prohibit samples. Parkinson’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder resulting from the gradual loss of certain neurons in the brain. These neurons are responsible for producing dopamine and that loss causes a range of symptoms including impaired movement, muscle stiffness and tremors. The standard baseline treatment of Parkinson’s disease is oral carbidopa/levodopa, but oral medication can be associated with wide variability in the timing and amount of absorption and there are significant challenges in creating a regimen that consistently maintains therapeutic effects. As Parkinson’s progresses, people are likely to experience OFF periods, which are characterized by the return of Parkinson’s symptoms that result from low levels of dopamine between doses of oral carbidopa/levodopa. OFF periods are often highly disruptive to people with Parkinson’s. Approximately one million people in the U.S. and 1.2 million Europeans are diagnosed with Parkinson’s; it is estimated that approximately 40% of people with Parkinson’s in the U.S. experience OFF periods.
Inbrija is for as needed use and utilizes our ARCUS platform for inhaled therapeutics. ARCUS is a dry-powder pulmonary drug delivery technology that we believe has potential to be used in the development of a variety of inhaled medicines. The ARCUS platform allows systemic delivery of medication through inhalation, by transforming molecules into a light, porous dry powder. This allows delivery of substantially higher doses of medication than can be delivered via conventional dry powder technologies. We acquired the ARCUS technology platform as part of our 2014 acquisition of Civitas Therapeutics. We have worldwide rights to our ARCUS drug delivery technology, which is protected by extensive
know-how and trade secrets and various U.S. and foreign patents, including patents that protect the Inbrija dry powder capsules beyond 2030. We have several patents listed in the Orange Book for Inbrija, including patents expiring between 2022 and 2032, and Inbrija is entitled to three years of new product exclusivity, through December 2021, as posted in the Orange book.
Ampyra
Ampyra was approved by the FDA in January 2010 to improve walking in adults with multiple sclerosis. To our knowledge, Ampyra is the first drug approved for this indication. Efficacy was shown in people with all four major types of MS (relapsing remitting, secondary progressive, progressive relapsing and primary progressive). Ampyra became subject to competition from generic versions of Ampyra starting in late 2018 as a result of an adverse U.S. federal district court ruling that invalidated certain Ampyra Orange Book-listed patents. We have experienced a significant decline in Ampyra sales due to competition from several generic versions of Ampyra. Additional manufacturers may market generic versions of Ampyra, and we expect our Ampyra sales will continue to decline over time. Net revenue for Ampyra was $98.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
License and Collaboration Agreement with Biogen
Ampyra is marketed as Fampyra outside the U.S. by Biogen International GmbH, or Biogen, under a license and collaboration agreement that we entered into in June 2009. Fampyra has been approved in a number of countries across Europe, Asia and the Americas. Under our agreement with Biogen, we are entitled to receive double-digit tiered royalties on net sales of Fampyra and we are also entitled to receive additional payments based on achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones. In October 2020, we received a $15 million milestone payment from Biogen based on ex-U.S. net sales exceeding $100 million over the four consecutive quarters ending with the third quarter of 2020. This payment was recorded as milestone revenue in the third quarter. We retained approximately $14 million of the milestone payment net of our payment obligations to another party. In November 2017, we announced a $40 million Fampyra royalty monetization transaction with HealthCare Royalty Partners, or HCRP. In return for the payment to us, HCRP obtained the right to receive these Fampyra royalties up to an agreed-upon threshold. Until this threshold is met, if ever, we will not receive Fampyra royalties although we retained the right to receive any potential future milestone payments, including the milestone payment described above. The HCRP transaction is accounted for as a liability, as described in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report.
Ampyra Patent Update
There are no patents listed in the Orange Book for Ampyra. Ampyra became subject to competition from generic versions of Ampyra starting in late 2018 as a result of an adverse U.S. federal district court ruling that invalidated certain Ampyra Orange Book-listed patents.
There are two European patents, EP 1732548 and EP 2377536, with claims directed to use of a sustained release dalfampridine composition (known under the trade name Fampyra in the European Union) to increase walking speed in a patient with multiple sclerosis. Both European patents are set to expire in 2025, absent any additional exclusivity granted based on regulatory review timelines. Nullity actions have been filed in Germany against both of the German national patents derived from EP 1732548 and EP 2377536 by ratiopharm GmbH, a generic manufacturer affiliated with Teva. Fampyra also has 10 years of market exclusivity in the European Union that is set to expire in 2021.
We will vigorously defend our intellectual property rights.
ARCUS Product Development
We have been exploring opportunities for other proprietary products in which inhaled delivery of medicine using our ARCUS drug delivery technology can provide a significant therapeutic benefit to patients. We believe there are potential opportunities with central nervous system, or CNS, as well as non-CNS, disorders.
Our ARCUS development has been focused on a program for acute treatment of migraine. Existing oral therapies for migraine can be associated with slow onset of action and gastrointestinal challenges. Patients cite the need for rapid relief from migraine symptoms as their most desired medication attribute. Additionally, individuals with migraine may suffer from
nausea and delayed gastric emptying which further impact the consistency and efficacy of the oral route of administration. We have been evaluating therapeutic candidates for their suitability to move forward with this program. Due to our three restructurings since 2017 and associated cost-cutting measures, we have deferred consideration of further investment into potential new ARCUS applications in migraine pending additional progress with the Inbrija commercial launch in the U.S.
Should we decide in the future to make investments in any ARCUS development program, we would be reliant on Catalent for the manufacture of product for that program. Our global supply agreement with Catalent does not provide for the terms and conditions under which Catalent would supply any product or product candidate other than Inbrija. We would be unable to advance the development of any ARCUS inhaled therapeutic candidate unless Catalent is willing to manufacture the candidate for us on commercially reasonable terms. Also, due to reductions in force, employee attrition and the 2021 sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations, we believe we lack certain personnel needed for, and would need to hire replacements before continuing with, this research and development work.
In July 2015, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation awarded us a grant to support the development of a formulation and delivery system for a dry powder version of lung surfactant, a treatment for neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, or nRDS. In collaboration with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, we developed a formulation and delivery device based on our proprietary ARCUS drug delivery technology. nRDS is a condition affecting prematurely born infants in which their lungs are underdeveloped and thus lack a sufficient amount of lung surfactant. It can be fatal, or lead to severe, chronic health issues caused by a lack of oxygen getting to the baby’s brain and other organs. Delivering liquid surfactant to the lungs via intubation is the standard of care. We believe that our formulation and delivery system may present a more practical alternative for use in developing areas of the world, where intubation poses numerous problems. Based on achievement of pre-clinical proof of concept, the foundation expanded the funding to include pre-IND development, including an additional grant of approximately $2.08 million in 2020 to continue this work. This program is not aimed at developing a commercial product, but our work on this program could potentially generate information that is useful for adapting the ARCUS drug delivery technology to commercial pediatric uses. We expect all current grant-funded work to be completed in the first half of 2021. We are evaluating next steps for our continuing involvement in this program as it transitions past the grant-funding stage and in light of the sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations and other factors.
Other Research and Development Programs
Our other research and development programs include rHIgM22 and cimaglermin alfa. rHIgM22 is a remyelinating antibody that is a potential therapeutic for multiple sclerosis. Data from a Phase 1 safety and tolerability trial showed that a single dose of rHIgM22 was not associated with any safety signals. The study was not powered to show efficacy and exploratory measures showed no difference between the treatment groups. Cimaglermin alfa is a member of the neuregulin growth factor family, and has been shown to promote recovery after neurological injury, as well as enhance heart function in animal models of heart failure. We initiated a Phase 1b clinical trial assessing three doses of cimaglermin alfa in people with heart failure, but discontinued enrollment and then received an FDA clinical hold based on the occurrence of a case of hepatotoxicity (liver injury). The FDA clinical hold was lifted after we presented additional data on the hepatotoxicity, but we have not since restarted any clinical study of cimaglermin alfa. We are considering next steps for these programs, which could include potential partnering or out-licensing, but due to our three restructurings since 2017 and associated cost-cutting measures, we have deferred consideration of any further investment pending additional progress with the Inbrija commercial launch in the U.S.
Financial Guidance for 2021
We are providing the following guidance with respect to our 2021 financial performance:
•
Net revenue from the sale of Ampyra in 2021 is expected to range from $75 million to $85 million.
•
Operating expenses in 2021 are expected to range from $130 million to $140 million. This is a non-GAAP projection that excludes restructuring costs and share-based compensation charges, as more fully described below.
The projected range of operating expenses in 2021 specified above was not prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP) because this guidance excludes restructuring costs and share-based compensation charges. Due to the forward looking nature of this information, the amount of compensation charges and benefits needed to reconcile this measure to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is dependent on future changes in the market price of our common stock and is not available at this time. Non-GAAP financial measures are not an
alternative for financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. However, we believe the presentation of this non-GAAP financial measure, when viewed in conjunction with actual GAAP results, provides investors with a more meaningful understanding of our ongoing and projected operating performance because it excludes (i) expenses that pertain to a non-routine restructuring event, and (ii) non-cash charges that are substantially dependent on changes in the market price of our common stock. We believe this non-GAAP financial measure helps indicate underlying trends in our business and is important in comparing current results with prior period results and understanding expected operating performance. Also, our management uses this non-GAAP financial measure to establish budgets and operational goals, and to manage our business and to evaluate its performance.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue
Net Product Revenues
Inbrija
We recognize product sales of Inbrija following receipt of product by companies in our distribution network, which for Inbrija primarily includes specialty pharmacies, which deliver the medication to patients by mail, and ASD Specialty Healthcare, Inc. (an AmeriSource Bergen affiliate). We recognized net revenue from the sale of Inbrija of $24.2 million and $15.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in Inbrija net revenue was due to an increase in net volume of $8.9 million.
Discounts and allowances which are included as an offset in net revenue consist of allowances for customer credits, including estimated chargebacks, rebates, returns and discounts. Discounts and allowances are recorded following shipment of our products to our customers. Adjustments are recorded for estimated chargebacks, rebates, and discounts. Discounts and allowances also consist of discounts provided to Medicare beneficiaries whose prescription drug costs cause them to be subject to the Medicare Part D coverage gap (i.e., the “donut hole”). Payment of coverage gap discounts is required under the Affordable Care Act, the health care reform legislation enacted in 2010. Discounts and allowances may increase as a percentage of sales as we enter into new managed care contracts in the future.
We believe that first and fourth quarter revenue for our products is subject to certain recurring seasonal factors relating to the commencement of a new calendar year. For example, some patients refill their prescriptions earlier ahead of the new year, in the fourth quarter, in anticipation of the year-end reset of health plan deductibles and the Medicare donut hole, or a year-end switch of their insurance plans or pharmacy benefit providers. Also, we believe specialty pharmacies may increase their stock, within contractual limits, to account for the holidays and new year. These factors may seasonally have a positive impact on fourth quarter revenues and a negative impact on first quarter revenues. Also, discounts and allowances typically are highest in the first quarter, and lowest in the fourth quarter, and when this occurs this increases fourth quarter revenues, and decreases first quarter revenues, on a relative basis. In the case of the fourth quarter of 2020, we believe our transition from a network of several specialty pharmacies to Alliance Rx Walgreens Prime, or Walgreens, as the sole specialty pharmacy for U.S. sales of Inbrija was another factor that positively impacted Inbrija net sales on a one-time basis, as Walgreens initiated stocking for newly-transferred patients during the quarter.
Ampyra
We recognize product sales of Ampyra following receipt of product by companies in our distribution network, which for Ampyra primarily includes specialty pharmacies, which deliver the medication to patients by mail. We recognized net revenue from the sale of Ampyra to these customers of $98.9 million and $164.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts are inclusive of Mylan AG revenue of $0.8 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in Ampyra net revenue was composed of a decrease in net volume of $79.5 million partially offset by price increase and discount and allowance adjustments of $14.4 million. Net
revenue from sales of Ampyra decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the entry of generic versions of Ampyra as a result of the invalidation of our Ampyra patents in 2017.
Discounts and allowances which are included as an offset in net revenue consist of allowances for customer credits, including estimated chargebacks, rebates, returns and discounts. Discounts and allowances are recorded following shipment of our products to our customers. Adjustments are recorded for estimated chargebacks, rebates, and discounts. Discounts and allowances also consist of discounts provided to Medicare beneficiaries whose prescription drug costs cause them to be subject to the Medicare Part D coverage gap (i.e., the “donut hole”). Payment of coverage gap discounts is required under the Affordable Care Act, the health care reform legislation enacted in 2010. Discounts and allowances may increase as a percentage of sales as we enter into new managed care contracts in the future.
We believe that first and fourth quarter revenue for our products is subject to certain recurring seasonal factors relating to the commencement of a new calendar year. For example, some patients refill their prescriptions earlier ahead of the new year, in the fourth quarter, in anticipation of the year-end reset of health plan deductibles and the Medicare donut hole, or a year-end switch of their insurance plans or pharmacy benefit providers. Also, we believe specialty pharmacies may increase their stock, within contractual limits, to account for the holidays and new year. These factors may seasonally have a positive impact on fourth quarter revenues and a negative impact on first quarter revenues. Also, discounts and allowances typically are highest in the first quarter, and lowest in the fourth quarter, and when this occurs this increases fourth quarter revenues, and decreases first quarter revenues, on a relative basis.
Other Product Revenues
We recognized net revenue from the sale of other products of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Milestone Revenue
We recognized $15 million and $0 million in milestone revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase is due to the $15 million milestone payment earned in the three-month period ended September 30, 2020 and received from Biogen in October 2020 based on ex-U.S. Fampyra net sales exceeding $100 million over a period of four consecutive quarters ending with the third quarter of 2020. We will retain approximately $14 million of the milestone payment net of our payment obligations to another party.
Royalty Revenue
We recognized $13.1 million in royalty revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to ex-U.S. sales of Fampyra by Biogen.
Cost of Sales
We recorded cost of sales of $33.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $14.7 million in inventory costs related to recognized revenues, $4.1 million in royalty fees based on net product shipments, idle capacity costs of $6.3 million, $8.2 million in period costs related to expired inventory, freight, stability testing, and packaging and $0.2 million for costs related to sales of the authorized generic version of Ampyra. Production costs related to idle capacity are not included in the cost of inventory but are charged directly to cost of sales in the period incurred.
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of $32.2 million in inventory costs related to recognized revenues, $0.9 million in royalty fees based on net product shipments, idle capacity costs of $0.7 million, $0.5 million in period costs related to freight, stability testing, and packaging and $0.5 million for costs related to sales of the authorized generic version of Ampyra. Cost of sales of $1.8 million for inventory manufactured pre-launch for Inbrija was not recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019, since the inventory manufactured prior to the FDA approval was expensed as research and development expense as incurred and was combined with other research and development expenses in 2018.
Amortization of Intangibles
We commenced amortization of the intangible asset upon launch in February 2019 and recorded amortization of $30.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $25.6 million related to Inbrija for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $23.0 million as compared to $60.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $37.1 million, or 62%. The decrease was primarily due to reductions in spending of $26.4 million due to the commercialization of Inbrija, reductions of $11.0 million due to restructuring and decrease in several programs to shift focus on Inbrija launch, partially offset by increases of $0.3 million in research and development expenses related to Biotie.
Selling, General and Administrative
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $81.2 million compared to $109.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $28.3 million, or 26%. The decrease was attributable primarily to a decrease in marketing related spending of $7.9 million due to launch activities for Inbrija, a decrease in overall salaries and benefits of $11.2 million and a decrease in spending related to marketing for Ampyra of $9.2 million.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $71.3 million compared to $83.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $12.0 million, or 14%. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in spending related to launch activities of $0.8 million, a decrease of $6.6 million in staff compensation, benefits and medical affairs related expenses, a decrease of $1.0 million in business development costs and human resources costs, and a decrease of $3.0 million in restructuring expenses.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairments
We recognized an intangible asset impairment charge of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company determined that there were relevant changes to the key assumptions that would negatively affect the value of the IPR&D asset for BTT-1023. Management determined that the results of the clinical trial did not meet the primary or secondary end-points, and the clinical trial was not large enough or expansive enough to be persuasive to generate interest by third-parties for a possible licensing arrangement. Management determined that this assessment was the triggering event that indicated that the asset was fully impaired as there was no potential value with an out-licensing arrangement. Based on the qualitative assessment, management determined that the carrying value of the asset exceeded its estimated fair value and therefore, the asset was fully impaired. Management determined that additional quantitative procedures were not relevant in this circumstance given the overwhelming qualitative evidence that indicated the asset was fully impaired.
We recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $277.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the third quarter of 2019, we experienced a significant decline in our stock price that reduced the market capitalization below the carrying value of the Company. We performed a quantitative assessment and after completing the assessment during the third quarter of 2019, we concluded that the carrying value of the Company exceeded its estimated fair value and therefore, the goodwill was fully impaired.
Loss on Assets Held for Sale
As a result of the sale of the Chelsea manufacturing operations to Catalent, the Company determined that the criterion to classify the Chelsea manufacturing operations as assets held for sale within the Company’s consolidated balance sheet effective December 31, 2020 were met. Accordingly, the assets were classified as current assets held for sale at December 31, 2020 as the Company, at that time, expected to divest the Chelsea manufacturing operations within the next twelve months. The Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell the Chelsea manufacturing operations on January 12, 2021 and closed the transaction on February 10, 2021. The classification to assets held for sale impacted the net book value of the assets expected to be transferred upon sale. The estimated fair value of the Chelsea manufacturing operations was determined using the purchase price in the purchase agreement along with estimated broker, accounting, legal, and other selling
expenses, which resulted in a fair value less costs to sell of approximately $71.8 million. The carrying value of the assets being classified as held for sale was approximately $129.7 million, which includes property and equipment of $129.6 million and prepaid expenses of $0.1 million. As a result, the Company recorded a loss on assets held for sale of $57.9 million against the Chelsea manufacturing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
A derivative liability was recorded in December 2019 as a result of the issuance of the 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024. The derivative liability is measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and changes in the fair value are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations. We recorded income of $40.0 million due to the change in the fair value of the derivative liability for the year ended December 31, 2020. The changes in the fair value of the derivative liability were primarily due to changes in the Company’s stock price over the period.
Changes in Fair Value of Acquired Contingent Consideration
As a result of the original spin out of Civitas from Alkermes, part of the consideration to Alkermes was a future royalty to be paid to Alkermes on Inbrija. Acorda acquired this contingent consideration as part of the Civitas acquisition. The fair value of that future royalty is assessed quarterly. We recorded income pertaining to changes in the fair value of our acquired contingent consideration of $30.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $86.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $56.0 million or 64%. The changes in the fair-value of the acquired contingent consideration were primarily due to the overall downward revision to the projected revenue and the recalculation of cash flows for the passage of time.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net was $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other income, net of $37.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease in income of $67.0 million, or 179%. The decrease was due primarily to the gain recorded on debt extinguishment of $55.1 million in 2019, a decrease in interest income of approximately $3.4 million, an increase in interest and amortization of debt discount expense of approximately $8.7 million, partially offset by an increase in other income $0.2 million.
Benefit from Income Taxes
We recorded a $8.1 million benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a $1.3 million benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective income tax rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 7.5% and 0.5%, respectively.
The variances in the effective tax rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were due primarily to the valuation allowance recorded on deferred tax assets for which no tax benefit can be recognized, goodwill impairment for which no tax benefit can be recognized, and the benefit recorded on the net operating loss carryback under the CARES act recorded at 21% to recover taxes paid at the previous statutory rate of 35%.
The Company’s overall effective tax rate in 2020 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the benefit recorded on the net operating loss carryback under the CARES act recorded at 21% to recover taxes paid at the previous statutory rate of 35%, the forfeitures of equity of which no tax deduction is recorded and the valuation allowance recorded on deferred tax assets for which no tax benefit can be recognized.
The Company continues to evaluate the realizability of its deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis and will adjust such amounts in light of changing facts and circumstances including, but not limited to, future projections of taxable income, tax legislation, rulings by relevant tax authorities, the progress of ongoing tax audits and the regulatory approval of products currently under development. Any changes to the valuation allowance or deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future would impact the Company's income taxes.
The Company’s state examination by the state of Massachusetts for tax periods 2016 and 2017 was completed during the third quarter of 2020. The Company was assessed an immaterial tax approximately $0.02 million.
The Company has ongoing state examinations in New Jersey and Minnesota which cover a range of tax periods, 2015-2018. There have been no proposed adjustments at this stage of these examinations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily from: private placements and public offerings of our capital stock; borrowing money through loans and the issuance of debt instruments; payments received under our collaboration and licensing agreements; revenue from sales of Ampyra, Fampyra, and Inbrija, as well as our former products, Zanaflex and Qutenza; royalty monetizations and our revenue interest financing arrangement; and, to a lesser extent, funding from government grants. Also, in February 2021, we obtained additional capital from the sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations.
At December 31, 2020, we had $71.4 million of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, compared to $125.8 million at December 31, 2019. Our December 31, 2020 cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments balance does not include restricted cash, currently held in escrow under the terms of our convertible senior secured notes due 2024, further described below under Financing Arrangements, which may potentially be released from escrow if we pay interest on those notes using shares of our common stock. The December 31, 2020 balance also does not include the net proceeds received from the sale of our Chelsea manufacturing operations. We incurred net losses of $99.6 million and $273.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our future capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including:
•
the amount of revenue generated from sales of Inbrija and Ampyra;
•
our ability to manage operating expenses;
•
the amount and timing of purchase price, milestone or other payments that we may owe or have a right to receive under collaboration, license, asset sale, acquisition, or other agreements or transactions; and the extent to which the terms and conditions of our convertible senior secured notes due 2024 restrict or direct our use of proceeds from such transactions;
•
our ability to make required payments relating to our 2024 Notes, as defined below under Financing Arrangements, using shares of our common stock rather than cash;
•
whether and the extent to which we can refinance our remaining 2021 Notes, as defined below under Financing Arrangements, with later-maturing debt, the terms and conditions of any new debt that we issue, and the extent to which we make any cash payments in connection with such a transaction;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•
capital required or used for future acquisitions, to in-license new products, programs or compounds, or for research and development relating to existing or future acquired or in-licensed programs or compounds.
Our ability to meet our future operating requirements, repay our liabilities, and meet our other obligations are dependent upon a number of factors, including our ability to generate cash from product sales, reduce planned expenditures, and obtain additional financing. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from the sale of our products, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, subject to the restrictions contained in the indenture governing our 2024 Notes, such as further reducing expenses, selling assets, restructuring debt, or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may be onerous and which are likely to be highly dilutive. Also, our ability to raise additional capital and repay or restructure our indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time, among other factors. In addition, financing may not be available when needed, at all, on terms acceptable to us or in accordance with the restrictions described above.
Financing Arrangements
Convertible Senior Secured Notes Due 2024
On December 24, 2019, the Company completed the private exchange of $276.0 million aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) for a combination of newly-issued 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”) and cash. For each $1,000 principal amount of exchanged 2021 Notes, the Company issued $750 principal amount of the 2024 Notes and made a cash payment of $200 (the “Exchange”). In the aggregate, the Company issued approximately $207.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes and paid approximate $55.2 million in cash to participating holders. The Exchange was conducted with a limited number of institutional holders of the 2021 Notes pursuant to Exchange Agreements dated as of December 20, 2019 (each, an “Exchange Agreement”).
The 2024 Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated as of December 23, 2019, among the Company, its wholly owned subsidiary, Civitas Therapeutics, Inc. (along with any domestic subsidiaries acquired or formed after the date of issuance, the “Guarantors”), and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee and collateral agent (the “2024 Indenture”). The 2024 Notes are senior obligations of the Company and the Guarantors, secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of the Company and the Guarantors, subject to certain exceptions described in the Security Agreement, dated as of December 23, 2019, between the grantors party thereto and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as collateral agent (the “Security Agreement”).
The 2024 Notes will mature on December 1, 2024 unless earlier converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Interest on the 2024 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears at a rate of 6.00% per annum on each June 1 and December 1, beginning on June 1, 2020. The Company may elect to pay interest in cash or shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions. If the Company elects to pay interest in shares of common stock, such common stock will have a per share value equal to 95% of the daily volume-weighted average price for the 10 trading days ending on and including the trading day immediately preceding the relevant interest payment date. In December 2020, the Company issued 1,484,871 shares of common stock in satisfaction of the interest payable to holders of the 2024 Notes on December 1, 2020. In connection with this stock-based interest payment approximately $6.2 million of accrued interest was released from restricted case and became available to the Company for other purposes.
The 2024 Notes are convertible at the option of the holder into shares of common stock of the Company at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date. The adjusted conversion rate for the 2024 Notes is 47.6190 shares of the Company’s common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2024 Notes, representing an adjusted conversion price of approximately $21.00 per share of common stock. The conversion rate was adjusted to reflect the 1-for-6 reverse stock split effected on December 31, 2020 and is subject to additional adjustments in certain circumstances as described in the 2024 Indenture.
The Company may elect to settle conversions of the 2024 Notes in cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of the Company’s common stock. Holders who convert their 2024 Notes prior to June 1, 2023 (other than in connection with a make-whole fundamental change) will also be entitled to an interest make-whole payment equal to the sum of all regularly scheduled stated interest payments, if any, due on such 2024 Notes on each interest payment date occurring after the conversion date for such conversion and on or before June 1, 2023. In addition, the Company will have the right to cause all 2024 Notes then outstanding to be converted automatically if the volume-weighted average price per share of the Company’s common stock equals or exceeds 130% of the adjusted conversion price for a specified period of time and certain other conditions are satisfied.
Holders of the 2024 Notes will have the right, at their option, to require the Company to purchase their 2024 Notes if a fundamental change (as defined in the 2024 Indenture) occurs, in each case, at a repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2024 Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the applicable repurchase date. If a make-whole fundamental change occurs, as described in the 2024 Indenture, and a holder elects to convert its 2024 Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change, such holder may be entitled to an increase in the adjusted conversion rate as described in the 2024 Indenture.
Subject to a number of exceptions and qualifications, the 2024 Indenture restricts the ability of the Company and certain of its subsidiaries to, among other things, (i) pay dividends or make other payments or distributions on their capital stock, or purchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for value any capital stock, (ii) make certain investments, (iii) incur indebtedness or issue preferred stock, other than certain forms of permitted debt, which includes, among other
items, indebtedness incurred to refinance the 2021 Notes, (iv) create liens on their assets, (v) sell their assets, (vi) enter into certain transactions with affiliates or (vii) merge, consolidate or sell of all or substantially all of their assets. The 2024 Indenture also requires the Company to make an offer to repurchase the 2024 Notes upon the occurrence of certain asset sales.
The 2024 Indenture provides that a number of events will constitute an event of default, including, among other things, (i) a failure to pay interest for 30 days, (ii) failure to pay the 2024 Notes when due at maturity, upon any required repurchase, upon declaration of acceleration or otherwise, (iii) failure to convert the 2024 Notes in accordance with the 2024 Indenture and the failure continues for five business days, (iv) not issuing certain notices required by the 2024 Indenture within a timely manner, (v) failure to comply with the other covenants or agreements in the 2024 Indenture for 60 days following the receipt of a notice of non-compliance, (vi) a default or other failure by the Company to make required payments under other indebtedness of the Company or certain subsidiaries having an outstanding principal amount of $30.0 million or more, (vii) failure by the Company or certain subsidiaries to pay final judgments aggregating in excess of $30.0 million, (viii) certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency and (ix) the commercial launch in the United States of a product determined by the U.S. FDA to be bioequivalent to Inbrija. In the case of an event of default arising from certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency with respect to the Company, all outstanding 2024 Notes will become due and payable immediately without further action or notice. If any other event of default occurs and is continuing, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding 2024 Notes may declare all the notes to be due and payable immediately.
The 2021 Notes received by the Company in the Exchange were cancelled in accordance with their terms. Accordingly, upon completion of the Exchange, $69.0 million of the 2021 Notes remained outstanding.
The Company assessed all terms and features of the 2024 Notes in order to identify any potential embedded features that would require bifurcation. As part of this analysis, the Company assessed the economic characteristics and risks of the 2024 Notes, including the conversion, put and call features. The Company concluded the conversion features required bifurcation as a derivative. The fair value of the conversion features derivative was determined based on the difference between the fair value of the 2024 Notes with the conversion options and the fair value of the 2024 Notes without the conversion options using a binomial model. The Company determined that the fair value of the derivative upon issuance of the 2024 Notes was $59.4 million and recorded this amount as a derivative liability with an offsetting amount as a debt discount as a reduction to the carrying value of the 2024 Notes on the closing date, or December 24, 2019. There are several embedded features within the 2024 Notes which, upon issuance, did not meet the conditions for equity classification. The conversion feature is measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and the changes in the fair value of the conversion feature for the period will be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Company received stockholder approval on August 28, 2020 to increase the number of authorized shares of the Company’s common stock from 13,333,333 shares to 61,666,666 shares. As a result of the share approval, the Company determined that multiple embedded conversion options met the conditions for equity classification. The Company performed a valuation of these conversion options as of September 17, 2020, which was the date the Company completed certain securities registration obligations. The resulting fair value of these conversion options was $18.3 million, which was reclassified to equity and presented in the statement of stockholder’s equity as of September 30, 2020, net of the $4.4 million tax impact. The equity component is not re-measured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. The Company performed a valuation of the derivative liability related to certain embedded conversion features that are precluded from equity classification. The fair value of these conversion features was calculated to be $1.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
The outstanding 2024 Note balance as of December 31, 2020 consisted of the following:
Convertible Senior Notes Due 2021
In June 2014, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (the “Underwriter”) relating to the issuance by the Company of $345 million aggregate principal amount of 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) in an underwritten public offering. The net proceeds from the offering were $337.5 million after deducting the Underwriter’s discount and offering expenses paid by the Company. On December 24, 2019, the Company completed the private exchange of $276.0 million aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 2021 Notes for a combination of newly-issued 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”) and cash. The 2021 Notes received by the Company in the exchange were cancelled in accordance with their terms. Accordingly, upon completion of the exchange, $69.0 million of the 2021 Notes remained outstanding.
The 2021 Notes are governed by the terms of an indenture, dated as of June 23, 2014 (the “Base Indenture”) and the first supplemental indenture, dated as of June 23, 2014 (the “Supplemental Indenture”, and together with the Base Indenture, the “2021 Indenture”), each between the Company and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee (the “Trustee”). The 2021 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of the Company’s common stock, at the Company’s election, based on an adjusted conversion rate of 3.9161 shares per $1,000 principal amount of 2021 Notes (representing an adjusted conversion price of approximately $255.35 per share), only in the following circumstances and to the following extent: (1) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of 2021 Notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of the Company’s common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; (2) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on September 30, 2014 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of the common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the adjusted conversion price on each applicable trading day; (3) if the Company calls any or all of the 2021 Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date; (4) upon the occurrence of specified events described in the 2021 Indenture; and (5) at any time on or after December 15, 2020 through the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date. The conversion rate described above was adjusted to reflect the 1-for-6 reverse stock split effected on December 31, 2020 and is subject to additional adjustments in certain circumstances as described in the 2021 Indenture.
The Company may redeem for cash all or part of the 2021 Notes, at the Company’s option, after June 20, 2017 if the last reported sale price of the Company’s common stock has been at least 130% of the adjusted conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending within five trading days prior to the date on which the Company provides notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2021 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
The Company pays 1.75% interest per annum on the principal amount of the 2021 Notes, payable semiannually in arrears in cash on June 15 and December 15 of each year. The 2021 Notes will mature on June 15, 2021.
If the Company undergoes a “fundamental change” (as defined in the 2021 Indenture), subject to certain conditions, holders may require the Company to repurchase for cash all or part of their 2021 Notes in principal amounts of $1,000 or an integral multiple thereof. The fundamental change repurchase price will be equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2021 Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date. If a make-whole fundamental change occurs, as described in the 2021 Indenture, and a holder elects to convert its 2021 Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change, such holder may be entitled to an increase in the adjusted conversion rate as described in the 2021 Indenture.
The 2021 Indenture contains customary terms and covenants and events of default. If an event of default (other than certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization involving the Company) occurs and is continuing, the Trustee by notice to the Company, or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding 2021 Notes by notice to the Company and the Trustee, may declare 100% of the principal of and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all the 2021 Notes to be due and payable. Upon such a declaration of acceleration, such principal and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, will be due and payable immediately. Upon the occurrence of certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization involving the Company, 100% of the principal and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all of the 2021 Notes will become due and payable automatically. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the 2021 Indenture provides that, to the extent the Company elects and for up to 270 days, the sole remedy for an event of default relating to certain failures by the Company to comply
with certain reporting covenants in the 2021 Indenture consists exclusively of the right to receive additional interest on the 2021 Notes.
The 2021 Notes are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with all of the Company’s existing and future senior debt and senior to any of the Company’s subordinated debt. The 2021 Notes are structurally subordinated to all existing or future indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of the Company’s subsidiaries and are effectively subordinated to the Company’s existing or future secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the collateral. The 2021 Indenture does not limit the amount of debt that the Company or its subsidiaries may incur.
In accounting for the issuance of the 2021 Notes, the Company separated the 2021 Notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the 2021 Notes as a whole. The excess of the principal amount of the liability component over its carrying amount, referred to as the debt discount, is amortized to interest expense over the seven-year term of the 2021 Notes using the effective interest method. The equity component is not re-measured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification.
The outstanding 2021 Note balances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted of the following:
Non-Convertible Capital Loans
Non-convertible capital loans granted by Business Finland (formerly Tekes), with an adjusted acquisition-date fair value of $20.5 million (€18.2 million) and a carrying value of $26.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The loans are composed of fourteen non-convertible loans. The loans bear interest based on the greater of 3% or the base rate set by Finland’s Ministry of Finance minus one (1) percentage point. The maturity dates for these loans range from eight to ten years from the date of issuance, however, according to certain terms and conditions of the loans, the Company may repay the principal and accrued and unpaid interest of the loans only when the consolidated retained earnings of Biotie is sufficient to fully repay the loans.
Research and Development Loans
Research and Development Loans (“R&D Loans”) were granted by Business Finland with an acquisition-date fair value of $2.9 million (€2.6 million) and a carrying value of $0.7 million as of December 31, 2020. The R&D Loans bear interest based on the greater of 1% or the base rate set by Finland’s Ministry of Finance minus three (3) percentage points. The repayment of these loans began in January 2017. The loan principal will be paid in equal annual installments over a 5 year period, ending January 2021.
Fampyra Royalty Monetization
As of October 1, 2017, the Company completed a royalty purchase agreement with HealthCare Royalty Partners, or HCRP (“Royalty Agreement”). In exchange for the payment of $40 million to the Company, HCRP obtained the right to receive Fampyra royalties payable by Biogen under the Collaboration and Licensing Agreement between the Company and Biogen, up to an agreed upon threshold of royalties. When this threshold is met, if ever, the Fampyra royalty revenue will revert back to the Company and the Company will continue to receive the Fampyra royalty revenue from Biogen until the revenue stream ends.
The Company maintained the rights under the license and collaboration agreement with Biogen, therefore, the Royalty Agreement has been accounted for as a liability that will be amortized using the effective interest method over the life of the arrangement, in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance. The Company recorded the receipt of the $40 million payment from HCRP and established a corresponding liability in the amount of $40 million, net of transaction costs of approximately $2.2 million.
The following table shows the activity within the liability account for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investment Activities
At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were approximately $71.4 million, as compared to $125.8 million at December 31, 2019. Our cash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less at date of purchase and consist of investments in a Treasury money market fund. Our short-term investments consist of high-grade corporate debt securities, commercial paper and U.S. government securities with original maturities of twelve months or less at date of purchase. Also, we maintain cash balances with financial institutions in excess of insured limits. We do not anticipate any losses with respect to such cash balances. Our December 31, 2020 cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments balance does not include restricted cash, currently held in escrow under the terms of our convertible senior secured notes due 2024, further described above under Financing Arrangements, which may potentially be released from escrow if we pay interest on those notes using shares of our common stock.
Net Cash Used in Operations
Net cash used in operations was $61.0 million compared to $128.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the net loss of $99.6 million, a decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $9.0 million, a change in the contingent consideration obligation of $30.9 million, a change in the derivative liability of $40.0 million, gain on disposal of property and equipment of $0.2 million, royalty revenues of $11.5 million, increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.2 million, increase in inventory of $3.5 million, and decrease in other non-current liabilities of $0.2 million.
Cash used in operations was partially offset by intangible assets impairment charge of $4.1 million, loss on assets held for sale of $57.9 million, share-based compensation expense of $8.1 million, amortization of net premiums and discounts on investments of $0.6 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $41.3 million, amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs of $16.4 million, a deferred tax provision of $4.7 million, and a decrease in accounts receivable of $1.9 million.
Net Cash Provided by Investing
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $59.4 million, which was due primarily to proceeds from maturities of investments of $63.8 million. This was partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $4.4 million.
Net Cash Used in Financing
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.7 million, which was due primarily to debt issuance costs related to the exchange of the convertible senior notes of $1.1 million and repayment of loans payable of $0.6 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our long-term contractual obligations include commitments and estimated purchase obligations entered into in the normal course of business. See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a description of our long-term contractual obligations.
Under certain agreements, we are required to pay royalties for the use of technologies and products in our research and development activities and in the commercialization of products. The amount and timing of any of the foregoing payments are not known due to the uncertainty surrounding the successful research, development and commercialization of the products.
Under certain agreements, we are also required to pay license fees and milestones for the use of technologies and products in our research and development activities and in the commercialization of products. We have committed to make potential future milestone payments to third parties of up to approximately $21.6 million as part of our various agreements, including licensing and development programs. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon achievement of certain developmental, regulatory or commercial milestones. Because the achievement of these milestones had not occurred as of December 31, 2020, such contingencies have not been recorded in our financial statements. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones. There is uncertainty regarding the various activities and outcomes needed to reach these milestones, and they may not be achieved.
Effects of Inflation
Our most liquid assets are cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Because of their liquidity, these assets are not directly affected by inflation. Because we intend to retain and continue to use our equipment, furniture and fixtures and leasehold improvements, we believe that the incremental inflation related to replacement costs of such items will not materially affect our operations. However, the rate of inflation affects our expenses, primarily employee compensation and contract services, which could increase our level of expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion of critical accounting policies identifies the accounting policies that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. It is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our significant accounting policies, which are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this document. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which the selection of an available alternative policy would not produce a materially different result.
Revenue Recognition
ASC 606 outlines a five-step process for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers: (i) identify the contract with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the separate performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue associated with the performance obligations as they are satisfied.
The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the Company will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company determines the performance obligations that are distinct. The Company recognizes as revenues the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to each respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied. Generally, the Company's performance obligations are transferred to customers at a point in time, typically upon receipt of the product by the customer.
ASC 606 requires entities to record a contract asset when a performance obligation has been satisfied or partially satisfied, but the amount of consideration has not yet been received because the receipt of the consideration is conditioned on something other than the passage of time. ASC 606 also requires an entity to present a revenue contract as a contract liability in instances when a customer pays consideration, or an entity has a right to an amount of consideration that is unconditional (e.g. receivable), before the entity transfers a good or service to the customer. We currently do not have any contract assets or contract liabilities.
Product Revenue, Net
Net revenue from product sales is recognized at the transaction price when the customer obtains control of the Company’s products, which occurs at a point in time, upon receipt of the product by the customer. The Company’s products are sold primarily to a network of specialty providers which are contractually obligated to hold no more than an agreed upon number of days of inventory. The Company’s payment terms are between 30 to 35 days.
The Company’s net revenues represent total revenues adjusted for discounts and allowances, including estimated cash discounts, chargebacks, rebates, returns, copay assistance, data fees and wholesaler fees for services. These adjustments represent variable consideration under ASC 606 and are recorded for the Company’s estimate of cash consideration expected to be given by the Company to a customer that is presumed to be a reduction of the transaction price of the Company’s products and, therefore, are characterized as a reduction of revenue. These adjustments are established by management as its best estimate based on available information and will be adjusted to reflect known changes in the factors that impact such allowances. Adjustments for variable consideration are determined based on the contractual terms with customers, historical trends, communications with customers and the levels of inventory remaining in the distribution channel, as well as expectations about the market for the product and anticipated introduction of competitive products.
Discounts and Allowances
Revenue from product sales are recorded at the transaction price, which includes estimates for discounts and allowances for which reserves are established and includes cash discounts, chargebacks, rebates, returns, copay assistance, data fees and wholesaler fees for services. Actual discounts and allowances are recorded following shipment of product and the appropriate reserves are credited. These reserves are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to the Customer and right of offset exists) or a current liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than a Customer). These allowances are established by management as its best estimate based on historical experience and data points available and are adjusted to reflect known changes in the factors that impact such reserves. Allowances for customer credits, chargebacks, rebates, data fees and wholesaler fees for services, returns, and discounts are established based on contractual terms with customers and analyses of historical usage of these items. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from the Company’s estimates. If actual results in the future vary from the Company’s estimates, the Company will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known. The nature of our allowances and accruals requiring critical estimates, and the specific considerations it uses in estimating their amounts are as follows:
Government Chargebacks and Rebates: We contract for Medicaid and other U.S. federal government programs to allow for our products to remain eligible for reimbursement under these programs. For Medicare, the Company also estimates the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom the Company will owe an additional liability under the Medicare Part D program. Based upon our contracts and the most recent experience with respect to sales through each of these channels, we provide an allowance for chargebacks and rebates. We monitor the sales trends and adjust the chargeback and rebate percentages on a regular basis to reflect the most recent chargebacks and rebate experience. The Company’s liability for these rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that have not been paid or for which an invoice has not yet been received, estimates of claims for the current quarter, and estimated future claims that will be made for product that has been recognized as revenue, but remains in the distribution channel inventories at the end of each reporting period. Our government chargeback and rebate accruals were $5.9 million and $5.6 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. A 10% change in our government chargebacks and rebate allowances would have had an approximate $1.7 million and $2.2 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Managed Care Contract Rebates: We contract with various managed care organizations including health insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers. These contracts stipulate that rebates and, in some cases, administrative
fees, are paid to these organizations provided our product is placed on a specific tier on the organization’s drug formulary. Based upon our contracts and the most recent experience with respect to sales through managed care channels, we provide an allowance for managed care contract rebates. We monitor the sales trends and adjust the allowance on a regular basis to reflect the most recent rebate experience. The Company’s liability for these rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that have not been paid or for which an invoice has not yet been received, estimates of claims for the current quarter, and estimated future claims that will be made for product that has been recognized as revenue, but remains in the distribution channel inventories at the end of each reporting period. Our managed care contract rebate accruals were $7.4 million and $8.5 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. A 10% change in our managed care contract rebate allowances would have had an approximate $3.1 million and $3.2 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Copay Mitigation Rebates: We offer copay mitigation to commercially insured patients who have coverage for our products (in accordance with applicable law) and are responsible for a cost share. Based upon our contracts and the most recent experience with respect to actual copay assistance provided, we provide an allowance for copay mitigation rebates. We monitor the sales trends and adjust the rebate percentages on a regular basis to reflect the most recent rebate experience. Our copay mitigation rebate accruals were $0.6 million and $0.3 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. A 10% change in our copay mitigation rebate allowances would have had an approximate $0.5 million and $0.7 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Cash Discounts: We sell directly to companies in our distribution network, which primarily includes specialty pharmacies and ASD Specialty Healthcare, Inc. (an AmeriSource Bergen affiliate). We generally provide invoice discounts for prompt payment for our products. We estimate our cash discounts based on the terms offered to our customers. Discounts are estimated based on rates that are explicitly stated in the Company’s contracts as it is expected they will take the discount and are recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time of product shipment when product revenue is recognized. We adjust estimates based on actual activity as necessary. Our cash discount allowances were $0.6 million and $0.4 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. A 10% change in our cash discount allowances would have had an approximate $0.2 million and $0.3 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Product Returns: We either offer customers no return except for products damaged in shipping or consistent with industry practice, a limited right of return based on the product’s expiration date. The Company estimates the amount of its product sales that may be returned by its customers and records this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. The company currently estimates product return liabilities using historical sales information and inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Based on the data that we receive from our customers, we have been able to make a reasonable estimate for product returns. We do not accept returns of Ampyra except for product damaged in shipping. Historically, it has been rare for us to have product damaged in shipping. We will exchange product from inventory for product damaged in shipping.
Prior to sale of Zanaflex assets in 2017, we accepted returns of Zanaflex products for six months prior to and twelve months after their expiration date. We provided a credit to customers with whom we have a direct relationship or a cash payment to those with whom we do not have a direct relationship. We do not exchange product from inventory for returned product. Our returns reserve for Zanaflex products were $0.2 million and $0.6 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. A 10% change in our returns would have had an approximate $(0.0) million and $(0.1) million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our specialty distributors for Qutenza have the right to return any unopened Qutenza product during the nine-month period beginning three months prior to the labeled expiration date and ending six months after the labeled expiration date. Once product has been opened or its expiration date does not fall within our return goods policy for Qutenza, it is no longer eligible for return. If product is returned, credit is given to the specialty distributors against amounts owed to us. We do not replace returned product with new product unless it has been damaged in shipping. Our returns accruals for Qutenza were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Data Fees and Fees for Services Payable to Specialty Pharmacies: We have contracted with certain specialty pharmacies to obtain transactional data related to our products in order to develop a better understanding of our selling channel as well as patient activity and utilization by the Medicaid program and other government agencies and managed care organizations. We pay a variable fee to the specialty pharmacies to provide us the data. We also pay the specialty pharmacies a fee in exchange for providing distribution and inventory management services, including the provision of inventory management data to the Company. We estimate our fee for service accruals and allowances based on sales to each specialty pharmacy and the applicable contracted rate. Our fee for service expenses are accrued at the time of product shipment and are typically settled with the specialty pharmacies within 60 days after the end of each respective quarter. Our data fee and fee for service accruals were $1.4 million and $1.5 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. A 10% change in our data fee and fee for service allowances would have had an approximate $0.6 million and $0.5 million effect on our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We have adjusted our allowances in the past based on actual experience, and we will likely be required to make adjustments to these allowances and accruals in the future. The historical adjustments have not been significant to operations. We continually monitor our allowances and accruals and make adjustments when we believe actual experience may differ from its estimates. The allowances included in the table below reflect these adjustments.
The following table provides a summary of activity with respect to the Company’s sales discounts and allowances during 2020 and 2019:
Royalty Revenue
Royalty revenue recorded by the Company relates exclusively to the Company’s License and Collaboration agreement with Biogen which provides for ongoing royalties based on sales of Fampyra outside of the U.S. The Company recognizes revenue for royalties under ASC 606, which provides revenue recognition constraints by requiring the recognition of revenue at the later of the following: 1) sale or usage of the products or 2) satisfaction of the performance obligations. The Company has satisfied its performance obligations and therefore recognizes royalty revenue when the sales to which the royalties relate are completed.
License Revenue
License revenue relates to the License and Collaboration agreement with Biogen which provides for milestone payments for the achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones during the term of the agreement. Regulatory milestones are contingent upon the approval of Fampyra for new indications outside of the U.S. Sales milestones are
contingent upon the achievement of certain net sales targets for Fampyra sales outside of the U.S. The Company recognizes license revenue under ASC 606, which provides constraints for entities to recognize license revenue which is deemed to be variable by requiring the Company to estimate the amount of consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. The Company recognizes an estimate of revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the milestone is achieved. For regulatory milestones, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the Company’s control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. For sales-based milestones, the Company recognizes revenue upon the achievement of the specific sale milestones.
Inventory
The Company capitalizes inventory costs associated with the Company's products prior to regulatory approval when, based on management's judgment, future commercialization is considered probable and the future economic benefit is expected to be realized; otherwise, such costs are expensed as research and development.
The cost of Ampyra inventory manufactured by Alkermes is based on specified prices calculated as a percentage of net product sales of the product shipped by Alkermes to Acorda. In the event Alkermes does not manufacture the products, Alkermes is entitled to a compensating payment for the quantities of product provided by the alternative manufacturer. This compensating payment is included in our inventory balances. The Company records a reserve for excess and obsolete inventory based on the historic and forecasted sales pattern and specifically identified obsolete inventory based on the expiration dates of its products. The Company periodically reviews inventory for slow moving or obsolete amounts based on expected sales. The Company reviews projected market share as well as current buying patterns from its customers. The Company analyzes its ability to sell the inventory on hand and committed to customers prior to the expiration period of the respective inventory. As a result, significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of the Company’s ability to sell inventory on hand and commitments based on the sales projections. If annual and expected volumes are less than expected, the Company may be required to make additional allowances for excess or obsolete inventory in the future. For the year ended December 31, 2019, upon review of expected future product sales volumes and the projected expiration of Ampyra inventory, we did not record any write off for potential obsolete and excess inventory.
Cost of Sales
Inbrija
Cost of sales includes the cost of inventory, expense due to inventory reserves when necessary, royalty expense, packaging costs, freight and required inventory stability testing costs. Cost of sales include those costs directly associated with the production of revenues, such as raw material consumed, factory overhead and other direct production costs. In periods of idle plant capacity, costs are charged directly to cost of sales in the period incurred.
Ampyra
Cost of sales includes the cost of inventory, expense due to inventory reserves when necessary, royalty expense, milestone amortization of intangible assets associated with our agreement with Alkermes as well as the capitalization of milestone achievements with the Canadian Spinal Research Organization (“CSRO”) during the three months ended March 31, 2010, packaging costs, freight and required inventory stability testing costs. Our inventory costs, royalty obligations and milestone obligations are set forth in the agreements entered into with Alkermes. These agreements require us to pay Alkermes a percentage of our net selling price for each inventory lot purchased from Alkermes. The cost for each lot is calculated based on an agreed upon estimated net selling price which is based on an actual historical net selling price. At the end of each quarter, we perform a calculation to adjust the inventory value for any lots received in the current quarter to that quarter’s actual net selling price. This payment is recorded as an adjustment to inventory as well as an accrual on our balance sheet and is required to be paid within 45 days of the quarter end. In the event we have sold any inventory purchased from Alkermes during that respective quarter, we would also record an adjustment to the cost of goods sold and an additional accrual on the balance sheet to be paid to Alkermes. The agreement with Alkermes allows us to purchase up to 25% of our annual inventory requirements from an alternative manufacturer but stipulates a compensating payment to be made to
Alkermes for any inventory purchased from this alternative manufacturer. This payment is determined at the end of the quarter in which any new lots have been purchased exclusive from Alkermes using the actual net selling price for the respective quarter net of an agreed upon amount as stipulated by the Alkermes agreement. This payment is recorded as an adjustment to inventory as well as an accrual on our balance sheet.
Zanaflex
Cost of sales consists of cost of inventory, expense due to inventory reserves when necessary, royalty expense, packaging costs, freight and required inventory stability testing costs. Our inventory costs, royalty obligations and milestone obligations are set forth in the agreements entered into in connection with our Zanaflex acquisition.
Qutenza
Cost of sales consists of cost of inventory, expense due to inventory reserves when necessary, royalty expense, packaging costs, freight and required inventory stability testing costs.
Research and Development
We consider the active management and development of our research, preclinical and clinical pipeline an important component of the long-term process of introducing new products. We manage our overall research, development and in-licensing efforts in a highly disciplined manner designed to advance only high quality, differentiated agents into clinical development. The duration of each phase of research and preclinical and clinical development and the probabilities of success for approval of drug candidates entering clinical development will be impacted by a variety of factors, including the quality of the molecule, the validity of the target and disease indication, early clinical data, investment in the program, competition and commercial viability. Due to the risks inherent in the clinical trial process and the early stage nature of our pipeline development programs, we are unable to estimate with any certainty completion dates, the proportion of our R&D investments assigned to any one program or to the future cash inflows from these potential programs.
Research and development expense consists primarily of:
•
salaries and related benefits and share-based compensation for research and development personnel;
•
costs of facilities and equipment that have no alternative future use;
•
fees paid to professional service providers in conjunction with independently monitoring our clinical trials and acquiring and evaluating data in conjunction with our clinical trials;
•
fees paid to contract research organizations (“CRO”s) in conjunction with preclinical studies;
•
fees paid to organizations in conjunction with contract manufacturing;
•
costs of materials used in research and development;
•
upfront and milestone payments under contractual agreements;
•
consulting, license and sponsored research fees paid to third parties; and
•
depreciation of capital resources used to develop our products.
For those studies that we administer ourselves, we account for our clinical study costs by estimating the patient cost per visit in each clinical trial and recognizing this cost as visits occur, beginning when the patient enrolls in the trial. This estimated cost includes payments to the trial site and patient-related costs, including laboratory costs related to the conduct of the trial. Cost per patient varies based on the type of clinical trial, the site of the clinical trial, and the length of the treatment period for each patient. For those studies for which we use a CRO, we account for our clinical study costs according to the terms of the CRO contract. These costs include upfront, milestone and monthly expenses as well as reimbursement for pass through costs. All research and development costs are expensed as incurred except when we are accounting for nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be used in future research and development activities. In these cases, these payments are capitalized at the time of payment and expensed ratable over the period the research and development activity is performed. As actual costs become known to us, we adjust our accrual; such changes in estimate may be a material change in our clinical study accrual, which could also materially affect our results of operations.
We use our employee and infrastructure resources across several projects, and many of our costs are not attributable to an individually named project, but are broadly applicable research projects. Accordingly, we do not account for internal research and development costs on a project-by-project basis. Unallocated costs are represented as operating expenses in the table below.
The following table shows, for each of the years ended, (i) the total third party expenses for preclinical and clinical development, on a project-by-project basis, (ii) our unallocated research and development operating expenses, and (iii) acquisitions, licenses and milestone payments, on a project-by-project basis:
With respect to previously established clinical study accruals in prior periods and for the year ended December 31, 2020 we did not make any significant adjustments to our clinical study costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses include personnel costs, related benefits and share-based compensation for our sales, managed markets and marketing personnel, the cost of Ampyra, Zanaflex, and Qutenza sales and marketing initiatives as well as the pre-market marketing costs for future products.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, related benefits and share-based compensation for personnel serving executive, finance, medical affairs, safety, business development, legal, quality assurance, information technology and human resource functions. Other costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development or sales and marketing expense and professional fees for legal and accounting services.
Asset Impairment
In Process Research and Development
The cost of in-process research and development (IPR&D) acquired directly in a transaction other than a business combination is capitalized if the project will be further developed or have an alternative future use; otherwise it is expensed. The estimated fair value of IPR&D projects acquired in a business combination is capitalized. Several methods may be used to determine the estimated fair value of the IPR&D assets acquired in a business combination. The Company utilizes the "income
method” which applies a probability weighting that considers the risk of development and commercialization to the estimated future net cash flows that are derived from projected sales revenues and estimated costs. These projections are based on factors such as relevant market size, patent protection, estimated pricing and expected industry trends. The estimated future net cash flows are then discounted to the present value using an appropriate discount rate. These assets are treated as indefinite-lived intangible assets until completion or abandonment of the projects, at which time the assets are amortized over the remaining useful life or impaired, as appropriate. These assets are tested at least annually or when a triggering event occurs that could indicate a potential impairment. Events that could result in an impairment, or trigger an interim impairment assessment, may include actions by regulatory authorities with respect to us or our competitors, the receipt of additional clinical or nonclinical data regarding our drug candidate or a potentially competitive drug candidate, changes in the clinical development program for a drug candidate or new information regarding potential sales for the drug which could have a negative effect on cash flows and which could result in an impairment. If impairment indicators are present or changes in circumstance suggest that an impairment may exist, we perform an impairment analysis by comparing the sum of the estimated discounted future cash flows, or fair value, of each intangible asset to its carrying value on the consolidated balance sheet. We will recognize an impairment loss if the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value.
Finite-Lived Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized on a straight line basis over the period in which the Company expects to receive economic benefit and are reviewed for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. The determination of the expected life will be dependent upon the use and underlying characteristics of the intangible asset. In the Company’s evaluation of the intangible assets, it considers the term of the underlying asset life and the expected life of the related product line. If impairment indicators are present or changes in circumstance suggest that impairment may exist, the Company performs a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows of each intangible asset to its carrying value on the consolidated balance sheet. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the recoverability test are less than the carrying value, the Company would determine the fair value of the intangible asset and recognize an impairment loss in the statement of operations if the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value. Fair value is generally estimated based on either appraised value or other valuation techniques. Events that could result in an impairment, or trigger an interim impairment assessment, may include actions by regulatory authorities with respect to us or our competitors, new or better products entering the market, changes in market share or market pricing, changes in the economic lives of the assets, changes in the legal framework covering patents, rights or licenses, and other market changes which could have a negative effect on cash flows and which could result in an impairment.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the amount of consideration paid in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Goodwill is not amortized and is subject to impairment testing on an annual basis or when a triggering event occurs that may indicate the carrying value of the goodwill is impaired. We perform our impairment testing at the reporting level where we have determined that we have a single reporting unit and operating segment. The impairment test for goodwill uses an approach which compares the estimated fair value of the reporting unit including goodwill to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the estimated fair value of the reporting unit, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value. The Company recorded an impairment charge of $277.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 in the statement of operations and therefore, the goodwill was fully impaired. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion of goodwill.
Derivative Liability
During 2019, a derivative liability was initially recorded as a result of the issuance of the 6.00% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (see Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report). The Company initially determined the fair value of the liability upon issuance. The fair value measurement of the derivative liability is classified as Level 3 under the fair value hierarchy as it has been valued using certain unobservable inputs. These inputs include: (1) share price as of the valuation date, (2) assumed timing of conversion of the Notes, (3) historical volatility of share price and (4) the risk-adjusted discount rate used to present value the probability-weighted cash flows. Significant increases or decreases in any of those inputs in isolation could result in a significantly lower or higher fair value measurement. The fair value of the derivative liability was determined using a binomial model that calculates the fair value of the Notes with the conversion
feature as compared to the fair value of the Notes without the conversion feature, with the difference representing the value of the conversion feature, or the derivative liability. The conversion feature will be measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and the change in the fair value of the conversion feature for the period will be recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
Changes in Fair Value of Acquired Contingent Consideration
Changes in the fair value of acquired contingent consideration represents changes in the estimated fair value of the Company’s acquired contingent liability. Contingent consideration is recognized at fair value as of the date of acquisition and recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet. The contingent consideration is re-valued on a quarterly basis using a probability weighted discounted cash-flow approach until fulfillment or expiration of the contingency. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration are recognized in the statement of operations.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income consists of income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Interest expense consists of cash and non-cash interest expense for the convertible senior secured notes due 2024 issued in December 2019, convertible senior notes due 2021 issued in June 2014, our capital and R&D loans and non-cash interest expense pertaining to the Fampyra royalty monetization.
Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. In accordance with ASC 740, we account for income taxes by the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized for tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each year-end, based on enacted laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We will continue to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets and liabilities on a quarterly basis, and will adjust such amounts in light of changing facts and circumstances, including but not limited to future projections of taxable income, tax legislation, rulings by relevant tax authorities and the progress of ongoing tax audits, if any. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is required to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized in future periods.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units granted to employees and non-employees by recognizing the costs resulting from all share-based payment transactions in the financial statements at their fair values. We estimate the fair value of each option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes closed-form option-pricing model based on assumptions for the expected term of the stock options, expected volatility of our common stock, prevailing interest rates, and an estimated forfeiture rate.
We have based our current assumptions on the following:
Of these assumptions, the expected term of the option and expected volatility of our common stock are the most difficult to estimate since they are based on the exercise behavior of the employees and expected performance of our common stock. Increases in the term and the volatility of our common stock will generally cause an increase in compensation expense.