Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We are a specialty finance company primarily engaged in originating and investing in CRE loans and related investments. We are externally managed by ACREM, a subsidiary of Ares Management, a publicly traded, leading global alternative asset manager, pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement. From the commencement of our operations in late 2011, we have been primarily focused on directly originating and managing a diversified portfolio of CRE debt-related investments for our own account.
We were formed and commenced operations in late 2011. We are a Maryland corporation and completed our initial public offering in May 2012. We have elected and qualified to be taxed as a REIT for United States federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, commencing with our taxable year ended December 31, 2012. We generally will not be subject to United States federal income taxes on our REIT taxable income as long as we annually distribute to stockholders an amount at least equal to our REIT taxable income prior to the deduction for dividends paid and comply with various other requirements as a REIT.
We also operate our business in a manner that is intended to permit us to maintain our exemption from registration under the 1940 Act.
Below are significant developments during the year ended December 31, 2020 presented by quarter:
Developments During the First Quarter of 2020:
•ACRE purchased a $132.6 million senior mortgage loan on a portfolio of office properties located across multiple states from the $200 million real estate debt warehouse investment vehicle maintained by an affiliate of the Company’s Manager (the “Ares Warehouse Vehicle”).
•ACRE originated a $29.6 million senior mortgage loan on a multifamily property located in Texas.
•ACRE originated a $56.5 million senior mortgage loan on an industrial property located in New York.
•ACRE originated a $19.0 million senior mortgage loan on a multifamily property located in Washington.
•ACRE originated a $39.6 million senior mortgage loan on a mixed-use property located in California.
•ACRE originated a $37.6 million mezzanine loan on an office property located in Illinois.
•ACRE originated a $41.0 million senior mortgage loan on a multifamily property located in New Jersey.
•ACRE closed the $150.0 million Morgan Stanley Facility (as defined below). The initial maturity date of the Morgan Stanley Facility is January 16, 2023, subject to two 12-month extensions, each of which may be exercised at ACRE’s option, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including payment of an extension fee, which, if both were exercised, would extend the maturity date of the Morgan Stanley Facility to January 16, 2025. Advances under the Morgan Stanley Facility generally accrue interest at a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a spread ranging from 1.75% to 2.25%, determined by Morgan Stanley, depending upon the mortgage loan sold to Morgan Stanley in the applicable transaction.
•ACRE entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) in which ACRE agreed to sell an aggregate of 4,600,000 shares of ACRE’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share. The public offering generated net proceeds of approximately $72.9 million, after deducting transaction expenses.
•ACRE transferred its interest in a $24.4 million senior mortgage loan on an office property located in North Carolina to a third party and retained a $6.1 million mezzanine loan on the same property. ACRE determined that the transfer did not qualify as a sale and therefore treated it as a financing transaction. As such, ACRE did not derecognize the $24.4 million senior mortgage loan asset and recorded a secured borrowing liability in its consolidated balance sheets. The initial maturity date of the $24.4 million secured borrowing is May 5, 2023, subject to one 12-month extension, which may be exercised at the transferee’s option, which, if exercised, would extend the maturity date to May 5, 2024. Advances under the $24.4 million secured borrowing accrue interest at a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a spread of 2.50%.
Developments During the Second Quarter of 2020:
•ACRE originated a $91.8 million senior mortgage loan on a multifamily property located in Florida. Subsequent to the origination date, we bifurcated the senior mortgage loan between a $66.9 million senior participation and a $24.9 million subordinated participation. In June 2020, we transferred our interest in the $24.9 million subordinated participation to a third party and retained the $66.9 million senior participation. We determined that the transfer did not qualify as a sale and thus, is treated as a financing transaction. As such, we did not derecognize the $24.9 million subordinated participation and recorded a secured borrowing liability in our consolidated balance sheets.
•ACRE purchased a $46.7 million senior mortgage loan on a multifamily property located in Florida from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. Subsequent to the origination date, we bifurcated the senior mortgage loan between a $34.1 million senior participation and a $12.6 million subordinated participation. In June 2020, we transferred our interest in the $12.6 million subordinated participation to a third party and retained the $34.1 million senior participation. We determined that the transfer did not qualify as a sale and thus, is treated as a financing transaction. As such, we did not derecognize the $12.6 million subordinated participation and recorded a secured borrowing liability in our consolidated balance sheets.
•ACRE entered into a sale agreement with a third party to sell a senior mortgage loan with outstanding principal of $31.5 million, which is collateralized by a hotel property located in Minnesota. As of June 30, 2020, the sale had not yet closed and the loan was reclassified from held for investment to held for sale and is carried at fair value. ACRE recognized an unrealized loss of $2.2 million upon reclassifying the loan to held for sale as the carrying value exceeded fair value as determined by the agreed upon sale price of the loan.
Developments During the Third Quarter of 2020:
•ACRE closed the sale of a senior mortgage loan with outstanding principal of $31.5 million, which was collateralized by a hotel property located in Minnesota, to a third party. In addition, ACRE closed the sale of two senior mortgage loans to a third party with outstanding principal of $39.9 million and $29.6 million, respectively, which were collateralized by multifamily properties located in Illinois and Texas, respectively. ACRE recognized an aggregate net realized loss of $4.0 million upon the closing of the sale of the three loans as the carrying value exceeded the sale prices of the loans.
•The U.S. Bank Facility (as defined below) matured and its term was not extended. The U.S. Bank Facility had been repaid in full prior to the maturity date.
•ACRE amended the MetLife Facility (as defined below) to, among other things, (1) extend the initial maturity date of the MetLife Facility to August 13, 2022, subject to two 12-month extensions, each of which may be exercised at ACRE’s option, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including payment of an extension fee, which, if both were exercised, would extend the maturity date of the MetLife Facility to August 13, 2024, (2) increase the interest rate on new advances subsequent to the date of the amendment to a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a spread of 2.50%. The interest rate on advances with respect to existing loans financed under the MetLife Facility prior to the amendment will continue to accrue interest at a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a spread of 2.30%, subject to certain exceptions and (3) waive the non-utilization fee of 25 basis points per annum on the average daily available balance of the MetLife Facility, which is owed if less than 65% of the MetLife Facility is utilized, for a period of nine months subsequent to the date of the amendment.
Developments During the Fourth Quarter of 2020:
•ACRE purchased an $8.5 million senior mortgage loan on an office property located in Illinois from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle.
•ACRE originated a $21.0 million supplemental senior mortgage loan on an industrial property located in New York, which is an upsize of the original $56.5 million senior mortgage loan previously originated by ACRE in January 2020.
•ACRE amended the Wells Fargo Facility (as defined below) to, among other things, (1) reduce the maximum commitment under the Wells Fargo Facility from $500.0 million to $350.0 million, which the maximum commitment may be increased to up to $500.0 million at ACRE’s option, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including payment of an upsize fee, (2) extend the funding period of the Wells Fargo Facility to December 14, 2022, subject to one 12-month extension at ACRE’s option, which, if exercised, would extend the funding period to December 14, 2023, (3) extend the initial maturity date of the Wells Fargo Facility to December 14, 2022, subject to three 12-month extensions, each of which may be exercised at ACRE’s option, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including payment of an extension fee, which, if all three were exercised, would extend the maturity date of the Wells Fargo Facility to December 14, 2025, (4) update the interest rate on advances under the Wells Fargo Facility from a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a pricing margin range of 1.50% to 2.25%, subject to certain exceptions, to a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a pricing margin range of 1.50% to 2.75%, subject to certain exceptions and (5) eliminate the non-utilization fee on the Wells Fargo Facility.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Results
The results of our operations are affected by a number of factors and primarily depend on, among other things, the level of our net interest income, the market value of our assets and the supply of, and demand for, commercial mortgage loans, CRE debt and other financial assets in the marketplace. Our net interest income, which reflects the amortization of origination fees and direct costs, is recognized based on the contractual rate and the outstanding principal balance of the loans we originate. Interest rates will vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, creditworthiness of our
borrowers, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. Our operating results may also be impacted by credit losses in excess of initial anticipations or unanticipated credit events experienced by borrowers.
Changes in Fair Value of Our Assets. We originate CRE debt and related instruments generally to be held for investment. Loans that are held for investment are carried at cost, net of unamortized loan fees and origination costs (the “carrying value”).
Loans are generally collateralized by real estate. The extent of any credit deterioration associated with the performance and/or value of the underlying collateral property and the financial and operating capability of the borrower could impact the expected amounts received. We monitor the performance of our loans held for investment portfolio under the following methodology: (1) borrower review, which analyzes the borrower’s ability to execute on its original business plan, reviews its financial condition, assesses pending litigation and considers its general level of responsiveness and cooperation; (2) economic review, which considers underlying collateral (i.e. leasing performance, unit sales and cash flow of the collateral and its ability to cover debt service, as well as the residual loan balance at maturity); (3) property review, which considers current environmental risks, changes in insurance costs or coverage, current site visibility, capital expenditures and market perception; and (4) market review, which analyzes the collateral from a supply and demand perspective of similar property types, as well as from a capital markets perspective. Such analyses are completed and reviewed by asset management and finance personnel who utilize various data sources, including periodic financial data such as property occupancy, tenant profile, rental rates, operating expenses, and the borrower’s exit plan, among other factors.
Loans are generally placed on non-accrual status when principal or interest payments are past due 30 days or more or when there is reasonable doubt that principal or interest will be collected in full. Accrued and unpaid interest is generally reversed against interest income in the period the loan is placed on non-accrual status. Interest payments received on non-accrual loans may be recognized as income or applied to principal depending upon management’s judgment regarding the borrower’s ability to make pending principal and interest payments. Non-accrual loans are restored to accrual status when past due principal and interest are paid and, in management’s judgment, are likely to remain current. We may make exceptions to placing a loan on non-accrual status if the loan has sufficient collateral value and is in the process of collection. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, all loans were paying in accordance with their contractual terms. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had three loans held for investment on non-accrual status due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with a carrying value of $67.1 million. There were no loans held for investment on non-accrual status as of December 31, 2019.
Loan balances that are deemed to be uncollectible are written off as a realized loss and are deducted from the current expected credit loss reserve. The write-offs are recorded in the period in which the loan balance is deemed uncollectible based on management’s judgment. There were no write-offs during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Changes in Market Interest Rates. With respect to our business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause:
•the interest expense associated with our borrowings to increase, subject to any applicable ceilings;
•the value of our mortgage loans to decline;
•coupons on our floating rate mortgage loans to reset to higher interest rates; and
•to the extent we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy where we pay fixed and receive floating interest rates, the value of these agreements to increase.
Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause:
•the interest expense associated with our borrowings to decrease, subject to any applicable floors;
•the value of our mortgage loan portfolio to increase, for such mortgages with applicable floors;
•coupons on our floating rate mortgage loans to reset to lower interest rates, subject to any applicable floors; and
•to the extent we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy where we pay fixed and receive floating interest rates, the value of these agreements to decrease.
Credit Risk. We are subject to varying degrees of credit risk in connection with our target investments. Our Manager seeks to mitigate this risk by seeking to originate or acquire investments of higher quality at appropriate prices with appropriate risk adjusted returns given anticipated and unanticipated losses, by employing a comprehensive review and selection process and by proactively monitoring originated or acquired investments (see the performance monitoring methodology above in Changes in Fair Value of Our Assets). Nevertheless, unanticipated credit losses could occur that could adversely impact our operating results and stockholders’ equity.
Performance of Commercial Real Estate Related Markets. Our business is dependent on the general demand for, and value of, commercial real estate and related services, which are sensitive to economic conditions. Demand for multifamily and other commercial real estate generally increases during periods of stronger economic conditions, resulting in increased property values, transaction volumes and loan origination volumes. During periods of weaker economic conditions, multifamily and other commercial real estate may experience higher property vacancies, lower demand and reduced values. These conditions can result in lower property transaction volumes and loan originations.
Availability of Leverage and Equity. We expect to use leverage to make additional investments that may increase our potential returns. We may not be able to obtain the amount of leverage we desire and, consequently, the returns generated from our investments may be less than we currently expect. To grow our portfolio of investments, we also may determine to raise additional equity. Our access to additional equity will depend on many factors, and our ability to raise equity in the future cannot be predicted at this time.
Size of Portfolio. The size of our portfolio of investments, as measured both by the aggregate principal balance and the number of our CRE loans and our other investments, will also be an important factor in determining our operating results. Generally, as the size of our portfolio grows, the amount of interest income we receive will increase and we may achieve certain economies of scale and diversify risk within our portfolio investments. A larger portfolio, however, may result in increased expenses; for example, we may incur additional interest expense or other costs to finance our investments. Also, if the aggregate principal balance of our portfolio grows but the number of our loans or the number of our borrowers does not grow, we could face increased risk by reason of the concentration of our investments.
Loans Held for Investment Portfolio
As of December 31, 2020, our portfolio included 50 loans held for investment, excluding 98 loans that were repaid, sold or converted to real estate owned since inception. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate originated commitment under these loans at closing was approximately $2.1 billion and outstanding principal was $1.8 billion. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we funded approximately $538.3 million of outstanding principal, received repayments of $304.0 million of outstanding principal and sold three loans with outstanding principal of $101.0 million to third parties. As of December 31, 2020, 95.3% of our loans have LIBOR floors, with a weighted average floor of 1.73%, calculated based on loans with LIBOR floors. References to LIBOR or “L” are to 30-day LIBOR (unless otherwise specifically stated).
As of December 31, 2020, all loans held for investment were paying in accordance with their contractual terms.
Our loans held for investment are accounted for at amortized cost. The following table summarizes our loans held for investment as of December 31, 2020 ($ in thousands):
_______________________________
(1)The difference between the Carrying Amount and the Outstanding Principal amount of the loans held for investment consists of unamortized purchase discount, deferred loan fees and loan origination costs.
(2)Unleveraged Effective Yield is the compounded effective rate of return that would be earned over the life of the investment based on the contractual interest rate (adjusted for any deferred loan fees, costs, premiums or discounts) and assumes no dispositions, early prepayments or defaults. The total Weighted Average Unleveraged Effective Yield
is calculated based on the average of Unleveraged Effective Yield of all loans held by us as of December 31, 2020 as weighted by the outstanding principal balance of each loan.
(3)Unleveraged Effective Yield is the compounded effective rate of return that would be earned over the life of the investment based on the contractual interest rate (adjusted for any deferred loan fees, costs, premiums or discounts) and assumes no dispositions, early prepayments or defaults. The total Weighted Average Unleveraged Effective Yield is calculated based on the average of Unleveraged Effective Yield of all interest accruing loans held by us as of December 31, 2020 as weighted by the total outstanding principal balance of each interest accruing loan (excludes loans on non-accrual status as of December 31, 2020).
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), which require management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts. The estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors management believes to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from those estimates and assumptions. We believe the following critical accounting policy represents an area where more significant judgments and estimates are used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Current Expected Credit Loss Reserve. In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. The standard replaced the incurred loss impairment methodology pursuant to GAAP with a methodology that reflects current expected credit losses (“CECL”) on both the outstanding balances and unfunded commitments on loans held for investment and requires consideration of a broader range of historical experience adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecast information to inform credit loss estimates (the “CECL Reserve”). ASU No. 2016-13 was effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that reporting period. We adopted ASU No. 2016-13 on a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of January 1, 2020. Subsequent period increases and decreases to expected credit losses impact earnings and are recorded within provision for current expected credit losses in our consolidated statements of operations. The CECL Reserve related to outstanding balances on loans held for investment required under ASU No. 2016-13 is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of our loans held for investment in our consolidated balance sheets. The CECL Reserve related to unfunded commitments on loans held for investment is recorded within other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets.
We estimate our CECL Reserve primarily using a probability-weighted model that considers the likelihood of default and expected loss given default for each individual loan. Calculation of the CECL Reserve requires loan specific data, which includes capital senior to us when we are the subordinate lender, changes in net operating income, debt service coverage ratio, loan-to-value, occupancy, property type and geographic location. Estimating the CECL Reserve also requires significant judgment with respect to various factors, including (i) the appropriate historical loan loss reference data, (ii) the expected timing of loan repayments, (iii) calibration of the likelihood of default to reflect the risk characteristics of our floating-rate loan portfolio and (iv) our current and future view of the macroeconomic environment. We may consider loan-specific qualitative factors on certain loans to estimate our CECL Reserve. In order to estimate the future expected loan losses relevant to our portfolio, we utilize historical market loan loss data licensed from a third party data service. The third party’s loan database includes historical loss data for commercial mortgage-backed securities, or CMBS, issued dating back to 1998, which we believe is a reasonably comparable and available data set to our type of loans.
See Note 4 included in these consolidated financial statements for CECL related disclosures.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K, which describes recent accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or are currently evaluating.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
On January 28, 2021, ACRE Commercial Mortgage 2021-FL4 Ltd. (the “Issuer”) and ACRE Commercial Mortgage 2021-FL4 LLC (the “Co-Issuer”), both wholly owned indirect subsidiaries of ours, entered into an Indenture (the “Indenture”) with ACRC Lender LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of ours (the “Seller”), as advancing agent, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as note administrator, and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee, which governs the issuance of approximately $603.0 million principal balance secured floating rate notes (the “Notes”) and $64.3 million of preferred equity in the Issuer (the “FL4 CLO Securitization”). For U.S. federal income tax purposes, the Issuer and Co-Issuer are disregarded entities.
The Notes are collateralized by interests in a pool of 23 mortgage assets having a total principal balance of approximately $667.3 million (the “Mortgage Assets”) that were originated by a subsidiary of ours. During the period ending in April 2024 (the “Companion Participation Acquisition Period”), the Issuer may use certain principal proceeds from the Mortgage Assets to acquire additional funded pari-passu participations related to the Mortgage Assets that meet certain acquisition criteria.
The sale of the Mortgage Assets to the Issuer is governed by a Mortgage Asset Purchase Agreement between the Seller and the Issuer, and acknowledged by us solely for purposes of confirming our status as a REIT, in which the Seller made certain customary representations, warranties and covenants.
In connection with the FL4 CLO Securitization, the Issuer and Co-Issuer offered and issued the following classes of Notes to third party investors: Class A, Class A-S, Class B, Class C, Class D and Class E Notes (collectively, the “Offered Notes”). A wholly owned subsidiary of ours retained approximately $62.5 million of the Notes and all of the $64.3 million of preferred equity in the Issuer, which totaled $126.8 million. We, as the holder of the subordinated Notes and all of the preferred equity in the Issuer, have the obligation to absorb losses of the FL4 CLO Securitization, since we have a first loss position in the capital structure of the FL4 CLO Securitization.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a $105.5 million senior mortgage loan on an office property located in Illinois from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. At the purchase date, the outstanding principal balance was approximately $103.6 million. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.15% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a $5.6 million senior mortgage loan on a self storage property located in Illinois from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. At the purchase date, the outstanding principal balance was approximately $5.4 million. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 3.00% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a fully funded $6.4 million senior mortgage loan on a self storage property located in Florida from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.90% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a fully funded $4.4 million senior mortgage loan on a self storage property located in Florida from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.90% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a fully funded $7.0 million senior mortgage loan on a self storage property located in Florida from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.90% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a fully funded $10.8 million senior mortgage loan on a self storage property located in Florida from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.90% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On January 28, 2021, we purchased a $6.5 million senior mortgage loan on a self storage property located in Missouri from the Ares Warehouse Vehicle. At the purchase date, the outstanding principal balance was approximately $5.9 million. The loan has a per annum interest rate of LIBOR plus 3.00% (plus accretion of the purchase discount) and an initial term of three years.
On February 16, 2021, we entered into an interest rate swap (the “Swap”) with Morgan Stanley Capital Services, LLC (“Morgan Stanley Capital”) for the initial notional amount of $870.0 million, which amortizes according to an agreed upon notional schedule. The Swap requires us to pay a fixed interest rate of 0.2075% and for Morgan Stanley Capital to pay a floating rate equal to one-month LIBOR, subject to a 0.00% floor. The Swap has a termination date of December 15, 2023.
On February 16, 2021, we entered into an interest rate cap (the “Cap”) with Morgan Stanley Capital for the initial notional amount of $275.0 million, which amortizes according to an agreed upon notional schedule. The Cap is tied to one-month LIBOR with a strike rate of 0.50%. The Cap has a termination date of December 15, 2023.
On February 17, 2021, we declared a cash dividend of $0.33 per common share for the first quarter of 2021 and a supplemental cash dividend of $0.02 per common share. The first quarter 2021 and supplemental cash dividend will be payable on April 15, 2021 to common stockholders of record as of March 31, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth a summary of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
The following tables set forth select details of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
Net Interest Margin
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net interest margin was approximately $69.1 million and $52.2 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest income of $121.1 million and $114.8 million, respectively, was generated by weighted average earning assets of $1.8 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, offset by $51.9 million and $62.6 million, respectively, of interest expense, unused fees and amortization of deferred loan costs. The weighted average borrowings under the Wells Fargo Facility, the Citibank Facility, the BAML Facility, the CNB Facility, the MetLife Facility, the U.S. Bank Facility and the Morgan Stanley Facility (individually defined below and collectively, the “Secured Funding Agreements”), Notes Payable (as defined below and excluding the Note Payable on the hotel property that is recognized as real estate owned in our consolidated balance sheets), the Secured Term Loan, Secured Borrowings and securitization debt (as defined below) were $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to an increase in our weighted average earning assets and weighted average borrowings for the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the benefit received from the impact of LIBOR floors on our loans held for investment due to a decrease in 30-day LIBOR for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, 95.3% of our loans held for investment as measured by outstanding principal balance have LIBOR floors, with a weighted average floor of 1.73%, calculated based on loans with LIBOR floors, while 21.3% of our borrowings have LIBOR floors, with a weighted average floor of 1.00%.
Revenue From Real Estate Owned
On March 8, 2019, we acquired legal title to a hotel property through a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Prior to March 8, 2019, the hotel property collateralized a $38.6 million senior mortgage loan that we held that was in maturity default due to the failure of the borrower to repay the outstanding principal balance of the loan by the December 2018 maturity date. In conjunction with the deed in lieu of foreclosure, we derecognized the $38.6 million senior mortgage loan and recognized the hotel property as real estate owned. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from real estate owned was
$13.6 million and $25.1 million, respectively. Revenues consist of room sales, food and beverage sales and other hotel revenues. The decrease in revenue from real estate owned for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly reduced occupancy and overall revenue at the hotel property for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was partially offset due to the inclusion of a full year of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, whereas the year ended December 31, 2019 only included approximately ten months of operations as the hotel property was acquired on March 8, 2019.
Operating Expenses
See the Related Party Expenses, Other Expenses and Expenses from Real Estate Owned discussions below for the cause of the decrease in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Related Party Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, related party expenses included $8.2 million in management and incentive fees due to our Manager pursuant to the Management Agreement, which consisted of $7.3 million in management fees and $0.8 million in incentive fees. For the year ended December 31, 2020, related party expenses also included $3.7 million for our share of allocable general and administrative expenses for which we were required to reimburse our Manager pursuant to the Management Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2019, related party expenses included $7.4 million in management and incentive fees due to our Manager pursuant to the Management Agreement, which consisted of $6.3 million in management fees and $1.1 million in incentive fees. For the year ended December 31, 2019, related party expenses also included $3.0 million for our share of allocable general and administrative expenses for which we were required to reimburse our Manager pursuant to the Management Agreement. The increase in management fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to an increase in our stockholders’ equity for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the public offering of 4,600,000 shares of our common stock in January 2020, which generated net proceeds of approximately $72.9 million. The decrease in incentive fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to our Core Earnings (as defined below) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 exceeding the 8% minimum return by a lower margin than the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. “Core Earnings” is defined in the Management Agreement as GAAP net income (loss) computed in accordance with GAAP, excluding non-cash equity compensation expense, the incentive fee, depreciation and amortization (to the extent that any of our target investments are structured as debt and we foreclose on any properties underlying such debt), any unrealized gains, losses or other non-cash items recorded in net income (loss) for the period, regardless of whether such items are included in other comprehensive income or loss, or in net income (loss), and one-time events pursuant to changes in GAAP and certain non-cash charges after discussions between our Manager and our independent directors and after approval by a majority of our independent directors. The increase in allocable general and administrative expenses due to our Manager for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to an increase in the percentage of time allocated to us by employees of our Manager due to changes in transaction activity year over year.
Other Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, professional fees were $2.6 million and $2.2 million, respectively. The increase in professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to an increase in our use of third-party professionals due to changes in transaction activity year over year. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses were $3.7 million and $4.2 million, respectively. The decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to a decrease in stock-based compensation expense due to the reversal of previously recognized expense related to restricted stock forfeitures for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Expenses From Real Estate Owned
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, expenses from real estate owned was comprised of the following ($ in thousands):
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, hotel operating expenses were $15.6 million and $21.4 million, respectively. Hotel operating expenses consist primarily of expenses incurred in the day-to-day operation of our hotel property, including room expense, food and beverage expense and other operating expenses. Room expense includes housekeeping and front office wages and payroll taxes, reservation systems, room supplies, laundry services and other costs. Food and beverage expense primarily includes the cost of food, the cost of beverages and associated labor costs. Other operating expenses include labor and other costs associated with administrative departments, sales and marketing, repairs and maintenance, real estate taxes, insurance, utility costs and management and incentive fees paid to the hotel property manager. The decrease in hotel operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly reduced occupancy and forced us to implement plans to reduce overall operating expenses at the hotel property for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was partially offset due to the inclusion of a full year of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, whereas the year ended December 31, 2019 only included approximately ten months of operations as the hotel property was acquired on March 8, 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense on our note payable was $1.7 million and $0.9 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the weighted average borrowings under the Note Payable on the hotel property was $28.3 million and $15.9 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, depreciation expense was $0.9 million and $0.7 million, respectively. The increase in depreciation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of depreciation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, whereas the year ended December 31, 2019 only included approximately ten months of depreciation expense as the hotel property was acquired on March 8, 2019.
Provision for Current Expected Credit Losses
We adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, on January 1, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for current expected credit losses was $20.2 million. Management’s current estimate of expected credit losses increased from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 due to a recession caused by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which was not known as of January 1, 2020 and thus, did not have an impact on our current expected credit loss reserve as of January 1, 2020.
The CECL Reserve takes into consideration the macroeconomic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on CRE properties and is not specific to any loan losses or impairments on our loans held for investment. Additionally, the CECL Reserve is not an indicator of what we expect our CECL Reserve would have been absent the current and potential future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Realized Losses on Loans Sold
In July 2020, we closed the sale of a senior mortgage loan with outstanding principal of $31.5 million, which was collateralized by a hotel property located in Minnesota, to a third party. In addition, in August 2020, we closed the sale of two senior mortgage loans to a third party with outstanding principal of $39.9 million and $29.6 million, respectively, which were collateralized by multifamily properties located in Illinois and Texas, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an aggregate net realized loss of $4.0 million in our consolidated statements of operations upon the sale of the three senior mortgage loans as the carrying value exceeded the sale prices of the loans.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 can be found in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 located within Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, which is incorporated by reference herein.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, fund and maintain our assets and operations, make distributions to our stockholders and other general business needs. We use significant cash to purchase our target investments, make principal and interest payments on our borrowings, make distributions to our stockholders and fund our operations.
Our primary sources of cash generally consist of unused borrowing capacity under our Secured Funding Agreements, the net proceeds of future offerings, payments of principal and interest we receive on our portfolio of assets and cash generated from our operating activities. Principal repayments from mortgage loans in securitizations where we retain the subordinate securities are applied sequentially, first used to pay down the senior notes, and accordingly, we will not receive any proceeds from repayment of loans in the securitizations until all senior notes are repaid in full.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience borrowers who are unable to pay interest and principal payments timely, including at the maturity date of the borrower’s loan, if at all, and expected prepayments by our borrowers may not occur, which could impact our liquidity. Our Secured Funding Agreements contains margin call provisions following the occurrence of certain mortgage loan credit events. If we are unable to make the required payment or if we fail to meet or satisfy any of the covenants in our Financing Agreements, we would be in default under these agreements, and our lenders could elect to declare outstanding amounts due and payable, terminate their commitments, require the posting of additional collateral, including cash to satisfy margin calls, and enforce their interests against existing collateral. We are also subject to cross-default and acceleration rights with respect to our Financing Agreements. Given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the real estate industry and the potential impact on our borrowers, to mitigate the risk of future margin calls, we proactively engaged in discussions with certain of our lenders to modify the terms of our borrowings on certain assets within these facilities, in order to, among other things, reduce the amounts we are borrowing against such assets and/or increase the borrowing spreads. We may not receive financing from our Secured Funding Agreements with respect to our commitments to fund our loans held for investment in the future. See “Summary of Financing Agreements” below for a description of our Financing Agreements.
We are focused on preserving our liquidity in order to satisfy our cash requirements, including future commitments to fund on our loans, make interest, principal and other payments pursuant to our financing obligations and to potentially originate new loans and make opportunistic new investments. Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT and our exemption from the 1940 Act, we expect that our primary sources of enhancing our liquidity will be financing, to the extent available to us, through credit, secured funding and other lending facilities, other sources of private financing, including warehouse and repurchase facilities, and public or private offerings of our equity or debt securities. On July 19, 2019, we filed a registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which became effective on August 2, 2019, in order to permit us to offer, from time to time, in one or more offerings or series of offerings up to $1.25 billion of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, subscription rights to purchase shares of our common stock, warrants representing rights to purchase shares of our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities, or units. The specifics of any future offerings, along with the use of proceeds of any securities offered, will be described in detail in a prospectus supplement, or other offering materials, at the time of any offering. We may also access liquidity through our “At the Market Stock Offering Program” which was established in November 2019 pursuant to which we may sell, from time to time, up to $100.0 million of shares of our common stock. Furthermore, we have sold, and may continue to sell certain of our mortgage loans, or interests therein, in order to manage liquidity needs. Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT, we may also change our dividend practice, including by reducing the amount of, or temporarily suspending, our future dividends or making dividends that are payable in cash and shares of our common stock for some period of time. We are also able to access additional liquidity through the reinvestment provisions in our FL3 collateralized loan obligation securitization debt (“CLO Securitization”), which allows us to replace mortgage assets in our CLO Securitization which have repaid, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including receipt of a Rating Agency Confirmation and investor approval of the new mortgage assets. There can be no assurance that the conditions for reinvestment will be satisfied and whether our CLO Securitization will acquire any additional mortgage assets. In addition, our CLO Securitization contains certain senior note overcollateralization ratio tests. To the extent we fail to meet these tests, amounts that would otherwise be used to make payments on the subordinate securities which we hold will be used to repay principal on the more senior securities to the extent necessary to satisfy any senior note overcollateralization ratio and we may incur significant
losses. Our sources of liquidity may be impacted to the extent we do not receive cash payments that we would otherwise expect to receive from the CLO Securitization if these tests were met.
Ares Management or one of its investment vehicles, including the Ares Warehouse Vehicle, may originate mortgage loans and we may have the opportunity to purchase such loans that are determined by our Manager in good faith to be appropriate for us, once we have sufficient available liquidity. Ares Management or one of its investment vehicles may also acquire mortgage loans from us.
As of February 16, 2021, we had approximately $88 million in unrestricted cash.
Equity Offerings
On January 22, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”), by and among us, ACREM, and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as representatives of the several underwriters listed therein (collectively, the “Underwriters”). Pursuant to the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, we agreed to sell, and the Underwriters agreed to purchase, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Underwriting Agreement, an aggregate of 4,000,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share. In addition, we granted to the Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 600,000 shares. The public offering closed on January 27, 2020 and generated net proceeds of approximately $63.3 million, after deducting transaction expenses. On January 30, 2020, we sold an additional 600,000 shares pursuant to the Underwriters option to purchase additional shares, generating additional net proceeds of approximately $9.6 million.
Cash Flows
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth changes in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash increased (decreased) by $69.1 million and $(5.8) million, respectively.
Operating Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $31.8 million and $32.5 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, adjustments to net income related to operating activities primarily included the provision for current expected credit losses of $20.2 million, accretion of deferred loan origination fees and costs of $7.4 million, amortization of deferred financing costs of $6.4 million and change in other assets of $15.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, adjustments to net income related to operating activities primarily included accretion of deferred loan origination fees and costs of $7.0 million, amortization of deferred financing costs of $6.6 million and change in other assets of $6.4 million.
Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash used in investing activities totaled $81.9 million and $174.4 million, respectively. This change in net cash used in investing activities was primarily as a result of the cash used for the origination and funding of loans held for investment exceeding the cash received from principal repayment of loans held for investment and the sale of loans held for sale for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities totaled $119.2 million and primarily related to proceeds from our Secured Funding Agreements of $473.5 million, proceeds from Secured Borrowings of $60.2 million and proceeds from the sale of our common stock of $73.2 million, partially offset by repayments of our Secured Funding Agreements of $446.5 million and dividends paid of $42.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities totaled $136.1 million and primarily related to proceeds from our Secured Funding Agreements of $793.8 million, proceeds from Notes Payable of $56.2 million and proceeds from the issuance of debt of consolidated VIEs of $172.7 million, partially offset by repayments of our Secured Funding Agreements of $843.2 million and dividends paid of $37.5 million.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 can be found in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 located within Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Summary of Financing Agreements
The sources of financing, as applicable in a given period, under our Secured Funding Agreements, Notes Payable and the Secured Term Loan (collectively, the “Financing Agreements”) are described in the following table ($ in thousands):
_____________________________
(1)The maturity date of the master repurchase funding facility with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (the “Wells Fargo Facility”) is subject to three 12-month extensions at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid. In December 2020, we amended the Wells Fargo Facility to, among other things, (1) reduce the maximum commitment under the Wells Fargo Facility from $500.0 million to $350.0 million, which the maximum commitment may be increased to up to $500.0 million at our option, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including payment of an upsize fee, (2) extend the funding period of the Wells Fargo Facility to December 14, 2022, subject to one 12-month extension at our option, (3) extend the initial maturity date of the Wells Fargo Facility to December 14, 2022, (4) update the interest rate on advances under the Wells Fargo Facility to a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a pricing margin range of 1.50% to 2.75%, subject to certain exceptions and (5) eliminate the non-utilization fee on the Wells Fargo Facility.
(2)The maturity date of the master repurchase facility with Citibank, N.A. (the “Citibank Facility”) is subject to two 12-month extensions at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid.
(3)Individual advances on loans under the Bridge Loan Warehousing Credit and Security Agreement with Bank of America, N.A. (the “BAML Facility”) generally had a two-year maturity, subject to a 12-month extension at our option provided that certain conditions were met and applicable extension fees were paid. In May 2019, our borrowing period for new individual loans under the BAML Facility expired and its term was not extended. As such, the total commitment amount under the BAML Facility as of December 31, 2019 represented the outstanding balance under the facility at the time the borrowing period expired. In June 2020, the BAML Facility was repaid in full and its term was not extended.
(4)In March 2020, we exercised a 12-month extension option on the secured revolving funding facility with City National Bank (the “CNB Facility”). The CNB Facility is subject to one additional 12-month extension at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid. In June 2019, we amended the CNB Facility to, among other things, (1) add an accordion feature that provides for, subject to approval by City National Bank in its sole discretion, an increase in the commitment amount from $50.0 million to $75.0 million for up to a period of 120 days once per calendar year and (2) decrease the interest rate on advances to a per annum rate equal to the sum of, at our option, either (a) LIBOR for a one, two, three, six or, if available to all lenders, 12-month interest period plus 2.65% or (b) a base rate (which is the highest of a prime rate, the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, or one-month LIBOR plus 1.00%) plus 1.00%; provided that in no event shall the interest rate be less than 2.65%.
(5)The maturity date of the revolving master repurchase facility with Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (the “MetLife Facility”) is subject to two 12-month extensions at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid. In August 2020, we amended the MetLife Facility to, among other things, (1) extend the initial maturity date of the MetLife Facility to August 13, 2022 and (2) increase the interest rate on new advances subsequent to the date of the amendment to a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a spread 2.50%. The interest rate on advances with respect to existing loans financed under the MetLife Facility prior to the amendment continues to accrue interest at a per annum rate equal to the sum of one-month LIBOR plus a spread of 2.30%, subject to certain exceptions.
(6)The maturity date of the master repurchase and securities contract with U.S. Bank National Association (the “U.S. Bank Facility”) was subject to two 12-month extensions at our option provided that certain conditions were met and applicable extension fees were paid. In July 2020, the U.S. Bank Facility matured and its term was not extended. The U.S. Bank Facility had been repaid in full prior to its maturity.
(7)The maturity date of the master repurchase and securities contract with Morgan Stanley (the “Morgan Stanley Facility”) is subject to two 12-month extensions at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid.
(8)Certain of our consolidated subsidiaries are party to three separate note agreements (the “Notes Payable”) with the lenders referred to therein, consisting of (1) a $32.4 million note that has an initial maturity date of March 5, 2024, subject to one 12-month extension at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid, (2) a $28.3 million note that has a maturity date of June 10, 2024 and (3) a $23.5 million note that has an initial maturity date of September 5, 2022, subject to two 12-month extensions at our option provided that certain conditions are met and applicable extension fees are paid.
(9)The maturity date of the Credit and Guaranty Agreement with the lenders referred to therein and Cortland Capital Market Services LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent for the lenders (the “Secured Term Loan”), was subject to one 12-month extension at our option provided that certain conditions were met. In December 2020, we exercised the 12-month extension option on the Secured Term Loan. During the extension period, the spread on advances under the Secured Term Loan increases every three months by 0.125%, 0.375% and 0.750% per annum, respectively, beginning after the third-month of the extension period.
Our Financing Agreements contain various affirmative and negative covenants, including negative pledges, and provisions related to events of default that are normal and customary for similar financing agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants of each respective Financing Agreement. We may be required to fund commitments on our loans held for investment in the future and we may not receive funding from our Secured Funding Agreements with respect to these commitments. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information on our Financing Agreements.
Securitizations
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying amount and outstanding principal of our CLO Securitization was $443.9 million and $445.6 million, respectively. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for additional terms and details of our CLO Securitization.
Secured Borrowings
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying amount and outstanding principal of our secured borrowings was $59.8 million and $60.2 million, respectively. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for additional terms and details of our secured borrowings.
Leverage Policies
We intend to use prudent amounts of leverage to increase potential returns to our stockholders. To that end, subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT and our exemption from registration under the 1940 Act, we intend to continue to use borrowings to fund the origination or acquisition of our target investments. Given current market conditions and our focus on first or senior mortgages, we currently expect that such leverage would not exceed, on a debt-to-equity basis, a 4-to-1 ratio. Our charter and bylaws do not restrict the amount of leverage that we may use. The amount of leverage we will deploy for particular investments in our target investments will depend upon our Manager’s assessment of a variety of factors, which may include, among others, our liquidity position, the anticipated liquidity and price volatility of the assets in our loans held for investment portfolio, the potential for losses and extension risk in our portfolio, the gap between the duration of our assets and liabilities, including hedges, the availability and cost of financing the assets, our opinion of the creditworthiness of our financing counterparties, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the United States economy generally or in specific geographic regions and commercial mortgage markets, our outlook for the level and volatility of interest rates, the slope of the yield curve, the credit quality of our assets, the collateral underlying our assets, and our outlook for asset spreads relative to the LIBOR curve.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMITMENTS
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are described in the following table ($ in thousands):
The table above does not include the related interest expense under the Secured Funding Agreements, Notes Payable and the Secured Term Loan, as all our interest is variable. Additionally, the table above does not include extension options, as applicable, under the Secured Funding Agreements, Notes Payable and the Secured Term Loan.
We may enter into certain contracts that may contain a variety of indemnification obligations, principally with underwriters and counterparties to repurchase agreements. The maximum potential future payment amount we could be required to pay under these indemnification obligations may be unlimited.
Management Agreement
We are also required to pay our Manager a base management fee of 1.5% of our stockholders' equity per year, an incentive fee and expense reimbursements pursuant to our Management Agreement. The table above does not include the amounts payable to our Manager under our Management Agreement as they are not fixed and determinable. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for additional terms and details of the fees payable under our Management Agreement.
DIVIDENDS
We elected to be taxed as a REIT for United States federal income tax purposes and, as such, anticipate annually distributing to our stockholders at least 90% of our REIT taxable income, prior to the deduction for dividends paid. If we
distribute less than 100% of our REIT taxable income in any tax year (taking into account any distributions made in a subsequent tax year under Sections 857(b)(9) or 858 of the Code), we will pay tax at regular corporate rates on that undistributed portion. Furthermore, if we distribute less than the sum of 1) 85% of our ordinary income for the calendar year, 2) 95% of our capital gain net income for the calendar year and 3) any undistributed shortfall from our prior calendar year (the “Required Distribution”) to our stockholders during any calendar year (including any distributions declared by the last day of the calendar year but paid in the subsequent year), then we are required to pay non-deductible excise tax equal to 4% of any shortfall between the Required Distribution and the amount that was actually distributed. Any of these taxes would decrease cash available for distribution to our stockholders. The 90% distribution requirement does not require the distribution of net capital gains. However, if we elect to retain any of our net capital gain for any tax year, we must notify our stockholders and pay tax at regular corporate rates on the retained net capital gain. The stockholders must include their proportionate share of the retained net capital gain in their taxable income for the tax year, and they are deemed to have paid the REIT’s tax on their proportionate share of the retained capital gain. Furthermore, such retained capital gain may be subject to the nondeductible 4% excise tax. If we determine that our estimated current year taxable income (including net capital gain) will be in excess of estimated dividend distributions (including capital gains dividends) for the current year from such income, we accrue excise tax on a portion of the estimated excess taxable income as such taxable income is earned.
Before we make any distributions, whether for United States federal income tax purposes or otherwise, we must first meet both our operating requirements and debt service on our Financing Agreements and other debt payable. If our cash available for distribution is less than our REIT taxable income, we could be required to sell assets or borrow funds to make cash distributions or we may make a portion of the Required Distribution in the form of a taxable stock distribution or distribution of debt securities.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have commitments to fund various senior mortgage loans, as well as subordinated debt and preferred equity investments in our portfolio. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the progress of capital expenditures, construction and leasing is anticipated to be slower than otherwise expected, and the pace of the funding of our unfunded commitments may be slower.
Other than as set forth in this annual report on Form 10-K, we do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured investment vehicles, special purpose entities or variable interest entities, established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Further, we have not guaranteed any obligations of unconsolidated entities or entered into any commitment or intend to provide additional funding to any such entities.