Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The financial information discussed below are derived from the audited consolidated financial statements of the Company as at December 31, 2020, which were prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. This financial information is only a summary and should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and related notes contained herein, which more fully present the Company’s financial condition and operations as at that date. The results set forth in these consolidated financial statements are not necessarily indicative of the Company’s future performance. This section and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in forward-looking statements.
Overview
As indicated in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, there is substantial doubt as to the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern. The Company has generated material operating losses since inception and its ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on the successful execution of its operating plan, which includes increasing sales of existing products - and in particular GrowPods and related products - while introducing additional products and services, controlling cost of goods sold and operation expenses, negotiating extensions of existing loans, and raising either debt or equity financing.
The Company needs a substantial amount of additional capital to fund its business, including expansion of its operations, and for repayment of its debts. No assurance can be given that any additional capital can be obtained or, if obtained, will be adequate to meet its needs and the Company may need to take certain measures to remain a going concern. If adequate capital cannot be obtained on a timely basis and on satisfactory terms, the Company’s operations could be materially negatively impacted, or it could be forced to terminate operating.
Impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic
The Covid-19 pandemic, its disruption of the Company’s business and its effect on the economy generally have not adversely impacted the Company, due principally to it cost saving measures. (See Item 1A - Risk Factors - The Company’s business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity may be substantially and adversely affected by this pandemic for a detailed discussion of matters relating to this pandemic.) In particular, the Company’s sales in 2020 were approximately $79,202 higher than for 2019, in spite of the Covid-19 pandemic. Its sales during the first quarter of 2021 were approximately $1,328,442, compared with $556,129 for the like period of 2020. Because the Company decreased its expenses, principally due to reductions in payroll, its operating loss for 2020 was $549,232 ($111,576 excluding noncash expenses), compared with $1,369,959 for 2019 ($389,800 excluding noncash expenses). The Company expects that its sales will increase in the second quarter of 2021 and beyond, principally because it expects to receive increasing revenues from sales of GrowPods and related products. The Company believes that, owing to the effect of the pandemic on its customers, receivables have been and may continue to be collected more slowly than prescribed by their payment terms and some may prove to be uncollectible. The Company does not intend to restore its staffing to pre-pandemic levels, although it may add personnel depending on demand for GrowPods and related products.
To mitigate losses during the Covid-19 pandemic and the ensuing recovery period, the Company terminated most of the 18 employees that it had in early 2020, such that it now has 8 employees, including officers, which it believes is the minimum necessary to maintain its operations. The Company’s chief executive officer has waived his salary since from June 1, 2020. In addition, the Company is deferring employer payroll taxes, as permitted by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The Company is also purchasing from Polymation fewer Medtainers® than required under the Production Contract; while doing so enables the Company to preserve cash by reducing expenses, it also subjects it to claims for breach of that agreement.
On May 4, 2020, the Company made a note in favor of Customers Bank in the principal amount of $137,690 pursuant to the terms of the CARES Act and pursuant to all regulations and guidance promulgated or provided by the SBA and other Federal agencies that are now, or may become, applicable to the loan (the Cares Loan”). The loan bears interest at the rate of 1% per annum. No interest or principal will be required during the first 6 months after the loan amount was disbursed, although interest will continue to accrue over this deferral period. After the deferral period and after taking into account any loan forgiveness applicable to the loan pursuant to the program, as approved by SBA, any remaining principal and accrued interest will be payable in substantially equal monthly installments over the remaining 18-month term of the loan, in the amount and according to the payment schedule provided by lender. The loan will be forgiven if its proceeds are used for payroll, mortgage interest, rent, and utilities during the 8-week period beginning on May 4, 2020. However, the amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if less than 75% of the funds is expended for payroll over that period. The regulations relating to loan forgiveness have not yet been adopted, as the result of which the Company has not applied for loan forgiveness, but the Company believes that when they are adopted and forgiveness is applied for, the entire loan will be forgiven.
The Company tested intellectual property and goodwill for impairment in preparing its financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, and determined that no adjustment was required.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth information from the consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Revenues and Cost of Goods Sold
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $2,227,668, from which the Company earned a gross profit of $1,021,703, or 45.9% of sales. Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019, were $2,148,466, from which the Company earned a gross profit of $1,021,703, or 45.9% of sales. The decrease in gross profit was due to an increase in revenues without a corresponding decrease in cost of goods sold. This reduction was due primarily to a reduction in revenues from Medtainers® and printing. The increase in cost of goods sold was due primarily to an increase in the cost of goods sold for humidity pack inserts, lighters and payment processing fees. The increase in cost of goods sold was partially offset by a decrease in the cost of goods sold for Medtainers® and shipping expenses.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, were as follows:
Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019 were $1,570,935 and $2,497,678, respectively, a difference of $926,743 that was attributable to a $70,479 reduction in advertising and marketing expense, primarily due to a decreased attendance at trade shows and conferences, a $572,956 decrease in share-based compensation due to amortization of share-based compensation awards from the 2018 Plan that commenced in 2018 and a $523,959 decrease in payroll. The decrease in operating expenses was partially offset by a $26,361 increase in bad debt, a $89,422 increase in professional fees due principally to increased auditing and legal expenses incurred in the exchange on October 9, 2020, a $94,415 increase in general and administrative expenses and a $30,453 increase in depreciation and amortization.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations decreased from $1,369,959 for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $549,232 for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a decrease of $926,743 in operating expenses from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020, which is discussed above. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in revenues with a corresponding increase in cost of goods sold, resulting in a decrease in the gross profit percentage from 52.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019, to 45.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense incurred in the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, was $39,799 and $38,491, respectively.
Net Loss
Net loss decreased from $1,408,450 for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $579,031 for the year ended December 31, 2020, due principally to the decrease in gross profit and the decrease in operating expenses, which are discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $338,368 in cash and $130,104 in accounts receivable. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company borrowed $195,478 from and repaid $352,455 to its officers and directors. For further information, see Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
On March 31, 2021, the Company had $444,177 in cash and $201,725 in accounts receivable, which is insufficient for it to meet its current obligations.
The number of items of the Company’s products sold for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were approximately as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had inventory of approximately 43,000 Medtainer® products and approximately 218,000 units of other products and no inventory of GrowPods and related products.
In addition to the Cares Loan, the Company received $210,000 from the sale of shares of Common Stock to private investors during the year ended December 31, 2020, and has received $615,000 from the sale of Common Stock to private investors during 2021. The Company believes that it will require approximately $1,000,000 in additional funding for the next 12 months, including approximately $600,000 to repay loans and interest that are past due, assuming that the Company’s operating loss remains at the same level; however, the Company believes, but cannot assure, that it will attain an operating profit in 2021. The Company is seeking extensions of these loans, and if it is successful in doing so, the amount of such funding will be reduced, but assurance can be given as to the extent that it will be successful. The Company plans to fund its activities principally through the sale of debt or equity securities to private investors. There is no assurance that such funding will be available on acceptable terms or available at all. If the Company is unable to raise sufficient funds when required or on acceptable terms, it may have to reduce significantly, or discontinue, its operations. To the extent that funds are raised by issuing equity securities or securities that are convertible into the Company’s equity securities, its stockholders may experience significant dilution.
The Company had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2020, or as of the date of this report.
The Company intends to devote its manpower and capital resources to increasing revenues, while working to reduce the cost of goods sold and operating expenses. Doing so depends on the successful execution of its operating plan, which includes increasing sales of existing products, introducing additional products and services, controlling cost of goods sold and operation expenses, negotiating extensions of existing loans and raising either debt or equity financing.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Risks and Uncertainties
See Item 1A - Risk Factors for information as to certain significant risks.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Certain estimates could be affected by external conditions, including those unique to its industry, and general economic conditions, which could affect the Company’s estimates so as to cause actual results to differ materially from its estimates. The Company re-evaluates all of its accounting estimates at least quarterly, based on these conditions and records adjustments when necessary.
Significant estimates relied upon in preparing the consolidated financial statements contained in this report include revenue recognition, accounts receivable reserves, inventory and related reserves, valuations and purchase price allocations related to business combinations, expected future cash flows used to evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets, estimated fair values of long-lived assets used to record impairment charges related to intangible assets and goodwill, amortization periods, accrued expenses, share-based compensation, and recoverability of the Company’s net deferred tax assets and any related valuation allowances.
Fair Value Measurement
The Company has adopted the provisions of ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements, which defines fair value as used in numerous accounting pronouncements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure of fair value measurements.
The estimated fair value of certain financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses, is carried at historical cost basis, which approximates their fair value because of the short-term nature of these instruments. The carrying amounts of the Company’s short- and long-term credit obligations approximate fair value because the effective yields on these obligations, which include contractual interest rates taken together with other features such as concurrent issuances of warrants and/or embedded conversion options, are comparable to rates of returns for instruments of similar credit risk.
ASC Topic 820 defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC Topic 820 also establishes a fair-value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC Topic 820 describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable.
Level 3 - Inputs that are unobservable (for example, cash flow modeling inputs based on assumptions).
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairment
Goodwill and intangible assets that have indefinite useful lives are not amortized, but are evaluated for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company records intangible assets at fair value, estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. The Company amortizes its intangible assets that have finite lives using either the straight-line method or based upon estimated future cash flows to approximate the pattern in which the economic benefit of the assets will be utilized. Amortization is recorded over estimated useful lives ranging from 5 to 20 years.
The Company reviews intangible assets subject to amortization quarterly to determine if any adverse conditions exist or a change in circumstances has occurred that would indicate impairment or a change in the remaining useful life. Conditions that would indicate impairment and trigger a more frequent impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in legal factors or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. If the carrying value of an intangible asset exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, the Company will write down its carrying value to its fair value in the period identified. The Company generally calculates fair value as the present value of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the asset using a risk-adjusted discount rate. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, the Company will amortize the remaining carrying value of the intangible asset prospectively over the revised remaining useful life. The Company also evaluates intangible assets and long-lived assets for possible impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. These changes include but are not limited to significant adverse changes in business climate, market conditions, or other events, including the Covid-19 pandemic, that indicate an asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of each asset to the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the test of recoverability are less than the carrying amount of these assets, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value.
In January 2017, FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment (“ASU No. 2017-04”), which simplifies accounting for goodwill impairment. This ASU requires a hypothetical purchase price allocation, which is mandatory for fiscal years beginning after December 14, 2019. As permitted, the Company adopted No. ASU No. 2017-04 for fiscal periods beginning January 1, 2018. Pursuant to ASU No. 2017-04, the Company evaluates and tests the recoverability of its goodwill for impairment at least annually during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or more often if circumstances indicate that goodwill may not be recoverable. The Company has conducted annual impairment test of goodwill during the fourth quarter of each year, commencing in the year ended December 31, 2018, in which year it first acquired intangible assets. The annual impairment testing process is subjective and requires judgment at many points. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to record impairment charges for these assets not previously recorded. The Company operates as a single operating segment with one reporting unit and consequently evaluates goodwill for impairment based upon an evaluation of the fair value of the Company as a whole. The estimation of fair value requires significant judgment. The goodwill recorded in the consolidated balance sheets at each of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, was $1,020,314. Goodwill was due entirely to the Company’s acquisition of intangible property relating to Medtainers® in 2018. Various future events, including changes in demand for the Company’s products and the Covid-19 pandemic, could result in an impairment of goodwill. Any adjustments resulting from an impairment test will be reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The fair value of acquired technology and patents, as well as acquired technology that the Company may develop, is determined at acquisition date primarily using the income approach, which discounts expected future cash flows to present value. The discount rates used in the present value calculations are typically derived from a weighted-average cost-of-capital analysis and then adjusted to reflect risks inherent in the development life cycle as appropriate. Any loss resulting from an impairment test will be reflected in operating income in the Company’s consolidated statements of income. The annual impairment testing process is subjective and requires judgment at many points. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to record impairment charges for these assets not previously recorded.
There was no impairment of intangible assets, long-lived assets or goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 20l4-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which superseded all existing revenue recognition requirements, including most industry specific guidance. This standard requires a company to recognize revenues when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that it expects to receive for them. FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASU No. 2014-09 concerning its adoption and clarification that have the same effective date and transition date: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations (Reporting Revenue Gross versus Net); ASU No. 20l6-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing; ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients; and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company adopted these amendments (collectively, the “new revenue standards”) when it adopted ASU No. 2014-09.
The new revenue standards became effective for the Company on January 1, 2018, and were adopted using the modified retrospective method. Adoption of the new revenue standards did not change the Company’s revenue recognition, as the majority of its revenues continue to be recognized when the customer takes control of its product. As the Company did not identify any accounting changes that impacted the amount of reported revenues with respect to its product revenues, no adjustment to retained earnings was required upon adoption of the new revenue standards.
Under the new revenue standards, the Company recognizes revenues when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, or when they are shipped to a customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration that it expects to receive in exchange for them. The Company recognizes revenues following the five-step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (a) it identifies contract(s) with a customer; (b) it identifies the performance obligations in the contract; (c) it determines the transaction price; (d) it allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (e) it recognizes revenues when (or as) it satisfies its performance obligation.
Revenues from product sales are recognized when a customer obtains control of the Company’s product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon shipment or delivery to the customer. The Company expenses incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that it would have been recognized is one year or less or the amount is immaterial.
Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under FASB ASC Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, under which the Company is required to recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable and a deferred tax liability or asset for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences and carry forwards to the extent they are realizable.
The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce its deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. While the Company has considered future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for the valuation allowance, in the event that it were to determine that it would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period in which such determination was made. Likewise, should the Company determine that it would not be able to realize all or part of a net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to that asset would be charged to income in the period in which such determination was made. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a deferred tax liability related to intangible assets that are amortized under GAAP but are not deductible for tax purposes. The remaining change in valuation allowance is attributable to the decrease in valuation allowance on other tax assets not generated through the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company believes that it is more likely than not that these tax assets will not be realized. Based on annual evaluations of tax positions, the Company believes that it has appropriately filed its tax returns and accrued for possible exposures. As part of the process of preparing the Company’s consolidated financial statements, it is required to estimate its income tax provision or benefit in each of the jurisdictions in which it operates. This process involves estimating current income tax provision or benefit together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences have resulted in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in the consolidated balance sheets.
ASC Topic 740.10.30 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC Topic 740.10.40 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. The Company has no material uncertain tax positions.
Smaller Growth Company
We are a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. As such, we may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies as long as (i) the market value of our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter. As a smaller reporting company, we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation; and, as long as we remain a smaller reporting company with less than $100 million in annual revenue, we will not be required to obtain an attestation report on internal control over financial reporting issued by our independent registered public accounting firm.