Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Information
Forward-looking statements in this report, including without limitation, statements related to the Company’s plans, strategies, objectives, expectations, intentions and adequacy of resources, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Investors are cautioned that such forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties including the impact that the global COVID-19 pandemic has had and will continue to have on the Company’s business, operations and financial results. These include the duration, spread, severity, and any recurrence of the COVID-19 pandemic including through any new variant strains of the underlying virus; the effectiveness, availability, and public acceptance of vaccines; the duration and scope of pandemic-related government restrictions on commercial and other activities, including retail store, office, school and restaurant closures; the duration and scope of the Company’s actions to maintain employee health at our offices, production facilities and distribution centers; the extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on overall demand for the Company’s products; the effect of measures taken by the Company to protect the health of our employees at our offices and distribution centers the pace of recovery when an effective vaccine is widely available or when the pandemic otherwise subsides and the heightened impact the pandemic has on many of the risks described herein, including without limitation risks relating to the on-going world-wide economic downturn and disruptions in our supply chain, any of which could adversely impact the Company’s ability to manufacture, source or distribute its products, both domestically and internationally.
These risks and uncertainties further include, without limitation, the following: (i) changes in the Company’s plans, strategies, objectives, expectations and intentions, which may be made at any time at the discretion of the Company; (ii) the impact of uncertainties in global economic conditions, whether caused by COVID-19 or otherwise, including the impact on the Company’s suppliers and customers; (iii) changes in client needs and consumer spending habits, including COVID-19 related changes; (iv) the impact of competition; (v) the impact of technological changes including, specifically, the growth of online marketing and sales activity; (vi) the Company’s ability to manage its growth effectively, including its ability to successfully integrate any business it might acquire; (vii) the Company’s ability to effectively manage its inventory in a rapidly changing business environment, including additional inventory acquired to respond to COVID-19 related uncertainties; (viii) currency fluctuations; (ix) international trade policies and their impact on demand for our products and our competitive position, including the imposition of new tariffs or changes in existing tariff rates; and (x) other risks and uncertainties indicated from time to time in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. The Company’s significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to consolidated financial statements. Certain accounting estimates are particularly important to the understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by the Company’s management and can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside the control of management. The Company’s management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on historical operations, future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, the observance of trends in the industry, information provided by customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. The following discusses the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates:
Estimates - Operating results may be affected by certain accounting estimates. The most sensitive and significant accounting estimates in the financial statements relate to customer rebates, valuation allowances for deferred income tax assets, obsolete and slow-moving inventories, potentially uncollectible accounts receivable, intangibles, accruals for income taxes, and stock-based compensation. Although the Company’s management has used available information to make judgments on the appropriate estimates to account for the above matters, there can be no assurance that future events will not significantly affect the estimated amounts related to these areas where estimates are required. However, historically, actual results have not been materially different than original estimates.
Revenue Recognition - The Company's revenues result from the sale of goods or services and reflect the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled. The Company records revenue based on a five-step model in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"). For its contracts with customers, the Company identifies the performance obligations (goods or services), determines the transaction price, allocates the contract transaction price to the performance obligations, and recognizes the revenue when (or as) the performance obligation is transferred to the customer. A good or service is transferred when (or as) the customer obtains control of that good or service. Depending on the contractual terms of each customer, revenue is recognized either at the time of shipment or upon delivery. When revenue is recorded, estimates of returns are made and recorded as a reduction of revenue. Customer rebates and incentives earned based on promotional programs in place volume of purchases or other factors are also estimated at the time of revenue recognition and recorded as a reduction of that revenue. Refer to Note 9 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers, in the notes to consolidated financial statements in this report for a more detailed discussion.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts - The Company provides an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon a review of outstanding accounts receivable, historical collection information and existing economic conditions. The allowance for doubtful accounts represents estimated uncollectible accounts receivables associated with potential customer defaults on contractual obligations, usually due to potential insolvencies. The allowance includes amounts for certain customers where a risk of default has been specifically identified. In addition, the allowance includes a provision for customer defaults based on historical experience. The Company actively monitors its accounts receivable balances, and its historical experience of annual accounts receivable write-offs has been negligible.
Customer Rebates - Customer rebates and incentives are a common practice in the office products industry. We incur customer rebate costs to obtain favorable product placement, to promote sell-through of products and to maintain competitive pricing. Customer rebate costs and incentives, including volume rebates, promotional funds, catalog allowances and slotting fees, are accounted for as a reduction to gross sales. These costs are recorded at the time of sale and are based on individual customer contracts. Management periodically reviews accruals for these rebates and allowances and adjusts accruals when appropriate.
Obsolete and Slow Moving Inventory - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined on the first-in, first-out method, or net realizable value. An allowance is established to adjust the cost of inventory to its net realizable value. Inventory allowances are recorded for obsolete or slow moving inventory based on assumptions about future demand and marketability of products, the impact of new product introductions and specific identification of items, such as discontinued products. These estimates could vary significantly from actual requirements if future economic conditions, customer inventory levels or competitive conditions differ from expectations.
Income Taxes - Deferred income tax liabilities or assets are established for temporary differences between financial and tax reporting bases and are subsequently adjusted to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce deferred income tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill - Intangible assets with finite useful lives are recorded at cost upon acquisition and amortized over the term of the related contract, if any, or useful life, as applicable. Intangible assets held by the Company with finite useful lives include patents and trademarks. The weighted average amortization period for intangible assets at December 31, 2020 was 9 years. The Company periodically reviews the values recorded for intangible assets and goodwill to assess recoverability from future operations whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company assessed the recoverability of its long-lived assets and goodwill and believed that there were no events or circumstances present that would require a test of recoverability on those assets. As a result, there was no impairment of the carrying amounts of such assets and no reduction in their estimated useful lives.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation - Stock based compensation cost is measured at the grant date fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option - pricing model to determine fair value of the awards, which involves certain subjective assumptions. These assumptions include estimating the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (“expected term”), the estimated volatility of the Company’s common stock price over the expected term (“volatility”) and the number of options for which vesting requirements will not be completed (“forfeitures”). Changes in the subjective assumptions can materially affect estimates of fair value stock-based compensation, and the related amount recognized on the consolidated statements of operations. Refer to Note 11 - Stock Option Plans, in the notes to consolidated financial statements in this report for a more detailed discussion.
Results of Operations 2020 Compared with 2019
Traditionally, the Company’s sales are stronger in the second and third quarters and weaker in the first and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, due to the seasonal nature of the back-to-school market.
COVID-19 Pandemic Related Considerations
As noted above in the “Forward-Looking Statements”, the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) through China, the United States, and other countries globally and the related ongoing economic downturn continue to present certain significant risks and uncertainties to the Company and its operations. Commencing late in the first quarter of the current fiscal year and continuing through the filing of this report, the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the Company’s financial results and business operations. During this period, we experienced, and continue to experience, a significant increase in demand for many of the Company’s first aid and safety products, as consumers and commercial enterprises stocked up on these products. On the other hand, while the Company gained market share in its Westcott craft products, it experienced weakness in the sales of its Westcott office and school supplies with the result that sales for fiscal year 2020 were approximately the same as fiscal year of 2019. The weakness in sales was due, in part, to pandemic-related continued or reimposed closures of retail stores, schools and offices and other COVID-19 related restrictions imposed in our domestic and international markets. The ultimate impact of these effects on the Company will depend on the duration, spread, and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any recurrence of the COVID-19 pandemic including through any new variant strains of the underlying virus, the effectiveness, availability, and acceptance by the public of vaccines, the length of time it takes for normal economic and operating conditions to resume, whether commercial closures and other restrictions that have been imposed to date are extended or reimposed, and additional actions that may be taken by governmental authorities or by businesses or individuals of their own initiative in response to the pandemic.
Substantially all of our manufacturing facilities and distribution centers and those of our key suppliers currently remain open and continue to operate despite temporary closures. We monitor information on COVID-19 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and believe we are adhering to their recommendations regarding the health and safety of our personnel. To address the potential human impact of the virus, most of our administrative staff are telecommuting. For those administrative staff not telecommuting and our warehouse and domestic manufacturing employees, we have implemented social distancing and mask policies, instituted daily temperature checks and have increased facility cleaning at each location. Non-essential domestic and international travel for our employees has ceased.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, commencing late in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing through the end of 2020 and the date of this report, the Company (i) has had to acquire certain of its products at increased costs due to dramatic increases in demand for such products (while, to date, the Company has been successful in passing along such increased costs to its customers, there is no assurance that the Company will be able to continue to do so in the future); (ii) had to acquire additional inventory to minimize the impact of any potential disruption to our supply chain; (iii) has incurred increased labor costs as a result of the payment of additional compensation to employees at its warehouse and distribution centers; and (iv) has incurred costs associated with the additional cleaning and maintenance of its facilities including the temporary closures of facilities for those purposes. The Company continued to incur such costs as a result of these conditions in the fourth quarter and through the date of this report. In addition, the Company has increased reserves relating to outstanding receivables from approximately $522,000 at December 31, 2019, to approximately $1,150,000 at December 31, 2020, as a result of credit risks related to COVID-19. (The Company continuously evaluates credit risks relating to its customers and may need to increase its reserves relating to its receivables further or even, in the event that one or more significant customers should cease operations or declares bankruptcy, write off a substantial amount of receivables.)
The Company has also experienced obstacles and inefficiencies resulting from a number of pandemic-related factors such as travel restrictions imposed by governmental authorities which, e.g., inhibit sales and marketing activities, and inefficiencies resulting from many of the Company’s personnel working remotely. In addition, the Company experienced inefficiencies in its manufacturing and distribution due to social distancing measures imposed in its facilities, COVID-19 related absenteeism, and higher than normal turnover and training of replacements, together with associated costs.
The increases and decreases in the demand for the Company’s products described above have continued to affect the Company’s operations through the end of fiscal year 2020 and continue to do so through the date of this report. They are likely to continue to do so in the immediate future. For example, a decrease could occur in the demand for its first aid and safety products as a result of market saturation potentially resulting from customers having stockpiled those products. While there is no certainty that the current high levels of demand for our first aid and safety products will continue, we have increased our short-term manufacturing and sourcing capacity for these products. We also increased manufacturing and sourcing of other key components and finished goods to minimize the impact of any disruption to our supply chain in the event of a resurgence of an outbreak of the coronavirus in any of our key manufacturing or distribution facilities. The Company anticipates that it has sufficient inventory of its products to meet anticipated demand. However, any prolonged increase in the duration or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic or a resurgence of the pandemic in the future, might adversely affect the Company’s ability to manufacture, source or distribute its products both domestically and internationally. The occurrence of any of these factors could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, operations and financial condition.
Net Sales
In 2020, sales increased by $21,545,698, or 15%, to $164,003,040 compared to $142,457,342 in 2019.
The U.S. segment sales increased by 12%, in 2020 compared to 2019 mainly attributable to strong sales of first aid and safety products, primarily due to continued market share gains in the industrial, safety, home improvement, mass market and e-commerce channels. Also contributing to the growth in first aid products was a surge demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic which had commenced late in the first quarter. These sales amounted to approximately $3.0 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Net sales in Canada, excluding First Aid Central products, for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased 4% in U.S. dollars and 3% in local currency compared to the same period in 2019. Sales of First Aid Central products were approximately $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
European net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 25% in both U.S. dollars and local currency, compared with the period in 2019. The increase in net sales was primarily due to increased sales of Westcott cutting products and Camillus knives in the e-commerce channel as well as continued growth of DMT sharpening products.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was 36.3% of net sales in 2020 compared to 36.5% in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses were $48,182,050 in 2020 compared with $43,571,510 in 2019, an increase of $4,610,540, or 10.6%. SG&A expenses were 29.4% of net sales in 2020 compared to 30.6% in 2019. The increase in SG&A expenses was primarily due to higher personnel related costs, commissions and shipping costs related to higher sales, provision for bad debt primarily related to the impact COVID-19 on our customers, as well as added expenses related to the acquisition of First Aid Central, partially offset by lower travel and marketing expenses.
Operating Income
Operating income was $11,412,664 in 2020, compared with $8,429,348 in 2019, and increase of $2,983,316. Operating income in the U.S. segment increased by approximately $1,673,000, primarily due to higher sales. Operating income in Canada increased by approximately $561,000, primarily due to the acquisition of First Aid Central. Operating income in the European segment increased by approximately $750,000, primarily due to higher sales.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense for 2020 was $919,709, compared with $1,788,512 for 2019, a decrease of $868,803. The decrease in interest expense, net for 2020, was primarily the result of a lower average interest rate as well as lower average debt outstanding under the Company’s revolving credit facility.
Other Expense
Other expense was $666,227 in 2020 compared to $97,672 in 2019. The increase in other expense is primarily related to a one-time non-cash charge of approximately $750,000 related to the termination of the Company’s Defined Benefit Pension Plan.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $1,727,962 in 2020, resulting in an effective tax rate of 18% compared to 1,029,556, an effective tax rate of 16% in 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
The Company did not engage in any off-balance sheet transactions during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During 2020, working capital increased by approximately $6.9 million compared to December 31, 2019. Inventory (excluding the impact of acquisitions) increased by approximately $11 million, or 29%. The increase was primarily due to anticipated growth in our business as well as the acquisition of product to offset the impact of potential supply chain interruptions related to COVID-19. The Company expects that changes in inventory levels will continue to be consistent with changes in sales, including the seasonal impact on the Company’s revenue stream. Inventory turnover, calculated using a twelve month average inventory balance, was 2.4 at December 31, 2020 as compared to 2.3 at December 31, 2019. The reserve for slow moving and obsolete inventory was $1,471,925 at December 31, 2020 compared to $538,354 at December 31, 2019. We do not anticipate material increases in the allowance for slow moving and obsolete inventory in the ordinary course of business during 2021.
Receivables increased by approximately $1.7 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The average number of days sales outstanding in accounts receivable was 60 days in 2020 compared to 64 days in 2019. Accounts payable and other current liabilities increased by approximately $3.6 million.
Long-term debt consists of (i) borrowings under the Company’s revolving loan agreement with HSBC Bank, N.A. (ii) amounts outstanding under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) and (iii) amounts outstanding under the variable rate mortgage related on the Company’s manufacturing and distribution facility in Vancouver, WA. The revolving loan agreement provides for borrowings of up to $50 million at Prime Rate less 1.25%. The credit facility has an expiration date of May 24, 2023. The Company must pay a facility fee, payable quarterly, in an amount equal to two tenths of one percent (.20%) per annum of the average daily unused portion of the revolving credit line. The facility is intended to provide liquidity for working capital, growth, share repurchases, dividends, acquisition and other business activities. Under the revolving loan agreement, the Company is required to maintain specific amounts of tangible net worth, a specified debt to net worth ratio and a fixed charge coverage ratio and must have annual net income greater than zero, measured as of the end of each fiscal year. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with the covenants then in effect under the loan agreement.
At December 31, 2020, total debt outstanding under the Company’s revolving credit facility increased by approximately $5.5 million compared to total debt at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, $38,767,167 was outstanding and $11,232,833 was available for borrowing under the Company’s revolving credit facility.
On May 7, 2020, the Company received a loan (the “PPP Loan”) from HSBC Bank, N.A. in the amount of $3,508,047 under the Paycheck Protection Program established by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act. Subject to potential forgiveness, as described below, the PPP Loan matures in two years on May 8, 2022, bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per year and is evidenced by a promissory note dated May 7, 2020 (the “Note”). Monthly payments of principal and interest are deferred until after any application for forgiveness submitted by the Company has been acted upon, as described below. The PPP Loan is unsecured and federally guaranteed. The Note contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, failure to make payments of principal and interest and breaches of representations and warranties. The Company may prepay the PPP Loan at any time prior to maturity with no penalty.
All or a portion of the PPP Loan may be eligible to be forgiven by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) and the lender upon application by the Company, provided that the Company shall have used the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including the payment of payroll, benefits, rent, mortgage interest and utilities, during the 24 week period beginning on the date of funding of the loan (the “covered period”). Not more than 40% of the amount forgiven may be for non-payroll costs.
Consistent with the requirements of the PPP for loan forgiveness, the Company used the loan proceeds solely for payment of payroll and otherwise in a manner which it believes satisfy the requirements for loan forgiveness. In August 2020, the Company submitted an application for forgiveness of the entire amount of the PPP loan to HSBC Bank, N.A. (the Lender). The lender approved the forgiveness application and, on August 26, 2020, submitted the Company’s application to the SBA for its approval. The SBA subsequently asked the Company to provide certain additional information and documentation in connection with it review of the Company’s forgiveness application and the Company has done so. The application is presently pending. No assurance can be given that the Company’s application for loan forgiveness will be approved by the SBA, in whole or in part.
The SBA reserves the right to audit any PPP loan, regardless of size. These audits may occur after forgiveness has been granted. Under the CARES Act, all borrowers are required to maintain their loan documentation for six years after the PPP loan was forgiven or repaid in full and to provide that documentation to the SBA upon request.
On April 28, 2020, the U.S. Department of the Treasury stated that the SBA will review each PPP loan over $2.0 million. In order to apply for the PPP Loan, we were required to certify, among other things, that the then current uncertainty made the PPP Loan request necessary to support our ongoing operations. We made this certification in good faith after analyzing, among other things, our financial situation and access to alternative sources of capital. Following this analysis, we believe that we satisfied all eligibility criteria for the PPP Loan, and that our receipt of the PPP Loan is consistent with the objectives of the PPP of the CARES Act. If it is later determined that we were ineligible to receive the PPP Loan, we may be required to repay the PPP Loan in its entirety and/or be subject to additional penalties, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
The Company’s First Aid Only manufacturing and distribution center in Vancouver, WA was financed by a variable rate mortgage with HSBC Bank, N.A. at an interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.5%. Principal payments of $22,222 are due monthly, with all amounts outstanding due on maturity on October 31, 2024. The outstanding principal on December 31, 2020 was $3,177,778.
Capital expenditures during 2020 and 2019 were $2,569,174 and $1,680,479, respectively, which were, in part, financed with borrowings under the Company’s revolving credit facility.
The Company believes that cash on hand, and cash generated from operating activities, together with funds available under its revolving credit facility, are expected, under current conditions, to be sufficient to finance the Company’s planned operations for at least the next twelve months from the issuance of this Form 10-K.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The update eliminates, clarifies and modifies certain guidance related to the accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2019-12 to have a material effect on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-14, Compensation - Retirement Benefits - Defined Benefit Plans - General (Subtopic 715-20), Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosures Requirements for Defined Benefit Plans Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220). This ASU removes disclosures that no longer are considered cost beneficial, clarifies the specific requirements of disclosures, and adds disclosure requirements identified as relevant. ASU 2018-14 is effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2020. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2018-14 to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting. ASU 2018-07 aligns the accounting for share-based payment awards issued to employees and non-employees. ASU 2018-07 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that reporting period. The adoption of ASU 2018-07 did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In February 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-02, Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income. ASU No. 2018-02 provides companies with an option to reclassify stranded tax effects within accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) to retained earnings in each period in which the effect of the change in the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (or portion thereof) is recorded. ASU No. 2018-02 also requires disclosure of a description of the accounting policy for releasing income tax effects from AOCI and whether an election was made to reclassify the stranded income tax effects from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. ASU No. 2018-02 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Companies can adopt the provisions of ASU No. 2018-02 in either the period of adoption or retrospectively to each period (or periods) in which the effect of the change in the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is recognized. This ASU was adopted effective January 1, 2019 and resulted in a reclassification between retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive loss. The impact from this ASU increased retained earnings by approximately $0.1 million, with an offsetting increase to accumulated other comprehensive loss for the same amount.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments in this update eliminate Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. The annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test is performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit should be considered when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable. The Company adopted this standard on January 1, 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have an impact to the financial statements of the Company.