ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Report. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in the future periods. Certain statements in this Report under this Item 7, Item 1, “Business”, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements or industry results, to be materially different from any future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. See page 1 of this Report under the caption “Forward-Looking Statements” for a description of the most significant of such factors.
Company’s Present Financial Condition
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $413 thousand compared to $862 thousand of cash at December 31, 2019. We had an accumulated deficit of approximately $389.2 million and $388 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We had a loss from operations of $758 thousand and a net loss of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a loss from operations of $725 thousand and a net loss of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
On June 28, 2019, we entered into License, Development and Commercialization Agreement (the "Agreement") with Abuse Deterrent Pharma, LLC, which was amended in October 2020. The Agreement, as amended, grants AD Pharma exclusive commercialization rights in the United States to LTX-03. Financial arrangements include monthly license payments to Acura by AD Pharma of $350,000 from inception through April 2020 and $200,000 thereafter until July 31, 2021 or FDA’s acceptance of a New Drug Application (“NDA”) for LTX-03 and reimbursement by AD Pharma of Acura’s LTX-03 outside development expenses. Upon commercialization of LTX-03, Acura will be entitled to stepped royalties on sales and is eligible for certain sales related milestones. However, if the NDA application for LTX-03 is not accepted by the FDA by July 31, 2021, AD Pharma has the option of terminating the Agreement and taking ownership of the intellectual property. Acura currently expects the submission and FDA acceptance of the NDA to occur after July 31, 2021 and has notified AD Pharma of this revised timeline. Acura is currently in discussions with AD Pharma to amend the Agreement. There can be no assurance that AD Pharma will agree to extend the NDA filing acceptance date or that they will not take ownership of the intellectual property.
Our losses have resulted principally from costs incurred in connection with research and development activities, salaries and other personnel-related costs and sales, marketing and general corporate expenses. Research and development activities include costs of pre-clinical studies, clinical trials, and clinical trial product supplies associated with our product candidates as well as cost sharing expenses of line extension studies and post-marketing studies under the Assertio Agreement. Sales and marketing expenses include costs associated with the Nexafed product line advertising incurred prior to our entering into the MainPointe Agreement, salaries and other personnel-related costs include the stock-based compensation associated with stock options and restricted stock units granted to employees and non-employee directors.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and we do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, our clinical trials, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the pandemic will have on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. (See further COVID-19 discussion in Note 1 to the Financial Statements).
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenues
License Fees
We recognize license fees under the license and development agreement with AD Pharma for LTX-03 dated June 2019 and as amended in October 2020. We recognized $3.0 million and $2.1 million of license fees revenue during the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue is derived from research and development services we perform under the license and development agreement with AD Pharma for LTX-03. We recognized $238 thousand and $185 thousand of collaboration revenue during the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Royalty Revenue
In connection with our license agreement with Assertio for Oxaydo Tablets, we earn a royalty based on product net sales. We recognized $102 thousand and $351 thousand of royalty revenue for Oxaydo during the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect future lower royalties from lower product net sales of Oxaydo Tablets as Assertio has indicated they have ceased promoting this product.
In connection with our license agreement with MainPointe for our Nexafed product line, we earn a royalty based on product net sales. We recognized $7 thousand and $21 thousand of royalty revenue on Nexafed during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Product Sales
Nexafed was launched in mid-December 2012 and Nexafed Sinus Pressure + Pain was launched in February 2015. Prior to entering into the MainPointe Agreement in March 2017, we sold our Nexafed products in the United States to wholesale pharmaceutical distributors as well as directly to chain drug stores. Our Nexafed products were sold subject to the right of return usually for a period of up to twelve months after the product expiration. During the second quarter 2020, we reviewed our product sales return allowance liability and recorded a $223 thousand favorable amount to product sales as we believe sufficient time has passed where the Nexafed product is no longer subject to right of return and we estimate no additional product will be returned.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense (“R&D”) for 2020 and 2019 was primarily with respect to our LIMITx Technology development activity under license with AD Pharma and can include, among other items, costs of preclinical and non-clinical internal and external activities, clinical study trials, clinical supplies and its related formulation and design costs, salaries and other personnel related expenses of our employees, consultants, our facility costs, and a percentage share of selected cost sharing expenses under the license agreement with Assertio. Also included in 2019 year end results is share-based compensation expenses of approximately $21 thousand. Excluding share-based compensation expense, our R&D expenses increased approximately $0.3 million between reporting periods, all related to the LTX-03 development activities.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses primarily consisted of legal, audit and other professional services, corporate insurance, and payroll. Included in each of the 2020 and 2019 results are share-based compensation expenses of approximately $53 thousand and $117 thousand, respectively. Excluding the share-based compensation expense our general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $0.7 million between reporting periods, resulting primarily from a $668 thousand intangible asset impairment charge offset by $137 thousand decrease in resulting ongoing amortization expense on this asset, resumption of board of director fee payments for the entire year of 2020 resulting in increase of $43 thousand over 2019 expense, and resumption of general and patent legal services for the entire year of 2020 resulting in increase of $170 thousand over 2019 expense.
Non-Operating Expense
Debt Extinguishment
On June 28, 2019, we modified the $5.0 million related party loan with Mr. Schutte and the accounting method used for the changes to the loan resulted in the recognition of a $2.6 million loss on debt extinguishment.
Interest Expense
For 2020 and 2019, we incurred interest expense of $450 thousand and $449 thousand, respectively, on our $6.0 million convertible debt.
Income Taxes
Our results for 2020 and 2019 include no federal or state income tax benefit provisions due to 100% allowances placed against our deferred tax assets for the uncertainty of their future utilization.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $413 thousand, working capital deficit of $6.6 million and an accumulated deficit of $389.2 million. We had a loss from operations of $758 thousand and a net loss of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We have suffered recurring losses from operations and have not generated positive cash flows from operations. We anticipate operating losses to continue for the foreseeable future. As of March 30, 2021 our cash balance was approximately $350 thousand.
Currently, the License, Development and Commercialization Agreement dated June 28, 2019 (the “Agreement”), as amended, requires AD Pharma to pay a monthly license payment of $350,000 from AD Pharma to us for a period from inception up to April 2020 at which time the payment is $200,000 per month through July 2021, and pay all outside development costs for LTX-03. AD Pharma is delinquent in remitting monthly license payments for December, 2020 thru March, 2021 and approximately $100 thousand of reimbursable LTX-03 development expenses. Failure to make these payments are an event of default under the Agreement, as amended. Based upon representations by AD Pharma, we anticipate receipt of these past due amounts by April 30, 2021 and payment obligations through July, 2021, for which no assurance can be given.
Included in the AD Pharma Agreement, as amended, is the requirement that the NDA for LTX-03 now be accepted by the FDA by July 31, 2021 or AD Pharma has the option to terminate the AD Pharma Agreement and take ownership of the LIMITx intellectual property. Failure to meet this date will be an event of default under the Company’s $6.0 million outstanding convertible debt to AD Pharma. The Agreement allows AD Pharma to terminate the Agreement “for convenience”. Acura currently expects the submission and FDA acceptance of the NDA for LTX-03 to now occur after July 31, 2021 and has notified AD Pharma of this revised timeline. Acura is currently in discussions with AD Pharma to amend the Agreement. There can be no assurance that AD Pharma will agree to extend the NDA filing acceptance date or that they will not take ownership of the intellectual property. Pending resolution of this matter, we have presented the $6.0 million convertible debt as a current liability at December 31, 2020. Whether or not AD Pharma exercises their right to terminate the Agreement, we need to raise additional financing or enter into license or collaboration agreements with third parties relating to our technologies. No assurance can be given that we will be successful in obtaining any such financing or in securing license or collaboration agreements with third parties on acceptable terms, if at all, or if secured, that such financing or license or collaboration agreements will provide payments to the Company sufficient to fund continued operations. In the absence of such financing or third-party license or collaboration agreements, the Company will be required to scale back or terminate operations and/or seek protection under applicable bankruptcy laws. An extended delay or cessation of the Company’s continuing product development efforts will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
In view of the matters described above, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists with respect to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financial statements are issued and our independent registered public accounting firm have included in their report relating to our 2020 financial statements a “going concern” explanatory paragraph as to substantial doubt of our ability to continue as a going concern.
In view of the matters described above, recoverability of a major portion of the recorded asset amounts shown in the Company’s accompanying balance sheets is dependent upon continued operations of the Company, which in turn is dependent upon the Company’s ability to meet its financing requirements on a continuous basis, to maintain existing financing and to succeed in its future operations. The Company’s financial statements do not include any adjustment relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue in existence.
Our future sources of revenue, if any, will be derived from licensing fees, milestone payments and royalties under the AD Pharma Agreement, the Assertio Agreement, the KemPharm Agreement, the MainPointe Agreement and similar agreements which we may enter into for our LIMITx products in development with other pharmaceutical company partners, for which there can be no assurance.
The amount and timing of our future cash requirements will depend on regulatory and market acceptance of our product candidates and the resources we devote to the development and commercialization of our product candidates.
Cash Flows
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $1.2 million. This net loss was partially offset by non-cash items such as $36 thousand in share-based compensation expense, $56 thousand of depreciation expense, $668 thousand impairment charge on an intangible asset, $70 thousand of intangible asset amortization expense and $223 write-down of product sales return allowance liability, with $118 thousand in net cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $118 thousand were primarily due to increases of $400 thousand in license fee receivable, $119 thousand in collaboration revenue receivable and $17 thousand in prepaid expenses and other current assets along with a decrease of $160 thousand in accounts payable and accrued expenses. These cash outflows were partially offset by a decreases of $52 thousand in royalty receivable, and $68 thousand in income tax receivable, along with increases of $449 thousand in accrued interest and $10 thousand in other current liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $3.8 million, capitalized debt discount of $13 thousand and a loss on debt extinguishment of $2.6 million. This net loss was partially offset by non-cash items such as $108 thousand in share-based compensation expense, $66 thousand of debt discount and debt issue cost amortization expense, $66 thousand of depreciation expense, and $207 thousand of intangible asset amortization expense with $154 thousand in net cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $154 thousand were primarily due to $78 thousand increase in collaboration revenue receivable and $379 thousand decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses. These cash outflows were partially offset by a decreases of $55 thousand in royalty receivables, $67 thousand in income tax receivable, $394 thousand in accrued interest and $44 thousand in prepaid expenses and other current assets and increases of $18 thousand in other current liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We had no investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $269 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of the proceeds from a loan under the CARESs Act.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of the net proceeds from loans provided by Mr. Schutte.
Related Party Loans from Mr. Schutte
At June 28, 2019, we entered into a Promissory Note (the “Note”) with Mr. Schutte that consolidated existing promissory notes that were due to mature at January 2, 2020 issued to John Schutte into a single note for $6.0 million (after including accrued and unpaid interest). To secure our performance of our obligations under the Note, we granted Mr. Schutte a security interest in all of our assets. Terms of the consolidated Note provide for a July 1, 2023 maturity date, interest at fixed rate of 7.5% per annum with all payments of principle and interest deferred to maturity. The Note is convertible into Acura common stock at $0.16 per share. As additional consideration, Mr. Schutte received a warrant to purchase 10 million shares of the Company’s common stock at a price of $0.01 per share.
With our consent, Mr. Schutte assigned and transferred to Abuse Deterrent Pharma, LLC (“AD Pharma”) all of his right, title and interest in this Note, its associated Security Agreement and the Warrant to purchase 10.0 million common shares of our stock, effective June 28, 2019. Mr. Schutte is an investor in AD Pharma.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in transactions or arrangements with unconsolidated or other special purpose entities.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses in our financial statements and accompanying notes. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those estimates related to contract agreements, research collaborations and investments. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The following items in our financial statements require significant estimates and judgments:
Going Concern
In connection with the preparation of the consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company conducted an evaluation as to whether there were conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, which raised substantial doubt as to the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date of the issuance, or the date of availability, of the financial statements to be issued, noting that there did appear to be evidence of substantial doubt of the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern as further discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenues are comprised of amounts earned under its license and collaboration agreements, royalties, and until March 2017 did previously include the Nexafed products’ net product sales. The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606-Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or Topic 606, on January 1, 2018, resulting in a change to its accounting policy for revenue recognition.
Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when, or as, performance obligations under terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised service is transferred to a customer. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring services to a customer (“transaction price”). The Company will then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. When determining the transaction price of the contract, an adjustment is made if payment from a customer occurs either significantly before or significantly after performance, resulting in a significant financing component.
The Company may enter into license and collaboration agreements which contain a single performance obligation or may contain multiple performance obligations. Those which contain multiple performance obligations will require an allocation of the transaction price based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised services underlying each performance obligation. These license and collaboration agreements may contain customer options for the license of additional products and territories. The options in the agreement may need to be evaluated to determine the option’s standalone selling prices. Some of the license and collaboration agreements may contain a license to the technology as well as licenses to tradenames or trademarks. The licenses to the tradenames or trademarks will need to be evaluated in context of the entire contract. The commercial sales-based milestones and sales royalties earned under the license and collaboration agreements are recorded in the period of the related sales by the licensee.
Research and Development
Research and Development (“R&D”) costs include internal R&D activities, external Contract Research Organization (“CRO”) services and their clinical research and investigative sites, and other activities. Internal R&D activity costs can include facility overhead, equipment and facility maintenance and repairs, laboratory supplies, pre-clinical laboratory experiments, formulation work, depreciation, salaries, benefits, insurance and share-based compensation expenses. CRO activity costs can include preclinical laboratory experiments and clinical trial studies. Other activity costs can include regulatory consulting, regulatory legal counsel, cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing pre-clinical trial materials, costs of manufacturing scale-up, and cost sharing expenses under license agreements. Internal R&D costs and other activity costs are charged to expense as incurred. We make payments to CROs based on agreed upon terms and may include payments in advance of a study starting date. Payments in advance will be reflected in the financial statements as prepaid expenses. We review and charge to expense the amounts for CRO costs and clinical trial study costs based on services performed and rely on estimates of those costs applicable to the stage of completion of a study as provided by the CRO to us. The accrued CRO costs are subject to revisions by us as the study progresses towards completion. Revisions are charged to expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known to us.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the liability method. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and income tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted income tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Additionally, net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards are reported as deferred income tax assets. The realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent upon future earnings. A valuation allowance against deferred income tax assets is required if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred income tax assets may not be realized. At December 31, 2019, 100% of the remaining deferred income tax assets are offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties with respect to future utilization of net operating loss carryforwards. If in the future it is determined that amounts of our deferred income tax assets would likely be realized, the valuation allowance would be reduced in the period in which such determination is made and a benefit from income taxes in such period would be recognized.
Share-based Compensation Expense
Compensation cost related to stock-based payment transactions is measured based on fair value of the equity or liability instrument issued. For purposes of estimating the fair value of each stock option unit on the date of grant, we utilized the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options, which have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. In addition, option valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions including the expected volatility factor of the market price of our common stock (as determined by reviewing its historical public market closing prices). Our accounting for stock-based compensation for restricted stock units, or RSUs, is based on the fair-value method. The fair value of the RSUs is the market price of our common stock on the date of grant, less its exercise cost. In May 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-09 which provides guidance as to how an entity should apply modified accounting in Topic 718 when changing the terms and conditions of its share-based payment awards. The guidance clarifies that modification accounting will be applied if the value, vesting conditions or classification of the award changes. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods, including interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2017 but early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted this new standard on January 1, 2018 which did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements of the Notes to Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) for further discussion.
Capital Expenditures
We did not have any capital expenditures during 2020 or 2019.
Impact of Inflation
We believe that inflation did not have a material impact on our operations for the periods reported.