Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended as a review of significant factors affecting our financial condition and results of operations for the periods indicated. The discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes presented herein. In addition to historical information, the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ significantly from those expressed, implied or anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors discussed herein and any other periodic reports filed and to be filed by us with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of therapeutics for the treatment or prevention of addiction and related disorders. Our lead investigational new drug product, AD04, is being developed as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of alcohol use disorder (“AUD”). The active ingredient in AD04 is ondansetron, a selective serotonin-3 antagonist (i.e., a “5-HT3 antagonist”) that is also the active ingredient in Zofran®, an approved drug for treating nausea and emesis. We have commenced Phase 3 clinical trial using AD04 for the potential treatment of AUD in subjects with certain target genotypes. We believe our approach is unique in that it targets the serotonin system and individualizes the treatment of AUD, through the use of genetic screening (i.e., a companion diagnostic genetic biomarker). We have created an investigational companion diagnostic biomarker test for the genetic screening of patients with certain biomarkers that, as reported in the American Journal of Psychiatry (Johnson, et. al. 2011 & 2013), we believe will benefit from treatment with AD04. Our strategy is to integrate the pre-treatment genetic screening into AD04’s label to create a patient-specific treatment in one integrated therapeutic offering. Our goal is to develop a genetically targeted, effective and safe product candidate to treat AUD by reducing or eliminating the patients’ consumption of alcohol. We are also exploring expanding or portfolio in the field of addiction.
We have a worldwide, exclusive license from the University of Virginia Patent Foundation (d.b.a the Licensing & Venture Group) (“UVA LVG”), which is the licensing arm of the University of Virginia, to commercialize our investigational drug candidate, AD04, subject to Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approval of the product, based upon three separate patent application families, with patents issued in over 40 jurisdictions, including three issued patents in the U.S. Our investigational agent has been used in several investigator-sponsored trials and we possess or have rights to use toxicology, pharmacokinetic and other preclinical and clinical data that supports our Phase 3 clinical trial. Our therapeutic agent was the product candidate used in a University of Virginia investigator sponsored Phase 2b clinical trial of 283 patients. In this Phase 2b clinical trial, ultra-low dose ondansetron, the active pharmaceutical agent in AD04, patients with the target genotypes showed a statistically significant difference between ondansetron and placebo for both the primary endpoint and secondary endpoint, which were reduction in severity of drinking measured in drinks per drinking day (1.71 drinks/drinking day; p=0.0042), and reduction in frequency of drinking measured in days of abstinence/no drinking (11.56%; p=0.0352), respectively. Additionally, and importantly, the Phase 2b results showed a significant decrease in the percentage of heavy drinking days (11.08%; p=0.0445) with a “heavy drinking day” defined as a day with four (4) or more alcoholic drinks for women or five (5) or more alcoholic drinks for men consumed in the same day.
The active pharmaceutical agent in AD04, our lead investigational new drug product, is ondansetron (the active ingredient in Zofran®), which was granted FDA approval in 1991 for nausea and vomiting post-operatively and after chemotherapy or radiation treatment and is now commercially available in generic form. In studies of Zofran®, conducted as part of its FDA review process, ondansetron was given acutely at dosages up to almost 100 times the dosage expected to be formulated in AD04 with the highest doses of Zofran® given intravenously (“i.v.”), which results in approximately 160% of the exposure level as oral dosing. Even at high doses given i.v. the studies found that ondansetron is well-tolerated and results in few adverse side effects at the currently marketed doses, which reach more than 80 times the AD04 dose and are given i.v. The formulation dosage of ondansetron used in our drug candidate (and expected to be used by us in our Phase 3 clinical trials) has the potential advantage that it contains a much lower concentration of ondansetron than the generic formulation/dosage that has been used in prior clinical trials, is dosed orally, and is available with use of a companion diagnostic genetic biomarker. Our development plan for AD04 is designed to demonstrate both the efficacy of AD04 in the genetically targeted population and the safety of ondansetron when administered chronically at the AD04 dosage. However, to the best of our knowledge, no comprehensive clinical study has been performed to date that has evaluated the safety profile of ondansetron at any dosage for long-term use as anticipated in our Phase 3 clinical trial.
According to the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (the “NIAAA”) and the Journal of the American Medical Association (“JAMA”), in the United States alone, approximately 35 million people each year have AUD (such number is based upon the 2012 data provided in Grant et. al. the JAMA 2015 publication and has been adjusted to reflect a compound annual growth rate of 1.13%, which is the growth rate reported by U.S. Census Bureau for the general adult population from 2012-2017), resulting in significant health, social and financial costs with excessive alcohol use being the third leading cause of preventable death and is responsible for 31% of driving fatalities in the United States (NIAAA Alcohol Facts & Statistics). AUD contributes to over 200 different diseases and 10% of children live with a person that has an alcohol problem. According to the American Society of Clinical Oncologists, 5-6% of new cancers and cancer deaths globally are directly attributable to alcohol. And, The Lancet published that alcohol is the leading cause of death in people ages 15-49 globally. The Centers for Disease Control (the “CDC”) has reported that AUD costs the U.S. economy about $250 billion annually, with heavy drinking accounting for greater than 75% of the social and health related costs. Despite this, according to the article in the JAMA 2015 publication, only 7.7% of patients (i.e., approximately 2.7 million people) with AUD are estimated to have been treated in any way and only 3.6% by a physician (i.e., approximately 1.3 million people). In addition, according to the JAMA 2017 publication, the problem in the United States appears to be growing with almost a 50% increase in AUD prevalence between 2002 and 2013.
We have devoted substantially all of our resources to development efforts relating to AD04, including preparation for conducting clinical trials, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property. We currently do not have any products approved for sale and we have not generated any significant revenue since our inception. From our inception through the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have funded our operations primarily through the private placement of debt and equity securities and most recently, our initial public offering, follow-on offering and equity line.
We have incurred net losses in each year since our inception, including net losses of approximately $10.9 million and $8.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We had accumulated deficits of approximately $31.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Substantially all our operating losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs, from general and administrative costs associated with our operations, and from financing costs.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain marketing approval for AD04, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty. We do not believe our current cash and equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months from the filing of these financial statements, because we have incurred various expenses related to adding personnel and other corporate resources and experienced delays in certain countries in obtaining regulatory approval required to commence the trial in such countries due to COVID-19, resulting in significantly slowed trial enrollment and additional expense. We expect that we will need additional funding to complete our first Phase 3 clinical trial.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our operating activities through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third-party funding, commercialization, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop AD04.
Clinical Trials - Research and Development Schedule
We currently anticipate that we, working in collaboration with our vendors, upon execution of collaborative research and development agreements with them, will be able to execute the following timeline:
AD04 - Two-Stage Clinical Development Strategy - Conduct the Phase 3 clinical trials sequentially
* Even if the 1st Phase 3 trial is not accepted by the FDA due to the study not being well-powered for the FDA’s currently stated end point, we still expect that the EMA will require only one additional trial. In this case, however, a 3rd trial might be required by the FDA (i.e., three Phase 3 trials in total). If two additional trials are required for FDA approval after an initial Phase 3 trial conducted in the EMA, we would expect to run the 2nd and 3rd trials in parallel (i.e., at the same time) so as not to increase the expected time to approval. The 2nd Phase 3 trial is expected to require $20 million in direct expenses, and up to $10 million in additional other development expenses is expected to be required. A possible 3rd Phase 3 trial would be expected to require an additional $20 million in clinical trial related expenditures.
We current estimate the total cost to complete our initial Phase 3 clinical trial of AD04 for the treatment of AUD to be approximately $10.7 million (versus a previous estimate of $8.8 million), of which approximately $5.3 million has already been incurred or been pre-paid, leaving approximately $5.4 million in direct trial expenses that we will be required to pay in the future. This estimate is subject to many factors, some of which are beyond our control. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
● the progress and cost of our research and development activities;
● the number and scope of our research and development programs;
● the progress and cost of our preclinical and clinical development activities;
● our ability to maintain current research and development licensing arrangements and to establish new research and development and licensing arrangements;
● our ability to achieve our milestones under licensing arrangements;
● the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
●
the costs and timing of regulatory approvals;
● The impact of COVID-19 on our ability to timely enroll patients in our Phase 3clinical trial and obtain regulatory approvals; and
● changes in the value of the Euro relative to the US Dollar.
Additional funds are expected to be raised through grants, partnerships with other pharmaceutical companies or through additional debt or equity financings, including pursuant to the terms of our equity line. We expect the second Phase 3 Trial to cost approximately $20 million, such estimate subject to the factors stated above.
As we advance our clinical programs, we are in close contact with our CROs and clinical sites and are assessing the impact of COVID-19 on our studies and current timelines and costs.
2020 Financing Developments
On June 11, 2020, we concluded a registered direct offering of 2,820,000 shares of common stock and in a concurrent private placement the sale of warrants to purchase 2,115,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share. The shares of common stock and accompanying warrants were sold directly to the buyers at a combined at-the-market price of $1.85 for a share and three quarters warrant. Gross proceeds of the offering, totaled $5,217,000, which after offering expenses, resulted in net proceeds of $4,657,215.
On September 21, 2020, we concluded a private placement with a related party of 357,143 unregistered shares of common stock and above market price of $1.40 per share. Gross proceeds of the offering, totaled $500,000, with no material expenses.
On September 29, 2020, previously registered warrants to purchase 225,000 shares at an exercise fee of $2.00 per share were exercised for a total of $450,000.
On November 18, 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) and a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Keystone Capital. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we have the right to sell Keystone Capital the lesser of (i) $15,000,000 in shares of our common stock and (ii) the number of shares of common stock equal to the Exchange Cap (as defined below), subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement, including a closing market price of Adial stock of greater than $1.00 on the business day sales under the agreement are made. The purchase price of the shares of our common stock that may be sold to Keystone Capital under the Purchase Agreement will be based on the market price of our common stock at the time of sale as computed under the Purchase Agreement. specifically, the purchase price per share of the common stock that may be sold to Keystone Capital under the Purchase Agreement is such fixed purchases equal ninety percent (90%) of the arithmetic average of the closing sale prices of our common stock during the five (5) consecutive trading-day period ending on the fixed purchase date for the fixed purchase, so long as the common stock is listed on Nasdaq or any nationally recognized successor thereto (to be appropriately adjusted for any reorganization, recapitalization, non-cash dividend, stock split or other similar transaction that occurs on or after the date of this Purchase Agreement). There is no upper limit on the price per share that Keystone Capital could be obligated to pay for the common stock under the Purchase Agreement.
Under the applicable rules of the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”), in no event may we issue more than 2,842,198 shares of our common stock to Keystone Capital under the Purchase Agreement (including 175,000 shares of our common stock that we issued to Keystone Capital upon execution of the Purchase Agreement, the cost of which issuance was capitalized as a cost of equity), which represents 19.99% of the shares of our common stock outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the Purchase Agreement (the “Exchange Cap”), unless (i) we obtain stockholder approval to issue shares of our common stock in excess of the Exchange Cap or (ii) the average price of all applicable sales of common stock to Keystone Capital under the Purchase Agreement equals or exceeds $1.8222, which represents the lower of (i) the Nasdaq official closing price immediately preceding the execution of the Purchase Agreement and (ii) the average of the five Nasdaq official closing prices for the common stock immediately preceding the execution of the Purchase Agreement, plus an incremental amount such that the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement are exempt from the Exchange Cap limitation under applicable Nasdaq rules. In any event, the Purchase Agreement specifically provides that we may not issue or sell any shares of our Common Stock under the Purchase Agreement if such issuance or sale would breach any applicable rules or regulations of the Nasdaq. The Company has also limited the aggregate number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the Purchase Agreement to 15,000,000 shares without subsequent approval from our board of directors.
Pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, we agreed to file with the SEC one or more registration statements on Form S-1 to register for resale under the Securities Act the shares of our common stock that may be issued to Keystone Capital under the Purchase Agreement, including the commitment shares that we issued to Keystone Capital. The Purchase Agreement and the Registration Rights Agreement contain customary representations, warranties, conditions and indemnification obligations of the parties. The registration statement registering such shares of common stock was declared effective on December 15, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not sell any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Purchase Agreement. Subsequent to the year-end we sold 1,007,296 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of $2,350,000 pursuant to the Purchase Agreement.
On March 11, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreements”) with each of Keystone Capital Partners, LLC (“Keystone”), Bespoke Growth Partners, Inc. (“Bespoke”), a company controlled by Mark Peikin, our Chief Strategy Officer and entities controlled by James W. Newman, Jr., a member of our board of directors (“Newman” and collectively with Keystone and Bespoke the “Investors,” and each an “Investor”), pursuant to which: (i) Keystone has agreed to purchase an aggregate of 333,334 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $3.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $1,000,002; (ii) Bespoke has agreed to purchase an aggregate of 336,667 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $3.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $1,010,001; and (iii) Newman has agreed to purchase an aggregate of 30,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $3.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $90,000. Under the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreements: (i) Keystone has purchased 33,334 shares of our common stock and paid us $100,002 and agreed to purchase an additional 300,000 shares of our common stock upon the effectiveness of a registration statement registering the shares of common stock acquired and to be acquired (the “Registration Statement”); (ii) Bespoke has purchased 33,337 shares of our common stock and paid us $100,011 and agreed to purchase an additional 300,000 shares of our common stock upon the effectiveness of the Registration Statement; and (iii) Newman has purchased 30,000 shares of our common stock and paid us $90,000. In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreements, we entered into Registration Rights Agreements, dated March 11, 2021 (“Registration Rights Agreements”), with each of the Investors pursuant to which we are obligated to file a registration statement (the “Registration Statement”) with the SEC within thirty (30) days following the date upon which we file this Annual Report on Form 10-K with the SEC and use all commercially reasonable efforts to have the Registration Statement declared effective by the SEC within thirty (30) days after the Registration Statement is filed (or, in the event of a “full review” by the SEC, within thirty (30) days after the Registration Statement is filed).
Recent Developments
Acquisition of Purnovate, Inc.
On December 7, 2020, we closed the Acquisition contemplated by that Equity Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we purchased all of the outstanding membership interests of Purnovate from the members of Purnovate, such that after the Acquisition, Purnovate became our wholly owned subsidiary. Purnovate is a pre-clinical drug development company with a platform focused on developing drug candidates for non-opioid pain reduction and other diseases and disorders potentially targeted with adenosine analogs that are selective, potent, stable, and soluble. Prior to the acquisition, our CEO and a Director owned equity in Purnovate and the transaction was considered to be one with a related party.
Pursuant to the terms of the Equity Purchase Agreement, in exchange for the outstanding membership interests of Purnovate, we paid the members an aggregate of $350,000 (the “Cash Consideration”) at the closing and issued to the Members an aggregate of 700,000 shares of our restricted common stock (the “Stock Consideration”) with an approximate fair market value of $1,638,000 at time of issuance, which issuance was exempt from registration pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Prior to the closing of the transaction, we loaned Purnovate $350,000 in working capital for use during the due diligence period. In addition, members will receive development milestone payments in an aggregate amount of up to $2,100,000 for each compound developed, development milestone payments in an aggregate amount of up to $20,000,000 for each compound commercialized, and royalties of 3.0% of net sales.
Clinical Developments
In January 2020, we announced that we had received favorable opinions from the Finnish Medicines Agency (FIMEA) and National Committee on Medical Research Ethics (TUKIJA) to commence our Phase 3 clinical trial to investigate AD04 as a genetically targeted therapeutic agent for the treatment of AUD.
On June 11, 2020, we announced that we had received all necessary approvals to commence our landmark Phase 3 clinical trial to investigate AD04 as a genetically targeted therapeutic agent for the treatment of AUD.
On July 17, 2020, we received notice that the European Medicines Agency (EMA) had accepted the Pediatric Investigation Plan (PIP) submitted by us for development of our lead drug candidate, AD04, for the treatment of alcohol use disorder in the pediatric population, ages 12 to 17.
On July 30, 2020, we announced that we had received approval to commence our Phase 3 clinical trial of AD04 for the treatment of AUD in Croatia. As a result, we had secured approvals to run the trial in all of the Scandinavian and Eastern European countries in which we intend to run the clinical trial.
On September 14, 2020, we filed with the FDA to take our Investigational New Drug (IND) Application for the use of our lead product candidate, AD04, as a treatment for Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD) off inactive status with the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and on October 15, 2020 we announced that that the FDA had reactivated the IND.
On November 3, 2020, we providing the following highlighted updates on our Phase 3 clinical trial of AD04 for the treatment of AUD
● All 25 planned investigative sites are active.
● 66% of expected patient screenings have been completed and the Phase 3 clinical trial more than 50% enrolled relative to planned enrollment.
● The enrollment rate has increased for four consecutive months and the Phase 3 clinical trial is projected to be fully enrolled during Q2 2021.
● Data readout is expected in Q4 2021 or earlier.
● AD04 has been well tolerated with no serious adverse events having been reported
Antibody Tests
In order to protect our patients in the ONWARD Phase 3 trial and potentially increase retention rates, we secured distribution rights to certain SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests to administer to patients in the trial and various time points. In an effort to make the antibody tests more widely available in the United States, we entered engagements with third parties for sell tests provided by Adial as their distributor. Significant resources have not been devoted to this effort and the impact on the Company is not expected to be material.
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (rounded to nearest thousand)
The following table sets forth the components of our statements of operations in dollars for the periods presented:
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses
Research and development expenses increased by approximately $1,887,000 (48%) during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily due to a large increase in direct trial expenses (approximately $2,967,000) consisting of CRO fees and expenses, site fees and related vendor expenses with an increase in trial sites open to enrollment, partially offset by decreases in regulatory consulting fees due to decreased trial preparation time, decreased compensation expense for R&D employees, decreased manufacturing expenses, and decreased license expenses. In the latter months of the year ended December 31, 2020, patient enrollment costs increased as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in the opening of higher cost sites in Scandinavia as opposed lower cost sites in Central and Eastern Europe.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $796,000 (19%) from in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to increased expense in a several areas, including business development and financial consulting (approximately $141,000), public and shareholder relations (approximately $83,000), insurance expenses (approximately $46,000), and equity compensation expense (approximately $222,000) with the increased use of option and share grants.
Other income (expenses)
Other income increased by $382,000 (110%) in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was mostly due to the presence in the first quarter of 2019 of a one-time warrant modification expense of $442,000, which was offset by a decrease in interest income of approximately $63,000, which was in turn due to the combination of substantially lower money market returns during the COVID-19 pandemic and somewhat reduced cash balances as we expend capital in the course of completing its trial.
Liquidity and capital resources
Overview
Our principal liquidity needs have historically been working capital, R&D, patent costs and personnel costs. We expect these needs to continue to increase in the near term as we develop and eventually commercialize our compound, if approved. Over the next several years, we expect to increase our R&D expenses as we undergo clinical trials to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of our lead product candidate and as we further develop product candidates acquired from Purnovate. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with the proceeds from our initial and secondary public offerings and our equity line, as well as other equity financings and the issuance of debt securities prior to that. On July 31, 2018, we closed our initial public offering.
On February 25, 2019, we closed a follow on a public offering pursuant to which we raised approximately $8.2 million net of underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses.
On June 11, 2020, we concluded a registered direct offering of 2,820,000 shares of common stock and in a concurrent private placement the sale of warrants to purchase 2,115,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share. The shares of common stock and accompanying warrants were sold directly to the buyers at a combined at-the-market price of $1.85 for a share and three quarters warrant. Gross proceeds of the offering, totaled $5,217,000, which after offering expenses, resulted in net proceeds of $4,657,215.
On September 21, 2020, we concluded a private placement with a related party of 357,143 shares of common stock at an above-market price of $1.40 per share, for total proceeds of $500,000.
On September 30, 2020, warrants to purchase 225,000 shares of common stock an exercise price of $2.00 per share were exercised for a total cash payment of $450,000.
Our current cash and cash equivalents are not expected to be sufficient to fund operations for the twelve months from the date of filing this form 10-K, based our current projections. We have recently executed an equity purchase agreement with Keystone Capital, LLC, which allows us to obtain depending on our stock’s market price and us meeting other conditions, up to $15 million in equity financing. We did not sell any shares of our common stock pursuant to the equity line with Keystone Capital during the year ended December 31, 2020; however, subsequent to the end of the year, we sold 1,007,296 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of $2.35 million. We also received approximately $1.4 million in proceeds from exercise of warrants to purchase 712,500 shares of common stock for an exercise price of $2.00 per share.
We expect to use approximately $8.6 million in cash during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 for both trial costs, other R&D project costs, and general corporate expenses. We expect to exhaust funds on hand in the fourth quarter of 2021, given our expected trial costs, other project costs, and costs of Company overhead, and will require approximately $3.3 million in additional funding to reach the current expected database lock in February of 2022. Our ability to access funds under the equity purchase agreement is dependent upon the market price of our common stock, so access to these funds is not guaranteed. If we are unable to access funds under the equity purchase agreement, we would need to raise funds through other sources. There is no assurance that such funds could be raised by that time on acceptable terms. Moreover, if our trial activities are significantly delayed due to the coronavirus pandemic, we would not be able to reach database lock with cash on hand even with receipt of the grants to which we have applied.
We will also require additional financing as we continue to execute our overall business strategy, including an estimated $20 million for a second phase three trial. Our liquidity may be negatively impacted as a result of research and development cost increases in addition to general economic and industry factors. We anticipate that, our future liquidity requirements will be funded through the incurrence of indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination. In addition, we may raise additional funds through grants and/or corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities or convertible debt, our shareholders will experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our products, future revenue streams or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Any failure to raise capital in the future could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies.
Cash flows
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists primarily of net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items (including amortization and share-based compensation), and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities. The increase in cash used in operating activities ($1,294,000) for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, despite the larger increase in net loss between the same periods (of approximately $2,301,000), is due to the larger proportion of costs being non-cash costs, such as equity compensation expense, and to a large increase in accrued expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash assets, such as pre-paid research and development, also increased substantially (by about $162,000) in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of the $350,000 loan that we made to Purnovate prior to the closing of the Acquisition to be used for further research and development efforts.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily consist of capital raising activities through debt and equity financing. Net cash provided by financing activities decreased $3,640,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, and was primarily attributable to the lesser net proceeds of the registered direct offering, private placement, and warrant exercises compared to the public offering completed in 2019.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, our expected liquidity needs and expected future cash positions, and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting periods. Certain of our more critical accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments, including those related to prepaid research and development, accruals associated with third party providers supporting clinical trials, realization of income tax assets, as well as the, fair value of stock based compensation to employees and service providers. We use historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for our judgments and making these estimates. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Any changes in those estimates will be reflected in our financial statements as they occur.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to a full understanding and evaluation of our reported financial results.
R&D Expenses
Recognition and accrual of expenses associated with our clinical trial are dependent on the judgment of our contractors and subcontractors in their reporting and communication of information to us. Occurrence of certain fees to our CRO, clinical trial sites, and subcontractors are tied to events, for which the determination of likelihood requires judgment both on our part and on the part of our contractors.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements
Our financial instruments consist primarily of cash, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and, prior to our initial public offering, debt instruments and derivative liabilities.
FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” requires disclosure of the fair value of financial instruments held by us. ASC Topic 825, “Financial Instruments,” defines fair value, and establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosures of fair value measurement that enhances disclosure requirements for fair value measures. The carrying amounts reported in the balance sheets for receivables, current liabilities, convertible notes, payable senior notes, and bridge notes each qualify as financial instruments and are a reasonable estimate of their fair values because of the short period of time between the origination of such instruments and their expected realization and their current market rate of interest.
The three levels of valuation hierarchy are defined as follows:
● Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
● Level 2: Inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
● Level 3: Unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions. As of December 31, 2020, the significant inputs to our derivative liabilities recorded at fair value were considered level 3 inputs.
Stock Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of options and stock warrants granted using the Black Scholes Merton model. We estimate when and if performance-based awards will be earned. If an award is not considered probable of being earned, no amount of equity-based compensation expense is recognized. If the award is deemed probable of being earned, related equity-based compensation expense is recorded. The fair value of an award ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense, net of forfeitures, over the requisite service periods in our statements of operations, which is generally the vesting period of the award.
The Black Scholes Merton model requires the input of certain subjective assumptions and the application of judgment in determining the fair value of the awards. The most significant assumptions and judgments include the expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, the expected dividend yield, and the expected term of the awards. In addition, the recognition of equity-based compensation expense is impacted by our forfeitures, which are accounted for as they occur.
The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent management’s best estimates. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our equity-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The key assumptions included in the model are as follows:
● Expected volatility - We determine the expected price volatility based on the historical volatilities of a peer group as we do not have a sufficient trading history for our units. Industry peers consist of several public companies in the bio-tech industry similar to us in size, stage of life cycle and financial leverage. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation. Starting in 2020, we have begun blending data on the our historical volatility together with this peer group of companies, the proportion of our volatility used growing as the period of our historical volatility becomes longer.
● Risk-free interest rate - The risk free rate was determined based on yields of U.S. Treasury Bonds of comparable terms.
● Expected dividend yield - We have not previously issued dividends and do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future. Therefore, we used a dividend rate of zero based on our expectation of additional dividends.
● Expected term -The expected term of the options was estimated using the simplified method.
Commitments and Contingencies
We follow subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to us but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. We assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in our financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. Our legal costs associated with contingent liabilities are recorded to expense as incurred.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and tax carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance, if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have no history of being able to generate a profit, and no certainty as to our ability to do so in the future.