Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The various sections of this discussion contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be materially affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially.
OVERVIEW
Our Business
ADMA Biologics, Inc. (the “Company,” “ADMA,” “we,” “us” or “our”) is an end-to-end commercial biopharmaceutical company dedicated to manufacturing, marketing and developing specialty plasma-derived biologics for the treatment of immunodeficient patients at risk for infection and others at risk for certain infectious diseases. Our targeted patient populations include immune-compromised individuals who suffer from an underlying immune deficiency disorder or who may be immune-suppressed for medical reasons.
We currently have three products with U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) approval, all of which are currently marketed and commercially available: (i) BIVIGAM (Immune Globulin Intravenous, Human), an Intravenous Immune Globulin (“IVIG”) product indicated for the treatment of Primary Humoral Immunodeficiency (“PI”), also known as Primary Immunodeficiency Disease (“PIDD”), and for which we received FDA approval on May 9, 2019 and commenced commercial sales in August 2019; (ii) ASCENIV (Immune Globulin Intravenous, Human - slra 10% Liquid), an IVIG product indicated for the treatment of PI, for which we received FDA approval on April 1, 2019 and commenced first commercial sales in October 2019; and (iii) Nabi-HB (Hepatitis B Immune Globulin, Human), which is indicated for the treatment of acute exposure to blood containing HBsAg and other listed exposures to Hepatitis B. We seek to develop a pipeline of plasma-derived therapeutics, including a product based on our most recently approved patent application under U.S. Patent No. 10,259,865 related to methods of treatment and prevention of S. pneumonia infection for an immunoglobulin manufactured to contain standardized antibodies to numerous serotypes of S. pneumoniae. Our products and product candidates are intended to be used by physician specialists focused on caring for immune-compromised patients with or at risk for certain infectious diseases.
We manufacture these products at our FDA-licensed, 400,000-liter annual capacity plasma fractionation and purification facility located in Boca Raton, Florida (the “Boca Facility”). Based on current production yields and our ongoing supply chain enhancement and capacity expansion initiatives, we believe this facility has the potential to produce quantities of our immune globulin (“IG”) products of more than $250 million in annual revenue beginning in 2024 as well as achieving profitability during the first quarter of 2024, as we ramp-up production over the next three to five years.
Through our ADMA BioCenters subsidiary, we currently operate as an FDA-approved source plasma collection organization in the U.S. This business unit, which we refer to as our Plasma Collection Centers business segment, provides us with a portion of our blood plasma for the manufacture of our products and product candidates, and also allows us to sell certain quantities of source plasma to customers for further manufacturing. As a part of our planned supply chain robustness initiative, we opened two new plasma collection centers during 2020, and we now have seven plasma collection centers in various stages of approval and development, including three that are fully operational and collecting plasma. With respect to our fully operational plasma collection centers, two hold FDA licenses and the third has a Biologics License Application (“BLA”) pending an FDA decision expected in the fourth quarter of 2021. In addition, one of our FDA-approved plasma collection centers also has approvals from the Korean Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (“MFDS”), as well as FDA approval to implement a Hepatitis B immunization program. After giving effect to the progress we made in 2020 with our plasma collection network expansion, we believe we remain on track to achieve our goal of having 10 or more plasma collection centers operating in the U.S. by 2024. A typical plasma collection center, such as those operated by ADMA BioCenters, can collect approximately 30,000 to 50,000 liters of source plasma annually, which may be sold for different prices depending upon the type of plasma, quantity of purchase and market conditions at the time of sale. Plasma collected from ADMA BioCenters’ facilities that is not used to manufacture our products or product candidates is sold to third-party customers in the U.S. and in other locations outside the U.S. where we are approved under supply agreements or in the open “spot” market.
We sell plasma-derived intermediate fractions to certain customers, which are generated as part of our FDA-approved manufacturing process for IG and IVIG products. In January 2020, we announced our entry into a five-year manufacturing and supply agreement to produce and sell these intermediate by-products, which are used as the starting raw material to produce other plasma-derived biologics. In addition, from time to time we provide contract manufacturing and testing services for certain third-party clients.
We also provide laboratory contracting services to certain customers and anticipate providing contract filling, labeling and packing services upon FDA approval and implementation of our in-house fill-finish capabilities through our Vanrx SA25 Workcell aseptic filling machine.
On June 6, 2017, we completed the acquisition of certain assets (the “Biotest Assets”) of the Therapy Business Unit (“BTBU”) of Biotest Pharmaceuticals Corporation (“BPC” and, together with Biotest AG, “Biotest”), which included two FDA-licensed products, Nabi-HB and BIVIGAM, and an FDA-licensed plasma fractionation facility located in Boca Raton, FL (the “Boca Facility”) (the “Biotest Transaction”).
Our Products
BIVIGAM
BIVIGAM is a plasma-derived IVIG that contains a broad range of antibodies similar to those found in normal human plasma. These antibodies are directed against bacteria and viruses and help to protect PI patients against serious infections. BIVIGAM is a purified, sterile, ready-to-use preparation of concentrated human Immunoglobulin G antibodies indicated for the treatment of PI, a group of genetic disorders. This includes, but is not limited to, the humoral immune defect in common variable immunodeficiency, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, congenital agammaglobulinemia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and severe combined immunodeficiency. These PIs are a group of genetic disorders. Based on recent estimates, these disorders are no longer considered to be very rare, with as many as one in every 1,200 people in the United States having some form of PI.
On May 9, 2019, the FDA approved the Prior Approval Supplement (the “PAS”) for the use of our IVIG manufacturing process, thereby enabling us to commence commercial sales of this product in the United States. We resumed production of BIVIGAM during the fourth quarter of 2017 and commercial production is ongoing, using our FDA-approved IVIG manufacturing process under U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) License No. 2019. We commenced commercial sales for this product in August of 2019.
ASCENIV
ASCENIV is a plasma-derived IVIG that contains naturally occurring polyclonal antibodies, which are proteins that are used by the body’s immune system to neutralize microbes, such as bacteria and viruses, and prevent against infection and disease. We manufacture ASCENIV under HHS License No. 2019 using a process known as fractionation. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”) has issued a permanent, product-specific-J-code for ASCENIV. Under the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (“HCPCS”), the J-code (J1554) will become effective April 1, 2021 and will replace the currently issued C-code for ASCENIV (C9072), which can continue to be utilized in the interim for reimbursement purposes. As part of our proprietary manufacturing process for ASCENIV, we leverage our unique, patented plasma donor screening methodology and tailored plasma pooling design, which blends normal source plasma and plasma from donors tested to have high levels of neutralizing antibody titers to respiratory syncytial virus (“RSV”) using our proprietary microneutralization testing assay. We are able to identify the high titer or “hyperimmune” plasma that meets our internal and required specifications for ASCENIV with our patented testing methods and assay. This type of high titer plasma is typically found in less than 10% of the total donor collection samples we test.
ASCENIV is approved for the treatment of Primary Immune Deficiency Disorder (“PIDD”), a class of inherited genetic disorders that causes a deficient or absent immune system in adults and adolescents (12 to 17 years of age). Our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial in 59 PIDD patients met the primary endpoint of no Serious Bacterial Infections reported during 12 months of treatment. Secondary efficacy endpoints further demonstrated the benefits of ASCENIV in the low incidence of infection, therapeutic antibiotic use, days missed from work/school/daycare and unscheduled medical visits and hospitalizations. We believe this clinical data together with the FDA approval for the treatment of PIDD better positions ADMA to further evaluate ASCENIV in immune-compromised patients infected with or at-risk for RSV infection or potentially other respiratory viral pathogens. We plan to work with the FDA and the immunology and infectious disease community to design a clinical trial to evaluate the use of ASCENIV in this patient population in the near future. Commercial sales of ASCENIV commenced in October of 2019.
Nabi-HB
Nabi-HB is a hyperimmune globulin that is rich in antibodies to the Hepatitis B virus. Nabi-HB is a purified human polyclonal antibody product collected from plasma donors who have been previously vaccinated with a Hepatitis B vaccine. Nabi-HB is indicated for the treatment of acute exposure to blood containing HBsAg, prenatal exposure of infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers, sexual exposure to HBsAg-positive persons and household exposure to persons with acute Hepatitis B virus infection in specific, listed settings. Hepatitis B is a potentially life-threatening liver infection caused by the Hepatitis B virus. It is a major global health problem. It can cause chronic infection and puts people at high risk of death from cirrhosis and liver cancer. Nabi-HB has a well-documented record of long-term safety and effectiveness since its initial market introduction. The FDA approved Nabi-HB on March 24, 1999. Production of Nabi-HB at the Boca Facility has continued under our leadership since the third quarter of 2017. In early 2018, we received authorization from the FDA for the release of our first commercial batch of Nabi-HB for commercial distribution in the U.S. and we continue to manufacture Nabi-HB under HHS License No. 2019.
IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 CRISIS
We continue to closely monitor ongoing developments in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts to our commercial manufacturing operations and plasma collections facilities, including but not limited to potential disruptions to our supply chain operations, including collections of source plasma, procurement of raw materials and packaging materials, a portion of which are sourced internationally, and testing of finished drug product that is required prior to its availability for commercial sale. Such testing has historically been performed by contract laboratories outside the United States. In addition, travel and other restrictions that have been implemented in the United States have impacted our commercial engagement efforts with respect to some of our products, including BIVIGAM and ASCENIV, as trade shows, industry and medical conferences and other events we had been planning to utilize and exhibit and attend with our staff to increase awareness of our products by physicians and payers remain subject to reduction in scope, rescheduling or outright cancellation due to the pandemic.
We have experienced some delays with our third-party vendors and testing laboratories which perform final drug product GMP release testing. In response to these delays, we have added additional release testing laboratories to our FDA-approved consortium listed in our drug approval documents which we believe has adequately addressed this issue. In July 2020, we began receiving FDA lot releases with testing data from our new testing laboratory vendor. In addition, due to previous state and local “shelter-in-place” orders, as well as ongoing requirements around physical distancing, we have experienced, and may experience in the future, lower than normal donor collections at our FDA-approved plasma collection centers. We were also subject to delays in shipments of source plasma from our contracted third-party suppliers, as well as delays in deliveries for personal protective equipment, reagents and other non-plasma raw materials and supplies used in the manufacture and distribution of our products. We have also experienced supply chain delays as a result of certain of our suppliers diverting significant resources towards the rapid development and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines. In addition, we have experienced challenges with respect to our customer engagement initiatives, as our sales and medical affairs field forces face difficulties communicating directly with physicians and other healthcare professionals and the cancellation or postponement of a number of key scientific and medical conferences, further limiting our ability to communicate with potential customers. We have implemented a comprehensive suite of virtual engagement initiatives, though clinician engagement remains lower due to continuing COVID-19-related priorities at U.S. medical centers.
As of the date of this report, we do not believe that the operations and immunoglobulin and plasma products production at our Boca Facility, our contract fill/finishers or our plasma collection facilities have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, as of the date of this report, we have not experienced, and currently do not anticipate, any material impairments with respect to any of our long-lived assets, including our property and equipment, goodwill or intangible assets.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has not, to date, materially adversely impacted our capital and financial resources, due to the economic uncertainty that has resulted from the pandemic, and the potential impact of such to our stakeholders, we are unable to predict with certainty any potential impacts to our business. Although we believe the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and our operations will be temporary, at the present time we are unable to determine the ultimate duration of the pandemic or its long-term effects on, among other things, the global, national or local economies, the capital and credit markets, our workforce, our customers or our suppliers. As a result, we are unable to predict whether the COVID-19 crisis will have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with Accounting Principles Generally Accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and assumptions, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates. Significant estimates include the realizable value of accounts receivable, valuation of inventory, assumptions used in projecting future liquidity and capital requirements, assumptions used in the fair value of awards granted under our equity incentive plans and warrants issued in connection with the issuance of notes payable and the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets.
Some of the estimates and assumptions we have to make under U.S. GAAP require difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain and, as a result, actual results could differ from those estimates. Due to the estimation processes involved, the following summary of accounting policies and their application are considered to be critical to understanding our business operations, financial condition and results of operations. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and our other accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are comprised of (i) revenues from the sale of our FDA-approved immunoglobulin products, (ii) product revenues from the sale of human plasma collected from our Plasma Collection Centers business segment, (iii) product revenues from the sale of intermediate fractions, (iv) contract manufacturing and testing revenue from certain clients; and (v) license revenues attributable to the out-licensing of ASCENIV in December 2012 to Biotest to market and sell this product in Europe and selected countries in North Africa and the Middle East. Biotest has provided us with certain services and financial payments in accordance with the related Biotest license agreement and is obligated to pay us certain amounts in the future if certain milestones are achieved. Deferred revenue is recognized over the term of the Biotest license. Deferred revenue is amortized into income for a period of approximately 22 years, the term of the Biotest license agreement.
Product revenue is recognized when the customer is deemed to have control over the product. Control is determined based on when the product is shipped or delivered and title passes to the customer. Revenue is recorded in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange. Revenue from the sale of immunoglobulin products is generally recognized when the product reaches the customer’s destination, and is recorded net of distributor fees, estimated rebates, price protection arrangements and customer incentives, including prompt pay discounts, wholesaler chargebacks and other wholesaler fees. These estimates are based on historical experience and certain other assumptions, and we believe that such estimates are reasonable. For revenues associated with contract manufacturing and sales of our intermediates, control transfers to the customer and the performance obligation is satisfied when the customer takes possession of the product from the Boca Facility or a third-party warehouse that is utilized by the Company.
Product revenues from the sale of human plasma collected at our plasma collection centers are recognized at the time control of the product has been transferred to the customer, which generally occurs at the time of shipment. Product revenues are recognized at the time of delivery if we retain control of the product during shipment. Payments received from customers where the foregoing revenue recognition criteria have not been satisfied are recorded as deferred revenue, which is reflected as a liability in our consolidated balance sheets.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are reported at realizable value, net of allowances for contractual credits and doubtful accounts, which are recognized in the period the related revenue is recorded. We extend credit to our customers based upon an evaluation of each customer's financial condition and credit history. Evaluations of the financial condition and associated credit risk of customers are performed on an ongoing basis. Based on these evaluations, we have concluded that our credit risk is minimal.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue includes costs associated with the manufacture of the Company’s FDA approved products, intermediates and the sale of human source plasma, as well as expenses related to conformance batch production, process development and scientific and technical operations when these operations are attributable to marketed products. When the activities of these operations are attributable to new products in development, the expenses are classified as research and development expenses. Costs of production for ASCENIV and BIVIGAM prior to their FDA approval dates of April 1, 2019 and May 9, 2019, respectively, were not capitalized into inventory but were instead expensed as incurred.
As a manufacturer of biological products, we are subject to the risks inherent in biological production, which could include normal course losses and failures inherent in the manufacturing process. As our biologics production levels increase there may be normal course inventory losses as we ensure product quality and compliance with FDA, state and local regulations, or due to testing results not meeting specifications. Such losses are charged to cost of product revenue in the period they are incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
All equity-based payments, including grants of stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) are recognized at their estimated fair value at the date of grant, and compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the grantee’s requisite vesting period. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we granted RSUs to members of our Board of Directors and certain members of our management and employees representing an aggregate of 361,000 shares of common stock. For the purpose of valuing stock options granted to our employees, directors and officers, we use the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We granted options to purchase an aggregate of 1,468,412 and 1,508,000 shares of Common Stock during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. To determine the risk-free interest rate, we utilize the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant with a term consistent with the expected term of our awards. The expected term of the options granted is in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletins 107 and 110 and is based on the average between vesting terms and contractual terms. The expected dividend yield reflects our current and expected future policy for dividends on our Common Stock. The expected stock price volatility for our stock options was calculated by examining the historical volatility of our Common Stock since our Common Stock became publicly traded in the fourth quarter of 2013. We will continue to analyze the expected stock price volatility and expected term assumptions and will adjust our Black-Scholes option pricing assumptions as appropriate. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-09, Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting (Topic 718), we have elected not to establish a forfeiture rate, as stock-based compensation expense related to forfeitures of unvested stock options is fully reversed at the time of forfeiture.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development (“R&D”) costs consist of clinical research organization costs, costs related to clinical trials, testing and evaluation of new or alternative products or processes, including the testing and development of a new filling line at one of our third-party fill/finishers for a process that has not been approved by the FDA, studies for potentially extending a product’s approved and labeled expiration dating and other potential label expansions, post-marketing commitment studies for BIVIGAM and ASCENIV, wages, benefits and stock-based compensation for employees directly related to research and development activities and, prior to April 1, 2019, assay development and testing, storage and transportation costs for high-titer plasma used in the manufacture of ASCENIV prior to its approval by the FDA. All research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Inventories
Raw materials inventory consists of various materials purchased from suppliers, including normal source plasma, that are used in the production of our products. Work-in-process and finished goods inventories reflect the cost of raw materials as well as costs for direct and indirect labor, primarily salaries, wages and benefits for applicable employees, as well as an allocation of overhead costs related to the Boca Facility including utilities, property taxes, general repairs and maintenance, consumable supplies and depreciation. The allocation of Boca Facility overhead to inventory is generally based upon the estimated square footage of the Boca Facility that is used in the production of our products relative to the total square footage of the facility.
Inventories, including plasma intended for resale and plasma intended for internal use in the Company’s manufacturing, commercialization or research and development activities, are carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value determined by the first-in, first-out method. Net realizable value is generally determined based upon the consideration we expect to receive when the inventory is sold, less costs to deliver the inventory to the recipient. The estimates for net realizable value of inventory are based on contractual terms or upon historical experience and certain other assumptions which we believe are reasonable. Inventory is periodically reviewed to ensure that its carrying value does not exceed its net realizable value, and adjustments are recorded to write down such inventory, with a corresponding charge to cost of product revenue, when the carrying value or historical cost exceeds its estimated net realizable value.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets, whenever significant events or changes in circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. If indicators of impairment exist, projected future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to its carrying amount to determine whether the asset’s carrying value is recoverable. Any resulting impairment is recorded as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset in excess of fair value and a charge to operating results. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we determined that there was no impairment of our long-lived assets.
Goodwill is not amortized but is assessed for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if impairment indicators exist. We have the option to perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit associated with the goodwill is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill and other intangible assets. If we conclude that this is the case, then we must perform a goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. An impairment charge is recorded to the extent the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, with the impairment loss recognized not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. We did not recognize any impairment charges related to goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) (“ASU 2016-13”), which requires financial assets to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected, with an allowance for credit losses to be deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial asset such that the net carrying value of the asset is presented as the amount expected to be collected. Under ASU 2016-13, the entity’s statement of operations is required to reflect the measurement of credit losses for newly recognized financial assets, as well as expected increases or decreases in expected credit losses that have taken place during the period. For public business entities, ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. We adopted ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, and the adoption of this update did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In July 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-11, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815)” (“ASU 2017-11”). ASU 2017-11 changed the classification analysis of certain equity-linked financial instruments (or embedded features within such instruments) with down round features. When determining whether certain financial instruments should be classified as liabilities or equity instruments, a down round feature no longer precludes equity classification when assessing whether the instrument is indexed to an entity’s own stock. The amendments also clarify existing disclosure requirements for equity-classified instruments. As a result, a freestanding equity-linked financial instrument (or embedded conversion option) no longer would be accounted for as a derivative liability at fair value as a result of the existence of a down round feature. For freestanding equity classified financial instruments, the amendments require entities that present earnings per share (“EPS”) in accordance with ASC 260 to recognize the effect of the down round feature when it is triggered. That effect is treated as a dividend and as a reduction of income available to common shareholders in basic EPS. In addition, convertible instruments with embedded conversion options that have down round features are now subject to the specialized guidance for contingent beneficial conversion features in ASC 470-20, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options.” ASU 2017-11 became effective for us on January 1, 2019, and this update did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which requires lessees to recognize assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by most leases on their balance sheet. The guidance became effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. ASU 2016-02 requires modified retrospective adoption for all leases existing at, or entered into after, the date of initial application, with an option to use certain transition relief. We adopted ASU 2016-02 on January 1, 2019 using the option to recognize the cumulative-effect adjustment, if any, as of the date of application, which was also January 1, 2019. As a result, there was no restatement of comparative periods. We recognized right-to-use assets of approximately $1.4 million and corresponding lease liabilities of approximately $1.6 million at the date of adoption. We also elected the “package of practical expedients,” which permits us to not reassess under the new standard our prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. In addition, we elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for all or embedded leases that qualify.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
The following table presents a summary of the changes in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
Revenues
We recorded total revenues of $42.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $29.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $12.9 million, or approximately 44%. The increase is mainly due to increased sales of our immunoglobulin products generated by our Boca Facility manufacturing operations in 2020 totaling $14.5 million, partially offset by a $1.6 million decrease in plasma revenues generated by our plasma collection centers business segment.
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were greater than the prior year as a result of our continued commercial scale-up for BIVIGAM and ASCENIV following these products’ FDA approvals on May 9, 2019 and April 1, 2019, respectively, as well as from the manufacturing and supply agreement we entered into in January 2020 to produce and sell intermediate fractions to a certain customer.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue was $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $39.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $21.8 million. This increase reflects non-recurring production charges of $7.5 million for the manufacture of BIVIGAM conformance lots at an increased plasma pool production scale in connection with our planned capacity expansion and other production initiatives and investments at the Boca Facility. Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 also reflects increases in product revenue costs of approximately $22.5 million related to the increase in revenues, partially offset by a $7.4 million reduction in unabsorbed manufacturing expenses resulting from increased production throughput at the Boca Facility.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses totaled $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to $1.4 million of costs incurred during 2020 for the testing and development of a new filling line at one of our third-party fill/finishers for a process that has not been approved by the FDA, a $1.0 million increase in expenses associated with clinical studies, mainly BIVIGAM post-marketing commitments, $0.4 million of costs incurred during 2020 for a study we commenced to potentially extend ASCENIV’s approved and labeled expiration dating, $0.2 million of expenses in 2020 related to third-party assay development and a $0.2 million non-recurring expense for assistance with a third-party clinical research project.
Plasma Center Operating Expenses
Plasma center operating expenses were $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Plasma center operating expenses consist of certain general and administrative plasma center costs, including rent, maintenance, utilities, compensation and benefits for center and administrative staff, advertising and promotion expenses and computer software fees related to donor collections. The increase in plasma center operating expenses is attributable to having additional plasma centers in operation in 2020, as well as higher employee compensation costs, donor fees, depreciation and rent expense, all related to plasma center expansion activities that took place in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had one plasma collection facility in operation. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we opened two additional plasma collection centers and commenced construction and development activities on four additional plasma collection facilities. We expect additional increases in our plasma center operating expenses in 2021 as we continue our expansion activities in this business segment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $35.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $9.1 million from the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to higher employee compensation expenses of $5.1 million related to staffing increases in support of our commercialization efforts for BIVIGAM and ASCENIV as well as the overall growth in the size and scope of our operations. SG&A expenses were also impacted in 2020 by increased insurance expense of $1.6 million and marketing consulting fees incurred in connection with our ASCENIV commercialization efforts of $3.1 million, partially offset by lower travel expenses and information technology consulting fees. We expect our SG&A expenses to continue to increase in 2021 as we continue to execute on the various facets of our business plan (see Liquidity and Capital Resources).
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization expense for intangible assets acquired in the Biotest Transaction was $0.7 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loss from Operations
Our operating loss was $64.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $41.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to the increase in cost of product revenue and other operating expenses, partially offset by the increase in revenues.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase reflects a higher average debt principal balance carried in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to the additional draws on our senior credit facility in May of 2019 and March of 2020 (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources”), which resulted in additional debt principal of $42.5 million.
Gain/Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In December of 2020, we refinanced our subordinated note payable to Biotest with an additional draw on our senior credit facility. As a result of this transaction and the payoff of the Biotest note, we recorded a gain on the extinguishment of debt in the amount of $1.0 million (see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). In connection with the refinancing of our senior credit facility in February of 2019, we incurred a loss on the extinguishment of debt for the retirement of our previously existing credit facility, consisting of a $6.5 million prepayment penalty, and the write-off of $3.5 million of unamortized debt discount related to the previous credit facility.
Gain on Transfer of Plasma Center Assets
As part of the purchase price for the Biotest Assets, we agreed to transfer two of our plasma collection centers to BPC effective January 1, 2019. We had estimated the combined fair value of the two facilities to be $12.6 million, and we recorded a liability in our financial statements for this amount as of the date of the Biotest Transaction. On January 1, 2019, the two plasma collection facilities were transferred to BPC and we recorded a gain on this transfer in the amount of $11.5 million, which reflects the derecognition of the obligation to transfer ownership of the two facilities net of the carrying value of the assets associated with these facilities, primarily property and equipment and inventory, in the amount of $1.1 million.
Net Loss
Our net loss was $75.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $48.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net loss of approximately $27.5 million was mainly due to the increase in operating loss and the higher interest expense.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $133.8 million, including cash and cash equivalents of $55.9 million, and stockholders’ equity of $88.2 million, as compared to working capital of $71.8 million, including cash and cash equivalents of $26.8 million, and stockholders’ equity of $26.2 million as of December 31, 2019. We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $340.5 million since inception, had negative cash flows from operations of $102.0 million and $76.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have funded our operations over the past few years primarily from the sale of our equity and debt securities.
We expect to continue to spend substantial amounts on procurement of raw material plasma and other raw materials necessary to scale up our manufacturing operations, commercial product launches, capacity expansion at the Boca Facility, building additional plasma collection facilities, product development, quality assurance, regulatory affairs and conducting clinical trials for our product candidates and purchasing clinical trial materials, some of which may be required by the FDA. In addition, our end-to-end production cycle from procurement of raw materials to commercial release of finished product can take between seven and 12 months or potentially longer, requiring substantial investments in raw material plasma and other manufacturing materials. We expect that we will not be able to generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to achieve profitability until the beginning of 2024 and, as a result, we expect that we will need to continue to finance our operations through additional equity or debt financings or through corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. Based upon our current projected revenues, the remaining proceeds we expect to receive from the sale of common stock pursuant to the Sale Agreement (as amended to date) discussed below and our projected expenditures, including capital expenditures and continued implementation of our commercialization and expansion activities, we currently believe that our cash, cash equivalents, projected revenue and accounts receivable will be sufficient to fund our operations, as currently conducted, into the fourth quarter of 2021. In order to have sufficient cash to fund our operations thereafter, we will need to raise additional capital before the end of the fourth quarter of 2021. These estimates and timeframes may change based upon several factors, including the success of our commercial manufacturing ramp-up activities, the acceptability and reimbursement of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV by physicians, patients or payers, and the various financing options that may be available to us. We currently have no firm commitments for additional financing, and there can be no assurances that we will be able to secure additional financing on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. Furthermore, if our assumptions underlying our estimated expenses and revenues are incorrect, we may have to raise additional capital sooner than currently anticipated.
Our long-term liquidity depends upon our ability to raise additional capital, fund capacity expansion and commercial programs and generate sufficient revenues from our products, several of which have only recently achieved commercial status, to cover our operating expenses and meet our obligations on a timely basis. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economy and created significant volatility and disruption to the financial markets. Failure to secure any necessary financing in a timely manner and on commercially reasonable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business plan and financial performance and we could be forced to delay or discontinue our capacity expansion, commercialization, product development or clinical trial activities, delay or discontinue the approval efforts for any of our product candidates, or potentially cease operations. In addition, we could also be forced to reduce or forgo sales and marketing efforts and forgo attractive business opportunities.
Due to numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, FDA reviews, inspections and approvals related to our products, patient/payer acceptance of our products, ongoing compliance and maintenance requirements and capacity expansion efforts at the Boca Facility, we are unable to estimate with certainty the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures required to fund our commercialization and other development activities. Our current estimates may be subject to change as circumstances regarding our business requirements evolve and are also subject to the effect of potential new government orders, policies and procedures that we must comply with which are outside of our control. As such, these factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We may decide to raise capital through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, or obtain a bank credit facility or enter into corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. The sale of additional equity or debt securities, if convertible, could result in dilution to our stockholders and, in such event, the market value of our common stock may decline. The incurrence of additional indebtedness would result in increased fixed obligations and could also result in covenants that would restrict our operations or other financing alternatives. In addition, we are exploring additional contract manufacturing arrangements and other business development opportunities, which may provide additional liquidity to us.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement (the “Sale Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC, as agent (“Jefferies”), pursuant to which we could offer and sell, from time to time, at our option, through or to Jefferies, up to an aggregate of $50 million of shares of our common stock. On November 5, 2020, we and Jefferies entered into an amendment to the Sale Agreement (as amended, the “Amended Sale Agreement”) to provide for an increase in the aggregate offering amount under the Sale Agreement, such that as of November 5, 2020, we may offer and sell shares having an additional aggregate offering price of up to $20 million. On February 3, 2021, we entered into an additional amendment to the Sale Agreement to provide for an additional increase in the aggregate offering amount under the Sale Agreement to allow us to sell shares having an aggregate offering price of up to $35.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 18,537,907 shares of our common stock under the Sale Agreement and received net proceeds in the amount of $42.5 million. Between January 1, 2021 and March 16, 2021, we sold an additional 16,311,084 shares of our common stock under the Sale Agreement and received net proceeds in the amount of $38.3 million, which leaves a remaining gross balance that can be raised under the Sale Agreement of $22.7 million. The net proceeds from this offering are being used for general corporate purposes, which may include (i) the procurement of raw materials for the manufacturing of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV; (ii) supporting the ongoing commercial sales of our IVIG products; (iii) expanding the manufacturing capacity of our Boca Facility, including supply chain functions, and enhancing the robustness of our supply chain oversight; (iv) expanding our plasma collection facility network; and (v) research and development and business development opportunities.
On February 11, 2019 (the “Perceptive Closing Date”), we and all of our subsidiaries entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty (the “Perceptive Credit Agreement”) with Perceptive Credit Holdings II, LP, as the lender and administrative agent (“Perceptive”). The Perceptive Credit Agreement, as amended, provides for a senior secured term loan facility in a principal amount of $100.0 million (the “Perceptive Credit Facility”), comprised of (i) a term loan made on the Perceptive Closing Date in the principal amount of $45.0 million, as evidenced by the Company’s issuance of a promissory note (the “Perceptive Tranche I Note”) in favor of Perceptive on the Perceptive Closing Date (the “Perceptive Tranche I Loan”), (ii) a term loan in the principal amount of $27.5 million (the “Perceptive Tranche II Loan”) evidenced by the Company’s issuance of a promissory note (the “Perceptive Tranche II Note”) in favor of Perceptive on May 3, 2019, (iii) a term loan in the principal amount of $12.5 million evidenced by the Company’s issuance of a promissory note (the “Perceptive Tranche III Note”) in favor of Perceptive on March 20, 2020 (the “Perceptive Tranche III Loan”); and (iv) a term loan in the principal amount of $15 million evidenced by our issuance of a promissory note in favor of Perceptive on December 8, 2020 (the “Perceptive Tranche IV Loan”, and together with the Perceptive Tranche I Loan, the Perceptive Tranche II Loan and the Perceptive Tranche III Loan, the “Perceptive Loans”). The Perceptive Tranche III Loan is the result of an amendment to the Perceptive Credit Agreement that the Company and Perceptive entered into on May 3, 2019 (the “First Perceptive Amendment”), and the Perceptive Tranche III Loan became available to the Company upon the approval of BIVIGAM on May 9, 2019. The Perceptive Tranche IV Loan is the result of an amendment to the Perceptive Credit Facility entered into on December 8, 2020 (the “Second Perceptive Amendment”), which also extended the maturity date of the Perceptive Credit Facility to March 1, 2024 (the “Maturity Date”), subject to acceleration pursuant to the Perceptive Credit Agreement, including upon an Event of Default (as defined in the Perceptive Credit Agreement).
On the Perceptive Closing Date, we used $30.0 million of the Perceptive Tranche I Loan to terminate and pay in full all of the outstanding obligations under its previously existing credit agreement with Marathon Healthcare Finance Fund, L.P. (“Marathon”) (the “Marathon Credit Facility”). We also used proceeds from the Perceptive Tranche I Loan to: (i) pay a deferred facility fee to Marathon in the amount of $2.8 million, (ii) pay a prepayment penalty to Marathon in the amount of $6.5 million, (iii) pay outstanding accrued interest to Marathon in the amount of $0.7 million, and (iv) pay certain fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Perceptive Credit Facility of approximately $1.5 million. In addition, Marathon released $4.0 million of cash to us that was held in a debt service reserve account per the terms of the Marathon Credit Facility. In connection with the First Perceptive Amendment, we paid an additional facility fee to Perceptive in the amount of $0.1 million on May 3, 2019. In connection with the Second Perceptive Amendment, we paid a facility fee to Perceptive in the amount of $0.8 million. The proceeds from the Perceptive Tranche IV Loan were used to retire the $15.0 million subordinated note we had payable to Biotest, which had a maturity date of June 17, 2022.
Borrowings under the Perceptive Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate per annum equal to 7.5% plus the greater of (i) one-month LIBOR and (ii) 3.5%; provided, however, that upon, and during the continuance of, an Event of Default, the interest rate will automatically increase by an additional 400 basis points. Accrued interest of approximately $0.9 million per month is payable to Perceptive on the last day of each month during the term of the Perceptive Credit Facility. The rate of interest in effect as of the Perceptive Closing Date and at December 31, 2020 was 11.0%.
On the Maturity Date, we are required to pay Perceptive the entire outstanding principal amount underlying the Perceptive Loans and any accrued and unpaid interest thereon. There are no scheduled principal payments on the Perceptive Loans prior to the Maturity Date. We may prepay outstanding principal on the Perceptive Loans at any time and from time to time upon three business days’ prior written notice, subject to the payment to Perceptive of (A) any accrued but unpaid interest on the prepaid principal amount plus (B) a redemption premium amount equal to (i) 5.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid on or prior to December 31, 2021, (ii) 2.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid after December 31, 2021 and on or prior to December 31, 2022, (iii) 4.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid after December 31, 2022 and on or prior to December 31, 2023, and (iv) 5.0% of the prepaid principal amount, if prepaid any time thereafter and prior to the Maturity Date.
All of our obligations under the Perceptive Credit Agreement are secured by a first-priority lien and security interest in substantially all of our tangible and intangible assets, including intellectual property and all of the equity interests in our subsidiaries. The Perceptive Credit Agreement contains certain representations and warranties, affirmative covenants, negative covenants and conditions that are customarily required for similar financings. The negative covenants restrict or limit our ability that of our subsidiaries to, among other things and subject to certain exceptions contained in the Perceptive Credit Agreement, incur new indebtedness; create liens on assets; engage in certain fundamental corporate changes, such as mergers or acquisitions, or changes to our or our subsidiaries’ business activities; make certain Investments or Restricted Payments (each as defined in the Perceptive Credit Agreement); change our fiscal year; pay dividends; repay other certain indebtedness; engage in certain affiliate transactions; or enter into, amend or terminate any other agreements that have the impact of restricting our ability to make loan repayments under the Perceptive Credit Agreement. In addition, we must (i) at all times prior to the Maturity Date maintain a minimum cash balance of $3.0 million; and (ii) as of the last day of each fiscal quarter commencing with the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019, report revenues for the trailing 12-month period that exceed the amounts set forth in the Perceptive Credit Agreement, which range from $31.2 million for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2021 to $55.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of the covenants contained in the Perceptive Credit Agreement.
In February 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 27,025,000 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and other expenses associated with the offering, of approximately $88.7 million. The proceeds from this offering were used (i) for the procurement of raw materials for the manufacturing of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV; (ii) to support the ongoing commercial sales of BIVIGAM and ASCENIV; (iii) to expand the manufacturing capacity of our Boca Facility and enhance our supply chain capabilities; (iv) to expand our plasma collection facility network; (v) for research and development and business development opportunities; and (vi) for general corporate purposes and other capital expenditures.
On May 21, 2019, we issued 12,937,500 shares of our Common Stock in an underwritten public offering for gross proceeds of $51.75 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us. The net proceeds of $48.4 million from the offering have been used (i) to support the commercial launch of ASCENIV, which commenced in October 2019, (ii) for the commercial re-launch of BIVIGAM, (iii) to expand the manufacturing capacity of the Boca Facility, (iv) for the procurement of raw materials for the manufacturing of ASCENIV and BIVIGAM, (v) to expand our plasma collection facility network; and (vi) for general corporate purposes and other capital expenditures.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $102.0 million, an increase of $25.8 million from the same period of a year ago, mainly due to the increase in net loss. The following table illustrates the primary components of our cash flows from operations:
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.7 million, which primarily consisted of $7.6 million for capital expenditures at the Boca Facility, which includes equipment purchases and implementation of our in-house fill/finish capabilities, and $5.1 million of capital expenditures for the construction and buildout of new plasma collection facilities. Cash used in investing activities of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly attributable to capital expenditures at the Boca Facility. Although we have no specific material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2020, we expect our total capital expenditures will be between $12.0 million and $20.0 million for fiscal 2021.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $143.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly consisted of $88.7 million of net proceeds received from our underwritten public offering in February 2020, $42.5 million of proceeds received from the Sale Agreement during the second half of 2020 and $12.5 million of proceeds from the Perceptive Tranche III Loan received in March 2020. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $80.0 million, which is comprised of the net proceeds received from our May 2019 equity offering in the amount of $48.4 million and the $31.6 million of net proceeds received from the refinancing of our senior credit facility and the subsequent Perceptive Tranche II Loan.
Effect of Inflation
Inflation or changing prices did not have a significant impact on our net sales, revenues or net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.