ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes of the company appearing elsewhere in this Report. This discussion of our financial condition and results of operations contains certain statements that are not strictly historical and are “forward-looking” statements and involve a high degree of risk and uncertainty. Actual results may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements due to other risks and uncertainties that exist in our operations, development efforts and business environment, including those set forth in this Item 7, and in the sections entitled “1A. Risk Factors” and “1. Business” in this Report and uncertainties described elsewhere in this Report. All forward-looking statements included in this Report are based on information available to the company as of the date hereof.
General
Company Overview
We are a specialty biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing products in various therapeutic areas, including respiratory disease, allergy and opioid overdose. Our products and product candidates in the allergy, respiratory, and opioid overdose markets include: SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection 0.3mg, which was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, in 2017 for use in the emergency treatment of acute allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis; SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection 0.15mg which was approved by the FDA in September 2018, for use in the treatment of anaphylaxis for patients weighing 33-66 pounds; a naloxone injection product candidate, ZIMHI, based on the approved Symject™ injection device and intended for the treatment of opioid overdose for which the company resubmitted its NDA to the FDA in May 2020, received a Complete Response Letter, or CRL, from the FDA in November 2020, submitted responses to the deficiencies identified in the CRL and met with the FDA concerning the responses, and intends to resubmit its NDA; Tempol, an investigational drug; and a Beclomethasone metered dose inhaler product candidate (APC-1000) intended for the treatment of asthma for which the company submitted an Investigational New Drug application, or IND, in January 2018 but has suspended the start-up phase of Phase 3 studies. In June 2020, we entered into a license agreement with a third party to license rights under patents, patent applications and related know-how relating to Tempol. The exclusive license includes the worldwide use under the licensed patent rights and related rights for the fields of COVID-19 infection, asthma, respiratory syncytial virus infection, and influenza infection, as well as the use of Tempol as a therapeutic for reducing radiation-induced dermatitis in patients undergoing treatment for cancer. In January 2021, we submitted an IND to the FDA for the investigational use of Tempol for the treatment of coronavirus (COVID-19) and in February 2021, we were notified by the FDA that the agency had completed the safety review of the IND and concluded that the company may proceed with the proposed clinical investigation and trial described in the IND. Our goal is to create low cost therapeutic alternatives to existing treatments. Consistent across all specialty pharmaceuticals product lines, we intend to submit NDAs under Section 505(b)(2), of the U.S. Food, Drug & Cosmetic Act, as amended, or FDCA, or Section 505(j) Abbreviated New Drug Applications, or ANDAs, to the FDA, whenever possible, in order to potentially reduce the time to market and to save on costs, compared to those associated with Section 505(b)(1) NDAs for new drug products.
Our U.S. Compounding, Inc., subsidiary, or USC, which we acquired in April 2016 and which is registered as a drug compounding outsourcing facility under Section 503B of the FDCA and the U.S. Drug Quality and Security Act, or DQSA, provides prescription compounded medications, including compounded sterile preparations and nonsterile compounds, to patients, physician clinics, hospitals, surgery centers and other clients throughout most of the United States. USC’s product offerings broadly include, among others, corticosteroids, hormone replacement therapies, hospital outsourcing products, injectables, urological preparations, topical compounds for pain and men’s and women’s health products. USC’s compounded formulations in many circumstances are offered as alternatives to drugs approved by the FDA. USC also provides certain veterinary pharmaceutical products for animals. On January 26, 2021, we announced that we have entered into a non-binding letter of intent with a potential buyer for sale of substantially all of the assets of our USC subsidiary, as described further in this Report under the heading "Business - Prescription Compounded Medications - Letter of Intent."
To achieve our goals and support our overall strategy, we may need to raise additional funding in the future and make significant investments in, among other things, product development and working capital.
SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection Product
On June 15, 2017, the FDA approved the company’s SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection 0.3mg product for the emergency treatment of allergic reactions (Type I) including anaphylaxis. SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection 0.3mg is intended to deliver a dose of epinephrine, which is used for emergency, immediate administration in acute anaphylactic reactions to insect stings or bites, allergic reaction to certain foods, drugs and other allergens, as well as idiopathic or exercise-induced anaphylaxis, to patients weighing 66 pounds or greater. On September 27, 2018, the FDA approved our lower dose version (0.15mg) of SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection, which is intended for patients weighing 33 to 66 pounds.
In July 2018, we entered into a Distribution and Commercialization Agreement with Sandoz Inc. to commercialize our SYMJEPI product. Under the terms of the agreement, we appointed Sandoz as the exclusive distributor of SYMJEPI in the United States and related territories, in all fields including both the retail market and other markets, and granted Sandoz an exclusive license under our patent and other intellectual property rights and know-how to market, sell, and otherwise commercialize and distribute the product in the licensed territory, subject to the provisions of the agreement, in partial consideration of an upfront fee by Sandoz and potential performance-based milestone payments. The agreement provided that Sandoz will pay to us 50% of the net profit from net sales, as each such term is defined in the agreement, of the product in the Territory to third parties, determined on a quarterly basis. We were the supplier of the product to Sandoz, and Sandoz ordered and paid us a supply price for quantities of products ordered. We were responsible for all manufacturing and, prior to Sandoz paying us the supply price, the component and supply costs related to manufacturing and supplying the product to Sandoz. In January 2019, we announced that Sandoz had launched SYMJEPI (epinephrine) 0.3 mg Injection in the U.S. market, initially available in the institutional setting. On July 9, 2019, we announced the full launch (institutional and retail) by Sandoz of both dose forms of the SYMJEPI injection products.
On May 11, 2020, we announced that we entered into an agreement, or the Termination Agreement, with Sandoz to terminate the Sandoz Agreement following an initial transition period that ended as a result of the execution of a transition services agreement. The Termination Agreement provided for the mutually agreed return to us of the marketing, promotion, and distribution rights, and certain marketing and promotional materials, relating to the SYMJEPI products, and the termination of the Sandoz Agreement, supported by a transition services agreement that we entered into with Sandoz and USWM, LLC concerning certain transition services, activities and arrangements relating to the SYMJEPI products. As part of the Termination Agreement, Sandoz agreed to support the products in the U.S. under the Sandoz Agreement through the end of the transition period to help reduce or minimize potential impacts to patients and customers. The Termination Agreement also provided for a future resolution of amounts that may be payable or owed with respect to the net sales and profit sharing provisions of the Sandoz Agreement, and for survival of certain provisions of the Sandoz Agreement.
On May 11, 2020, we announced that we entered into an exclusive distribution and commercialization agreement, or the USWM Agreement, with USWM, LLC, or USWM or US WorldMeds, for the United States commercial rights for the SYMJEPI products, as well as for the company’s ZIMHI product candidate. Under the terms of the USWM Agreement, we appointed USWM as the exclusive distributor of SYMJEPI in the United States and related territories, or the Territory, effective upon the termination of the Sandoz Agreement, and of the ZIMHI product if approved by the FDA for marketing, and granted USWM an exclusive license under our patent and other intellectual property rights and know-how to market, sell, and otherwise commercialize and distribute the products in the Territory, in partial consideration of an initial payment of $1,000,000 by USWM and potential regulatory and commercial based milestone payments totaling up to $26 million, if all of the milestones are achieved. There can be no assurances that any of these milestones will be met or that any milestone payments will be paid to us. We retain rights to the intellectual property subject to the USWM Agreement and to commercialize both products outside of the Territory. In addition, we may continue to use the licensed intellectual property (excluding certain of the licensed trademarks) to develop and commercialize other products (with certain exceptions), including products that utilize our Symject™ syringe product platform.
The USWM Agreement provides that, after deducting the supply price and subject to certain other deductions and adjustments, including an allocation for USWM sales and distribution expenses from net sales of the products, USWM will pay to us 50% of the net profit from net sales, as each such term is defined in the USWM Agreement, of the product in the Territory to third parties, determined on a quarterly basis. We will be the supplier of the products to USWM, and USWM will order and pay us a supply price for quantities of products ordered. The agreement does not include minimum payments to us by USWM, minimum requirements for sales of product by USWM or, with certain exceptions, minimum purchase commitments by USWM. Commencing in July 2020, USWM began promoting the SYMJEPI products through its field sales force.
On January 22, 2021, we announced that the SYMJEPI products added to the Walgreens Prescription Savings Club program and were available to members of the program. The Walgreens Prescription Savings Club offers customers, who pay an annual membership fee, savings off retail prices on a large variety of medications.
On October 1, 2019, we entered into an exclusive distribution and commercialization agreement with a company in Australia to register and commercialize the SYMJEPI products in the Australia and New Zealand markets, after all required regulatory registration and approvals have been obtained. We anticipate that it could take many months in order to obtain the required registration and approvals.
ZIMHI (naloxone) Injection Product
On December 31, 2018, we filed an NDA with the FDA relating to our higher dose naloxone injection product, ZIMHI, for the treatment of opioid overdose. On November 22, 2019, we received a CRL from the FDA regarding our NDA for ZIMHI. The CRL stated that the FDA determined that it could not approve the NDA in its present form and provided recommendations needed for resubmission. A CRL is issued by the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research when it has completed its review of a file and questions remain that preclude the approval of the NDA in its current form. The questions raised by the FDA related generally to Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (CMC). No other clinical safety or efficacy issues were raised. In December 2019, we provided responses to the FDA to the comments included in the CRL. In February 2020, we had a Type A meeting with the FDA to discuss our response to the CRL and the process and timeline for resubmission of the NDA to the FDA. At the meeting, we obtained concurrence from the agency on the CMC information required for resubmission of the NDA, including additional information involving extractables and leachables testing from the syringe and glassware. On May 15, 2020, we resubmitted to the FDA the NDA for ZIMHI. On November 13, 2020, we received a second CRL from the FDA regarding the resubmitted NDA. The deficiencies and questions raised in the CRL related generally to new CMC issues. We submitted responses to the deficiencies identified in the CRL and held a Type A meeting with the FDA to discuss the CRL and the company’s responses, and obtained input from the agency concerning the resubmission of the NDA. With the input from the meeting, the company intends to resubmit the NDA for ZIMHI to the FDA. The company expects to resubmit the NDA within approximately 45 days from the date of this Report absent unexpected delays, although there can be no assurance regarding the date that our NDA will be resubmitted. At the Type A meeting, the FDA did not provide any specific timeline for review of a resubmitted NDA. If the matters raised in the CRL cannot be resolved with the FDA division that sent the CRL, we may appeal the matter within the agency through a Formal Dispute Resolution process. There can be no assurances regarding the timing or outcome of our resubmission of the NDA to the FDA or the FDA’s review of any resubmitted NDA relating to the ZIMHI product, the timing or outcome of any Formal Dispute Resolution process that we may decide to initiate, whether the FDA will regard our responses to the CRL and a resubmitted NDA as satisfactory, whether the FDA will require additional actions, information or trials after review of a resubmitted NDA or issue another CRL, the timing, costs or outcome of any additional actions that may be required following any resubmission of the NDA, or that the product will be able to compete successfully in the market if approved and launched. The development of an intramuscular injection of naloxone for the treatment of opioid overdose will require commercial scale manufacturing subject to review and approval by the FDA.
Tempol (APC400)
On June 12, 2020, we entered into a license agreement with Matrix Biomed, Inc., or the Licensor, to license rights under patents, patent applications and related know-how of Licensor relating to Tempol, an investigational drug. The exclusive license includes the worldwide use under the licensed patent rights and related rights of Tempol for the fields of COVID-19 infection, asthma, respiratory syncytial virus infection, and influenza infection. In addition, the exclusive license includes the use of Tempol as a therapeutic for reducing radiation-induced dermatitis in patients undergoing treatment for cancer.
In July 2020, we submitted to the FDA a pre-IND package which provided a protocol for a Phase 2/3 study examining Tempol in COVID-19 patients, and the FDA provided comments regarding the prospective use of Tempol in a randomized placebo controlled trial. In January 2021, we submitted an IND to the FDA for the investigational use of Tempol for the treatment of COVID-19. On February 22, 2021, we announced that the company was notified by the FDA that the agency had completed the safety review of the IND and concluded that the company may proceed with the proposed clinical investigation and trial described in the IND. The goal of the study titled, “A Phase 2/3, Adaptive, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study to Examine the Effects of Tempol (MBM-02) on Preventing COVID-19 Related Hospitalization in Subjects with COVID-19 Infection,” is to examine the safety and activity of Tempol in COVID-19 patients early in the infection. In addition to safety, the study will examine markers of inflammation and the rate of hospitalization for patients taking Tempol versus placebo early in COVID-19 infection. We currently anticipate that the trial will begin in the second quarter of 2021. On January 28, 2021, we announced that in collaboration with the Human Immune Monitoring Center at Stanford University we conducted a study to investigate the effects of Tempol on immune cells from COVID-19 patients, and that preliminary data from that study showed that Tempol decreases cytokines from stimulated cells from COVID-19 patients. In March 2021, we announced that in studies conducted at Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, hamsters challenged with the virus that causes COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) showed decreased inflammation in the lungs when treated with Tempol compared to controls. We intend to continue to explore the availability of government and/or non-government funding to help support study the efficacy of Tempol as a therapeutic treatment for COVID-19. We also continue to explore options regarding the funding and design of a clinical study to examine the effects of Tempol for the treatment of radiation induced dermatitis and are engaged in additional formulation and development and GMP manufacturing processes intended to support an IND to begin such a study.
Going Concern and Management Plan
The financial statements included elsewhere herein for the year ended December 31, 2020, were prepared under the assumption that we would continue our operations as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities during the normal course of business. However, as of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $6.9 million, an accumulated deficit of approximately $229.9 million, and liabilities of approximately $27.4 million. We have incurred substantial recurring losses from operations, have used, rather than provided, cash in our continuing operations, and are dependent on additional financing to fund operations. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements included elsewhere herein do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty. In January and February 2021, the Company issued common stock upon exercise of investor warrants. The Company received total of approximately $5,852,000 and the warrant holders received 8,356,000 shares of common stock. On February 2, 2021, the Company completed the closing of an underwritten public offering of 46,621,621 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $1.11 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $48.6 million, after deducting approximately $3.2 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company.
Our management intends to attempt to secure additional required funding, if required, through equity or debt financing, sales or out-licensing of product candidates or intellectual property assets, revenues from sales of compounded sterile formulations, share of profits received relating to sales in the U.S. of our SYMJEPI products, seeking partnerships or commercialization agreements with other pharmaceutical companies or third parties to co-develop and fund research and development or commercialization efforts of our products, from a business combination, or similar transactions. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any sources of funding, if required. Such additional funding may not be available, may not be available on reasonable terms, and, in the case of equity financing transactions, could result in significant additional dilution to our stockholders. If we do not obtain required additional equity or debt funding, our cash resources will be depleted and we could be required to materially reduce or suspend operations, which would likely have a material adverse effect on our business, stock price and our relationships with third parties with whom we have business relationships, at least until additional funding is obtained. If we do not have sufficient funds to continue operations, we could be required to seek bankruptcy protection or other alternatives that could result in our stockholders losing some or all of their investment in us.
Funding that we may receive during fiscal 2021 is expected to be used to satisfy existing obligations and liabilities and working capital needs, to support commercialization of our products and conduct the clinical and regulatory work to develop our product candidates, to begin building working capital reserves and to fund a number of projects, which may include, without limitation, some or all of the following:
●
continue development and commercialization of our ZIMHI (naloxone) product candidate;
●
continue development of our allergy and respiratory product candidates;
●
pursue the development of other product candidates that we may develop or acquire;
●
fund clinical trials of Tempol and other product candidates;
●
expand research and development activities;
●
access manufacturing, commercialization and sales capabilities;
●
implement additional internal systems and infrastructure;
●
maintain, defend and expand the scope of our intellectual property portfolio;
●
acquire products, technologies, intellectual property or companies and support continued development and funding thereof;
●
hire additional management, sales, research, development and clinical personnel; and
●
help fund the operations and capital expenditures of USC.
Results of Operations
Our consolidated results of operations are presented for the year ending December 31, 2020 and for the year ending December 31, 2019.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. Consolidated revenues were approximately $16,527,000 and $22,114,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Consolidated revenues decreased approximately $5,587,000 in year 2020 compared to the comparable period of 2019.
Revenues of our Drug Development and Commercialization business conducted by Adamis were approximately $2,777,000 and $3,763,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Revenue relating to the sales of SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection 0.3mg and 0.15mg decreased approximately $986,000 primarily due to decreased sales, and sales and marketing and other matters relating to the transition of commercialization and marketing rights to the SYMJEPI products from Sandoz to USWM.
Revenues of our Compounded Pharmaceuticals business conducted through USC were approximately $13,751,000 and $18,351,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Restrictions on outpatient surgery and other medical procedures due to the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a decline in sales of USC’s products of approximately $4,995,000. These amounts were partially offset by an increase of approximately $395,000 in sales of USC’s veterinary products. The COVID-19 outbreak has adversely affected revenues from sales of USC products, in part due to reductions or cancellations of elective surgeries and reduction in office visits to physicians’ offices, healthcare facilities or clinics by patients, and the resulting decreased demand by USC’s customers for certain of USC’s products, and will likely continue to adversely affect revenues from sales of USC products for a period of time which cannot be predicted. Moreover, COVID-19 has restricted USC from utilizing traditional sales and marketing efforts, such as regular sales visits to customers, in generating revenues. USC has added to its product catalog certain drugs that may from time to time appear on the FDA's Drug Shortage List, some of which may be used in connection with the treatment of acutely ill COVID-19 patients, although the COVID-19 outbreak could result in shortages or delays in our ability to obtain supplies relating to certain of these products.
Cost of Goods Sold. Consolidated cost of goods sold was approximately $14,894,000 and $15,479,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cost of goods sold includes direct and indirect costs to manufacture formulations and sell products, including active pharmaceutical ingredients, personnel costs, packaging, storage, shipping and handling costs, the write-off of obsolete inventory and other related expenses. The gross margin percentage for the years ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 10% compared to approximately 30% for the years ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of goods sold of our Drug Development and Commercialization business conducted by Adamis was approximately $6,327,000 and $5,057,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The gross loss percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 128% compared to approximately 34% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of goods sold for the 2020 year compared to the 2019 year increased primarily due to an increase of approximately $1,270,000 in direct materials, depreciation, maintenance fees and other related expenses associated with the production of SYMJEPI (epinephrine) Injection 0.3mg and 0.15mg.
Cost of goods sold of our Compounded Pharmaceuticals business conducted through USC was approximately $8,567,000 and $10,422,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 38% compared to approximately 43% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Expenses relating to wages, benefits and other compensation expenses, consulting services, product devices, testing, freight, repairs and maintenance and other related expenses as a result of the elimination of a second shift at the USC outsourcing facility and the ceasing of sales of certain formulations at the USC outsourcing facility decreased approximately $3,055,000, which was partially offset by an increase of approximately $1,200,000 of charges for obsolete inventory.
Selling, General and Administrative ("SG&A") Expenses. SG&A expenses consist primarily of depreciation and amortization, professional fees which include legal, accounting and audit fees, consulting and employee compensation. Consolidated SG&A expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $30,581,000 and $25,288,000, respectively.
SG&A expenses of our Drug Development and Commercialization business conducted by Adamis for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $20,090,000 and $11,271,000, respectively. The increase was attributable to increases in professional fees and insurance expenses of approximately $1,631,000, approximately $7,900,000 in contingency loss accrual related to the Nephron case, as discussed in Note 15, and compensation and related expenses of approximately $272,000. These amounts were partially offset by decreases in approximately $492,000 in patent expenses, approximately $311,000 in selling expenses, and approximately $181,000 in consulting, outside services and other related expenses.
SG&A expenses of our Compounded Pharmaceuticals business conducted through USC for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $10,491,000 and $14,016,000, respectively. Approximately $1,784,000 of the decrease in SG&A expenses for the 2020 year compared to the 2019 year was attributable to decreases in selling expenses primarily due to the reduction of commission payments, marketing expenses and other related expenses as a direct effect of the reduction in revenue, approximately $896,000 of the decrease was attributable to decreases in wages, benefits and other compensation expenses, approximately $519,000 of the decrease was attributable to operational expenses relating to the ceasing of sales of certain USC products, approximately $318,000 of the decrease was attributable to depreciation, repairs and maintenance, and other related expenses, and approximately $261,000 of the decrease was attributable to decreases in professional fees and consulting expenses. These amounts were partially offset by increases of approximately $253,000 in licenses, permits, bad debt expense and other related administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses. Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services to be used in future research and development activities are recorded as an asset and are expensed when the research and development activities are performed. Research and development expenses were approximately $8,281,000 and $10,376,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and development expenses of our Drug Development and Commercialization business conducted by Adamis were approximately $8,040,000 and $10,293,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. R&D expenses of Adamis decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the comparable 2019 period was primarily due to a net decrease of approximately $4,056,000 in development costs of our product candidates, including ZIMHI, APC-1000, SYMJEPI and other product candidates. R&D miscellaneous expenses decreased by approximately $105,000. These amounts were partially offset by an increase of approximately $1,763,000 in development costs primarily attributed to APC-400, and other product candidates, including the $590,000 fair value of the preferred stock issued to Matrix Biomed Inc. upon execution of the licensing agreement related to APC-400, and an increase of approximately $145,000 for wages, benefits, and other compensations expenses.
Research and development expenses of our Compounded Pharmaceuticals business conducted through USC were approximately $241,000 and $83,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. R&D expenses of USC for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the comparable 2019 period, increased approximately $158,000 due to the testing of new products.
Impairment Expense Goodwill. Impairment expense of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $6,772,000 and $0, respectively. As described in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein, in light of recent events associated with the global spread of COVID-19 and other factors, we performed a goodwill impairment review as of March 31, 2020, and recorded a charge of approximately $3,143,000 for impairment of goodwill during the first three months of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, with the continued decline in revenue during 2020 primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors affecting our Compounded Pharmaceutical reporting unit, we performed a goodwill impairment review and recorded an additional charge of approximately $3,629,000 for impairment of goodwill in 2020.
Impairment Expense Contract Costs. Impairment expense of contract costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $1,750,000 and $0, respectively. As a result of entering into the Termination Agreement described above providing for the termination of the Sandoz Agreement, our financial results for the year ending December 31, 2020, included an impairment of the Adamis capitalized cost to obtain a contract of $1,750,000. For further information, see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Impairment Expense - Long Lived Assets. Impairment expense of long-lived assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $1,116,000 and $0, respectively. In light of the delay in putting the Construction In Progress - Equipment assets into service and the continued effect of the COVID-19 pandemic as of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment charge of approximately $1,116,000. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Impairment Expense Intangibles. Impairment expense of intangibles for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $2,913,000 and $0, respectively. The impairment expense was primarily due to the impairment of the Taper DPI intellectual property, as a result of the Company’s determination not to pursue further development efforts regarding the product candidate related to this intangible. For further information, please see Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Impairment Expense Inventories. Impairment expenses of inventories for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $0 and $322,000, respectively. The 2019 impairment expense was attributable to the inventories damaged during a flood at the USC facility.
Other Income (Expense). Other Income (Expenses) consists primarily of interest income, interest expense, and changes to the fair value of warrant liabilities. Other income (expense) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $389,000 and $1,847,000, respectively. The decrease in other income and increase in other expense during the twelve-month period in 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to the decrease of approximately $1,329,000 for the change in fair value of warrants, a decrease of approximately $92,000 in interest/other income and an increase of interest expense of approximately $37,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses of approximately $49.4 million and $27.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Since our inception, June 6, 2006, and through December 31, 2020, we have an accumulated deficit of approximately $229.9 million. Since inception and through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations principally through debt financing and through public and private issuances of common stock and preferred stock. Since inception, we have raised a total of approximately $210.4 million in debt and equity financing transactions, consisting of approximately $26.7 million in debt financing and approximately $183.7 million in equity financing transactions.
In February 2020, we completed a registered direct offering of 11,600,000 shares of common stock, and a concurrent private placement of warrants to purchase 8,700,000 shares of common stock, to a small number of accredited institutional investors, resulting in estimated net proceeds of approximately $6.2 million. In September 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 18,548,386 shares of common stock, resulting in estimated net proceeds of approximately $10.7 million. In February 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 46,621,621 shares of common stock, resulting in estimated net proceeds of approximately $48.3 million.
In April 2020, we secured an approximately $3.2 million Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loan provided for by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and administered by the SBA. The unsecured loan (the “PPP Loan”) is evidenced by a promissory note of the company (the “PPP Note”), to Arvest Bank, the Lender. Under the terms of the PPP Note and the PPP Loan, interest accrues on the outstanding principal at the rate of 1.0% per annum. The term of the PPP Note is two years, unless sooner provided in connection with an event of default under the PPP Note. To the extent the loan amount is not forgiven under the PPP, we are obligated to make equal monthly payments of principal and interest, beginning seven months from the date of the PPP Note (or later if a timely loan forgiveness application has been submitted), until the maturity date. The CARES Act and the PPP provide a mechanism for a borrower to apply for forgiveness of up to the full amount borrowed. The amount of loan proceeds eligible for forgiveness is based on a formula that takes into account a number of factors, including the amount of loan proceeds used by the Company during the eight-week or 24-week period after the loan origination for certain purposes including payroll costs, interest on certain mortgage obligations, rent payments on certain leases, and certain qualified utility payments, provided that at least 60% of the loan amount is used for eligible payroll costs; the employer maintaining or rehiring employees and maintaining salaries at certain levels; and other factors. Subject to the other requirements and limitations on loan forgiveness, only loan proceeds spent on payroll and other eligible costs during the covered eight-week or 24-week period will qualify for forgiveness. In December 2020, we submitted an application for the forgiveness of the full amount of the PPP Loan, and as such will not be required to make any payments of principal or interest on the PPP Loan before the date on which the SBA remits the loan forgiveness amount on our loan to our Lender (or notifies our Lender that no forgiveness amount is allowed). There is no assurance that we will be granted forgiveness of some or all of the amount of the PPP Loan. After the CARES Act was passed and we applied for and obtained the PPP Loan, the SBA issued new guidance that, among other things, questioned whether a public company with substantial market value and access to capital markets would qualify to participate in the PPP and be able to make the required certification that current economic uncertainty makes the loan request necessary to support the ongoing operations of the applicant. Subsequently, the Secretary of the Treasury and SBA has issued guidance that the government will review all PPP loans of more than $2 million for which the borrower applies for forgiveness, and that all PPP loans in excess of $2 million, and other PPP loans as appropriate, will be subject to review by SBA for compliance with program requirements set forth in the PPP Interim Final Rules and in the Borrower Application Form. Should we be audited or reviewed by federal or state regulatory authorities as a result of filing an application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan or otherwise, such audit or review could result in the diversion of management’s time and attention and legal and reputational costs. If we were to be audited or reviewed and receive an adverse determination or finding in such audit or review, we could be required to return or repay the full amount of the PPP Loan and could be subjected to fines or penalties, which could reduce our liquidity and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
On March 15, 2021, we entered into a Note, or the PPP2 Note, in favor of Arvest Bank as lender, or the Bank, in the principal amount of $1,765,495 relating to funding under a Second Draw loan, or the Second Draw Loan, pursuant to the terms of the PPP, the CARES Act, and the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act enacted in December 2020. Under the terms of the PPP2 Note and Second Draw Loan, interest accrues on the outstanding principal at the rate of 1.0% per annum. The term of the PPP2 Note is five years, unless sooner provided in connection with an event of default under the PPP2 Note. We may prepay the Second Draw Loan at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Under the PPP, the proceeds of the Second Draw Loan may be used to pay payroll and make certain covered interest payments, lease payments and utility payments. We may apply for forgiveness of some or all of the Second Draw Loan pursuant to the PPP. In order to obtain full or partial forgiveness of the Second Draw Loan, we must timely request forgiveness, must provide satisfactory documentation in accordance with applicable SBA guidelines, and must satisfy the criteria for forgiveness under the PPP and applicable SBA requirements. If we timely apply for forgiveness, payments will be deferred in accordance with the CARES Act, as modified by the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020, and we will not be obligated to make any payments of principal or interest before the date on which the SBA remits the loan forgiveness amount to the Bank or notifies the Bank that no loan forgiveness in allowed; and the Bank will then notify us of remittance by SBA of the loan forgiveness amount (or notify us that the SBA determined that no loan forgiveness is allowed) and the date that our first payment is due. Interest will accrue during the deferral period. No assurance is provided that we will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part. If the Second Draw Loan is not forgiven in accordance with the terms of the PPP, we will be obligated to make monthly payments of principal and interest to repay the Second Draw Loan in full prior to the maturity date. If we do not submit a loan forgiveness application to the Bank within 10 months after the end of our applicable covered period, as defined under the PPP and applicable regulations and guidance issued by the SBA or the U.S. Department of Treasury, then we must begin paying principal and interest after that period. The PPP2 Note contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults, breaches of representations, warranties or covenants, defaults on other loans with the Bank, bankruptcy or insolvency events, certain change of control events, material adverse changes or events, and certain other events. The occurrence of an event of default may result in the repayment of all amounts outstanding, collection of all amounts owing by us, or filing suit and obtaining judgment against us.
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was approximately $20.9 million and $19.9 million, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities increased, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the increases in inventory purchases and prepaid expenses, and a reduction in accounts payable. Although there was an increase in operating losses in 2020, it was offset by the impairment expenses described above.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $0.9 million and $2.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities decreased primarily due to the reduction in purchases of additional equipment during the year months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year months ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $19.9 million and $12.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash flows provided by financing activities increased for the period ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher proceeds from issuance of common stock and the proceeds of the PPP loan.
Loan Agreements
In connection with our acquisition of USC and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement relating to the USC acquisition, we assumed approximately $5,722,000 principal amount of debt obligations under two loan agreements and related loan documents relating to the building, real property and equipment that certain third parties agreed to transfer to the company or USC in connection with the merger transaction, as well as the two loan agreements to which USC is a party, a working capital loan and an equipment loan, and related loan documents evidencing loans previously made to USC, and we agreed to become an additional co-borrower under the loan agreement and related documents, such documents as amended referred to as the “Loan Documents.” The lender in all of the Loan Documents was First Federal Bank and/or its successor Bear State Bank, referred to as Lender or the Bank. In November 2016, we entered into amendments of our loan agreements with the Bank. The balances of the USC working capital line, building loan and equipment loan were due and payable on February 28, 2018, August 9, 2020 and October 1, 2019, respectively. There was no outstanding balance on the USC Working Capital Line at its maturity date, and that agreement has not currently been renewed or extended. In addition, amounts owed under the equipment loan have been previously paid and there is no outstanding balance under those loan documents. Periodic interest and principal payments under the building loan agreement are approximately $19,000 per month. We also entered into a loan and security agreement with the Lender, referred to as the Adamis Working Capital Line, pursuant to which we borrowed $2,000,000 to provide working capital to USC, subject to the terms and conditions of the loan agreement. Our obligations under the Adamis Working Capital Line were satisfied in full in July 2018, and there is no outstanding balance under the Adamis Working Capital Line, which has been terminated.
At December 31, 2020, our aggregate indebtedness under the building loan agreement was approximately $2,067,000. The building loan matures in August 2021 and a final payment of all outstanding amounts will be due and payable on the maturity date. The building loan agreement included in the amended Loan Documents with the Bank include a variety of representations, warranties and covenants that we are required to comply with. If we do not comply with the provisions of such agreements and documents and the Bank declares an event of default, the Bank would be entitled to accelerate the maturity date of the loans, the principal and accrued interest would become due and payable, and the Bank could elect to exercise its remedies as a secured creditor under the loan documents and applicable law.
Our ability to make scheduled payments on our indebtedness depends in part on our future performance and ability to raise additional capital if required, which is subject to economic, financial, competitive and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash to service our debt, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, such as selling assets, attempting to restructure our debt or obtaining additional capital through sales of equity or incurrence of additional debt on terms that may be onerous or highly dilutive to our stockholders. Our ability to engage in any of these activities would depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time, and we may not be able to do so when needed, on desirable terms or at all, which could result in a default on our debt obligations. Additionally, the building loan included in the Loan Documents contains various restrictive covenants, including, among others, our obligation to deliver to the Bank certain financial and other information, our obligation to comply with certain notice and insurance requirements, and our inability, without the Bank’s prior consent, to dispose of certain of our assets, incur certain additional indebtedness, enter into certain merger, acquisition or change of control transactions, pay certain dividends or distributions on or make certain repurchases of our capital stock or incur any lien or other encumbrance on our assets, subject to certain permitted exceptions. Any failure by us to comply with any of these covenants, subject to certain cure periods, or to make all payments under the debt instruments when due, would cause us to be in default under the applicable debt instrument. In the event of any such default, the Bank may be able to foreclose on the assets that secure the debt or declare all borrowed funds, together with accrued and unpaid interest, immediately due and payable, thereby potentially causing all of our available cash to be used to pay our indebtedness or forcing us into bankruptcy or liquidation if we do not then have sufficient cash available. Any such event or occurrence could severely and negatively impact our business, financial conditions or results of operations.
For additional information concerning our debt and equity financing transactions, and our loan agreements, see Notes 11, 12, 13, 16 and 17 accompanying our financial statements included elsewhere herein.
As noted above under the heading “Going Concern and Management Plan,” through December 31, 2020, we have incurred substantial losses. The availability of any required additional funding cannot be assured. In addition, an adverse outcome in legal proceedings in which we are involved could adversely affect our liquidity and financial position. See Note 15 accompanying our financial statements included elsewhere herein. If in the future we are not able to obtain additional equity or debt funding that might be required, our cash resources could be depleted and we could be required to materially reduce or suspend operations. No assurance can be given as to the timing or ultimate success of obtaining future funding, if required. We will be required to devote significant cash resources in order to continue development and commercialization of our product candidates and to support our other operations and activities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to aid you in understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. For further discussion of our accounting policies, see Note 3 in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Acquisitions and Intangibles. The accounting for business combinations requires management to make judgments and estimates of the fair value of assets acquired, including the identification and valuation of intangible assets, as well as liabilities assumed. Such judgments and estimates directly impact the amount of goodwill recognized in connection with each acquisition, as goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the fair value of its net tangible and identifiable intangible assets.
Goodwill. Goodwill, which has an indefinite useful life, represents the excess of purchase consideration over fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually as of December 31 each year, or more frequently if events occur indicating the potential for impairment. During its goodwill impairment review, the company may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. The qualitative factors include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, and the overall financial performance and outlook of the company. If, after assessing the totality of these qualitative factors, the company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then no additional assessment is deemed necessary. Otherwise, the company proceeds to perform the two-step test for goodwill impairment. The first step involves comparing the estimated fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the company performs the second step of the goodwill impairment test to determine the amount of loss, which involves comparing the implied fair value of the goodwill to the carrying value of the goodwill. These determinations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions.
The company evaluates its long-lived assets with definite lives, such as property and equipment, acquired technology, customer relationships, patent and license rights, for impairment by considering competition by products prescribed for the same indication, the likelihood and estimated future entry of non-generic and generic competition with the same or similar indication and other related factors. The factors that drive the estimate of the life are often uncertain and are reviewed on a periodic basis or when events occur that warrant review. Recoverability is measured by comparison of the assets’ book value to future net undiscounted cash flows that the assets are expected to generate.
We performed an impairment analysis as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and no impairment of goodwill or acquired intangibles was identified. The COVID-19 pandemic and the related significant market decline, including the market price of the common stock of Adamis, may constitute a triggering event that requires an assessment of the company's goodwill and other intangible assets as of March 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, with the continued decline in revenue during 2020 primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors affecting our Compounded Pharmaceutical reporting unit, we performed a goodwill impairment review and recorded an additional charge of approximately $3,629,000 for impairment of goodwill in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, total goodwill impairment charge recorded was approximately $6,772,000.
Other Long-Lived Assets. The company evaluates its long-lived assets with definite lives, such as property and equipment, acquired technology, customer relationships, patent and license rights, for impairment by considering competition by products prescribed for the same indication, the likelihood and estimated future entry of non-generic and generic competition with the same or similar indication and other related factors. The factors that drive the estimate of the life are often uncertain and are reviewed on a periodic basis or when events occur that warrant review. Recoverability is measured by comparison of the assets’ book value to future net undiscounted cash flows that the assets are expected to generate.
As of December 31, 2020, in light of the time and costs involved in further product development efforts and competitive conditions in the relevant markets related to the Taper DPI intellectual property, and our determination not to devote any further substantial financial resources to development of this product candidate or pursue further development efforts regarding this product candidate, we recorded an impairment charge of approximately $2,913,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Construction In Progress - Equipment (“CIP”) are primarily for the expansion of USC's operations and will be placed into service contingent upon the completion of equipment validation and when the economy has recovered from the COVID - 19 pandemic. In light of the delay in putting the CIP assets into service and the lingering effect of the COVID -19 pandemic as of December 31, 2020, the Company had recorded an impairment charge of approximately $1,116,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The carrying value of the CIP assets was determined by estimating the residual value of the assets.
Stock-Based Compensation. We account for stock-based compensation transactions in which we receive employee services in exchange for options to purchase common stock. Stock-based compensation cost for restricted stock units or RSUs is measured based on the closing fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Stock-based compensation cost for stock options is estimated at the grant date based on each option’s fair-value as calculated by the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We recognize stock-based compensation cost as expense ratably on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
Warrant Liabilities. Warrants are accounted for in accordance with the applicable authoritative accounting guidance as either liabilities or as equity instruments depending on the specific terms of the agreements. Liability-classified instruments are recorded at fair value at each reporting period with any change in fair value recognized as a component of change in fair value of warrant liabilities in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we did not have any off balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are disclosed in Note 3 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.