Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Edoc Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 20, 2020 as a Cayman Islands corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (a “Business Combination”). We consummated our Public Offering (as defined below) on November 12, 2020 and are currently in the process of locating suitable targets for our business combination. We intend to use the cash proceeds from our Public Offering and the Private Placement described below as well as additional issuances, if any, of our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt to complete the Business Combination.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
We completed the sale of 9,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit on November 12, 2020. Simultaneous with the closing of the Public Offering, we completed the sale of 479,000 private placement units (the “Private Units”) at a price of $10.00 per unit in a private placement. Of the 479,000 private placement units, 65,000 units, or the “representative units” were purchased by I-Banker (and/or its designees).
In addition, the Company’s sponsor agreed, pursuant to a letter agreement to purchase up to 3,750,000 of the Company’s rights in the open market at a market price not to exceed $0.20 per right. I-Bankers also agreed to purchase up to 1,250,000 of the Company’s rights in the open market at a market price not to exceed $0.20 per right.
As of December 31, 2020, a total of $91,538,680 of the net proceeds from the IPO and the Private Placements (including $8,680 of interests earned since the IPO) were in a trust account established for the benefit of the Company’s public shareholders. The trust fund account is invested in interest-bearing U.S. government securities and the income earned on those investments is also for the benefit of our public shareholders.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of IPO and the Private Placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally towards consummating a business combination.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2020, we have not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from August 20, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, relates to our formation and initial public offering (“Public Offering” or “IPO”), and, since the completion of the IPO, searching for a target to consummate a Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Public Offering and placed in the Trust Account (defined below).
For the period from August 20, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $565,298 which consists of non-cash loss of $484,637 related to changes in the fair value of the warrant liabilities, formation and operating costs of $89,341, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust of $8,680.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the period from August 20, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $116,159. Net loss of $565,298 was affected by the non-cash loss on the change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $484,637, interest income on investments held in the Trust of $8,680 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $26,818 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash outside our trust account of $1,000,730, available for working capital needs. All remaining cash was held in the trust account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
On November 12, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 9,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “public share”, the warrants included in the Units, the “public warrants” and the rights included in the Units, the “rights”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $90,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 479,000 Private Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $4,790,000.
In connection with the IPO, the underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the prospectus (the “Over-Allotment Option”) to purchase up to 1,350,000 additional units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), if any. As of December 31, 2020, the over-allotment granted to the underwriters had expired unexercised.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (excluding the deferred underwriters’ discount) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes and liquidation expenses if we are unsuccessful in completing a Business Combination. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our Sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion. As of December 31, 2020, no Working Capital Loans have been issued.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangement as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
We entered into an administrative support agreement (“Administrative Support Agreement”) pursuant to which agreed to pay our sponsor for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month. Effective March 31, 2021, we entered into a termination agreement with our sponsor (the “Termination Agreement”) to terminate the Administrative Support Agreement (and any accrued obligations pursuant thereto). Since our initial public offering, we have not made any payments under the Administrative Support Agreement, and have paid for services rendered and expenses advanced by our sponsor on an as-needed basis.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Public Warrants, Private Warrants, Rights and Representative Warrants (as defined in Note 4,5 and 7 ) collectively (“Warrants”), as either equity or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the Warrants and the applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to our own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of liability-classified warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
We account for the Private Warrants and Representative’s Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants and FPAs do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. The fair value of the Private Warrants and Representative’s Warrants has been estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model.
We evaluated the Public Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that they met the criteria for equity classification and are required to be recorded as part a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
Class A Ordinary shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 8,484,502 ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per ordinary shares is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period. The calculation of diluted income per ordinary shares does not consider the effect of the warrants and rights issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) Private Placement since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants and rights would be anti-dilutive. The warrants and rights are exercisable for 6,137,400 shares of ordinary shares in the aggregate.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of net loss per share for ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method. Net loss per ordinary shares, basic and diluted, for redeemable Ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per ordinary shares, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income attributable to redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the periods. Non-redeemable ordinary shares include the Founder Shares as these ordinary shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.
Recent Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of this offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.