Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Tabular dollars are presented in millions, except per share amounts
The following section discusses our year ended June 30, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”), as compared to year ended June 30, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”). A detailed review of our fiscal 2020 performance compared to our fiscal 2019 performance is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This document and other written or oral statements made from time to time by ADP may contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Statements that are not historical in nature and which may be identified by the use of words like “expects,” “assumes,” “projects,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” “we believe,” “could” “is designed to” and other words of similar meaning, are forward-looking statements. These statements are based on
management’s expectations and assumptions and depend upon or refer to future events or conditions and are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements or that could contribute to such difference include: ADP's success in obtaining and retaining clients, and selling additional services to clients; the pricing of products and services; the success of our new solutions; compliance with existing or new legislation or regulations; changes in, or interpretations of, existing legislation or regulations; overall market, political and economic conditions, including interest rate and foreign currency trends and inflation; competitive conditions; our ability to maintain our current credit ratings and the impact on our funding costs and profitability; security or cyber breaches, fraudulent acts, and system interruptions and failures; employment and wage levels; changes in technology; availability of skilled technical associates; the impact of new acquisitions and divestitures; the adequacy, effectiveness and success of our business transformation initiatives; and the impact of any uncertainties related to major natural disasters or catastrophic events, including the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic. ADP disclaims any obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. These risks and uncertainties, along with the risk factors discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and in other written or oral statements made from time to time by ADP, should be considered in evaluating any forward-looking statements contained herein.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In addition to our U.S. GAAP results, we use adjusted results and other non-GAAP metrics to evaluate our operating performance in the absence of certain items and for planning and forecasting of future periods. Adjusted EBIT, adjusted EBIT margin, adjusted net earnings, adjusted diluted earnings per share, adjusted effective tax rate and organic constant currency are all non-GAAP financial measures. Please refer to the accompanying financial tables in the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section for a discussion of why ADP believes these measures are important and for a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to their comparable GAAP financial measures.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Highlights from the year ended June 30, 2021 include:
3% 60 basis points
6%
Revenue Growth Earnings Before Income Taxes Margin Expansion Diluted EPS Growth
2% (40) basis points
2%
Organic Constant Currency
Revenue Growth Adjusted EBIT Margin Expansion Adjusted Diluted EPS Growth
23% Employer Services
New Business Bookings Growth 2% PEO Services
Average Worksite Employee Growth
$3.0B
Cash Returned via Shareholder Friendly Actions
$1.6B Dividends | $1.4B Share Repurchases
We are a leading global provider of cloud-based Human Capital Management (“HCM”) technology solutions to employers around the world. The global COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the global business environment and on our clients, but our priority has been and continues to be the safety of our associates and the needs of our clients. We have continued to provide HCM services, including the processing of payroll and tax obligations, to our clients during this time. ADP's efforts have also been focused on providing information and tools to help clients understand and navigate the governmental relief that has been adopted globally. In addition, we released a Return to Workplace solution that assists our clients in bringing their employees back to work safely through a comprehensive set of tools designed to streamline the entire process.
During the fiscal year, we continued to advance our market-leading solutions and achieved some new milestones. Earlier this year, our next-gen payroll solution earned ADP its 6th consecutive “Top HR Product Award” at the annual HR Technology Conference. This solution features a highly scalable, policy-based framework that enables easy self-service and powerful transparency. In February, we announced the launch of Roll, a new mobile-first payroll and tax filing product aimed at small businesses, which combines an AI-driven chat-based interface with the power and scale of our payroll and tax filing expertise. We continued to add to our robust DataCloud platform by introducing the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) Dashboard which can help businesses analyze their diversity landscape through a simple Q&A format and user interface that allows them to better set, track and expand their DEI goals. For our RUN platform, which is a leading solution in the market with approximately 750,000 clients, we began to roll out a new user experience and launched TimeKeeping Plus, an entirely new, native workforce management solution. This year, we reached 100,000 clients across our workforce management solutions for the first time, as the pandemic reinforced the need for robust workforce management solutions for our clients while they navigate the new norm of increasingly flexible schedules and work arrangements.
Our suite of HRO solutions also continued to deliver steady growth this year, despite the dynamic economic environment. Within PEO, the average worksite employee count grew 12% in the fourth quarter resulting in annual growth of 2%. We also have over 2 million worksite employees on our other HRO solutions within our Employer Services segment, as clients look for ways to outsource parts of the HR function to a best-in-class provider like ADP.
We continue to drive innovation by anticipating our clients' evolving needs and always designing for people as the world of work changes. We lead the HCM industry by driving growth through our strategic, cloud-based HCM solutions and developing innovations like our next gen platforms. We further enable these solutions by supplementing them with organic, differentiated investments such as the ADP Datacloud and ADP Marketplace, and through our compliance expertise.
For fiscal 2021, we drove solid revenue growth of 3% for the year, continued to invest for sustainable growth despite market conditions, and managed any non-essential spend prudently. Employer Services New Business Bookings was up 23% for fiscal 2021. In addition, the Employer Services client revenue retention rate for fiscal 2021 improved 170 basis points to 92.2% as compared to our rate for fiscal 2020. The PEO average number of Worksite Employees increased 2% for fiscal 2021. Our pays per control metric, which represents the number of employees on ADP clients' payrolls in the United States when measured on a same-store-sales basis for a subset of clients ranging from small to large businesses, turned positive in the fourth quarter resulting in annual growth of negative 3% for fiscal 2021.
We have a strong business model, a highly cash generative business with low capital intensity, and offer a suite of products that provide critical support to our clients’ HCM functions. We generate sufficient free cash flow to satisfy our cash dividend and our modest debt obligations, which enables us to absorb the impact of downturns and remain steadfast in our reinvestments, our longer term strategy, and our commitments to shareholder friendly actions. We are committed to building upon our past successes by investing in our business through enhancements in research and development and by driving meaningful transformation in the way we operate. Our financial condition remains solid at June 30, 2021 and we remain well positioned to support our associates and our clients.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS OF CONSOLIDATED OPERATIONS
Total Revenues
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
á 3% YoY Growth
á 2% YoY Growth, Organic Constant Currency
Revenues for fiscal 2021 increased due to strong retention, new business started from New Business Bookings, an increase in zero-margin benefits pass-throughs and one percentage point of favorability from foreign currency. This increase is partially offset by a one percentage point of pressure from our interest earned on funds held for clients discussed below. Refer to “Analysis of Reportable Segments” for additional discussion of the increases in revenue for both of our reportable segments, Employer Services and Professional Employer Organization (“PEO”) Services.
Total revenues in fiscal 2021 include interest on funds held for clients of $422.4 million, as compared to $545.2 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in the consolidated interest earned on funds held for clients resulted from the decrease in our average interest rate earned to 1.5% in fiscal 2021, as compared to 2.1% in fiscal 2020. The decrease is partially offset by an increase in our average client funds balances of 5.2% to $27.4 billion in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Total Expenses
For the year ended June 30, 2021, operating expenses increased due to the increase in our PEO Services zero-margin benefits pass-through costs to $3,092.0 million from $2,907.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, the impact of foreign currency, and an increase in incentive compensation costs due to decreases in the prior year. These increases were partially offset by reduced costs as a result of our broad-based transformation initiatives and excess capacity headcount actions in the prior year, a change of $52.5 million in our estimated losses related to ADP Indemnity compared to prior year, reduced travel expenses and decreased pension costs as a result of U.S. pension service costs that were eliminated with the July 1, 2020 cessation of U.S. participants accruing any future service benefits (“U.S. pension freeze”).
Systems development and programming costs increased for fiscal 2021 due to increased investments and costs to develop, support, and maintain our products, partially offset by capitalization of costs related to our strategic projects, including our next gen platforms.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased related to the amortization of our acquisitions of intangibles and internally developed software.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased for the year ended June 30, 2021 due to an increase in
incentive compensation costs, investments in our sales organization, and the impact of foreign currency, partially offset by a decrease in charges related to transformation initiatives, reduced costs as a result of our broad-based transformation initiatives and excess capacity headcount actions in the prior year for non-sales associates, capitalization of costs to obtain a contract under ASC 606, reduced travel expenses, legal settlements, and a decrease in bad debt expense.
Interest expense decreased for the year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to a decrease in average interest rates for commercial paper borrowings to 0.1% for the year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to 1.6% for the year ended June 30, 2020. This was coupled with a decrease in average daily borrowings under our commercial paper program to $1.6 billion for the year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to $2.7 billion for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Other (Income)/Expense, net
Other (income)/expense, net, decreased $51.7 million in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020 as a result of a decrease in interest income on corporate funds due to lower interest rates earned and the change in non-service components of pension income, net, and the items described below. See Note 10 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on non-service components of pension income, net.
In fiscal 2021, the Company recorded impairment charges of $19.9 million which is comprised of a write down of $10.5 million related to internally developed software which was determined to have no future use, impairment charges of $9.4 million related to operating right-of-use assets and certain related fixed assets associated with vacating certain leased locations early, and recognizing certain owned facilities at fair value given intent to sell and accordingly classified as held for sale.
In fiscal 2020, the Company recorded impairment charges of $29.9 million, which is comprised of $25.3 million as a result of recognizing certain owned facilities at fair value given intent to sell and accordingly classified as held for sale and vacating certain leased locations early and recorded total impairment charges of $4.6 million related to operating right-of-use assets and certain related fixed assets associated with the vacated locations.
Earnings Before Income Taxes
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
á 6% YoY Growth
á 60 bps YoY Growth
Earnings before income taxes increased in fiscal 2021 due to the increases in revenues partially offset by the increases in expenses discussed above.
Overall margin increased in fiscal 2021 as a result of operational efficiencies, coupled with a decrease in charges related to transformation initiatives, legal settlements, reduced costs as a result of our broad-based transformation initiatives and excess capacity headcount actions in the prior year, a change of $52.5 million in our estimated losses related to ADP Indemnity compared to prior year, decreased selling expense, and decreased interest expense. These were partially offset by an increase in incentive compensation costs, a decrease in interest earned on funds held for clients, and incremental pressure from growth in our zero-margin benefits pass-throughs.
Adjusted Earnings before certain Interest and Taxes ("Adjusted EBIT")
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
á 1% YoY Growth
â 40 bps YoY Growth
Adjusted EBIT and Adjusted EBIT margin exclude certain interest amounts, legal settlements, gain on sale of assets, net charges related to our broad-based transformation initiatives and the impact of the net severance charges as applicable in the respective periods.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 and 2020 was 22.7% and 22.5%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily due to combined benefits from a valuation allowance release related to foreign tax credit carryforwards and a foreign tax law change during fiscal 2020 as well as a decrease in the excess tax benefit on stock-based compensation, partially offset by favorable adjustments to prior year tax liabilities during fiscal 2021. Refer to Note 11, Income Taxes, within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Adjusted Provision for Income Taxes
The adjusted effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 and 2020 was 22.7% and 22.6%, respectively. The drivers of the adjusted effective tax rate are the same as the drivers of the effective tax rate discussed above.
Net Earnings and Diluted Earnings per Share
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
á 5% YoY Growth
á 6% YoY Growth
For fiscal 2021, adjusted net earnings and adjusted diluted EPS reflect the changes in components described above.
For fiscal 2021, diluted EPS increased as a result of the impact of fewer shares outstanding resulting from the repurchase of approximately 8.2 million shares during fiscal 2021 and 6.2 million shares during fiscal 2020, partially offset by the issuances of shares under our employee benefit plans.
Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted Diluted Earnings per Share
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
á 1% YoY Growth
á 2% YoY Growth
For fiscal 2021, adjusted net earnings and adjusted diluted EPS reflect the changes in components described above.
ANALYSIS OF REPORTABLE SEGMENTS
n/m - not meaningful
Employer Services
Revenues
Revenues increased in fiscal 2021 due to strong retention, business started from New Business Bookings and one percentage point of favorability from foreign currency. Employer Services client revenue retention rate for fiscal 2021 improved 170 basis points to 92.2% as compared to our rate for fiscal 2020. Increases in revenues were partially offset by a decrease in interest earned on funds held for clients.
Earnings before Income Taxes
Employer Services’ earnings before income taxes was flat in fiscal 2021 due to increased revenues discussed above offset by increases in expenses. The increases in expenses were due to an increase in incentive compensation costs, investments in our sales organization, an increase in amortization expense, and the impact of foreign currency. The increases in expenses were offset by reduced costs as a result of our broad-based transformation initiatives and excess capacity headcount actions for non-sales associates, reduced travel expenses, and a decrease in bad debt expense.
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
â 40 bps YoY Growth
Employer Services' overall margin decreased for fiscal 2021 due to an increase in incentive compensation costs, a decrease in interest earned on funds held for clients, and an increase in amortization expense. This decrease was partially offset by reduced costs as a result of our broad-based transformation initiatives and excess capacity headcount actions in the prior year, and a decrease in bad debt expense.
Revenues
PEO Services' revenues increased 7% and PEO Services' revenues excluding zero-margin benefits pass-through costs increased 8% in fiscal 2021. PEO Services' revenues increased due to a 2% increase in the average number of Worksite Employees in fiscal 2021 driven by an increase in the number of new PEO Services clients, partially offset by a modest decline in pays per control.
Earnings before Income Taxes
PEO Services’ earnings before income taxes increased 18% in fiscal 2021 due to increased revenues discussed above, partially offset by increases in expenses. The increases in expenses were due to the increase in zero-margin benefits pass-through costs of $184.3 million described above, partially offset by a change of $52.5 million in our estimated losses related to ADP Indemnity compared to the prior year, and a decrease in selling expenses.
For the year ended June 30, respectively:
á 140 bps YoY Growth
PEO Services' overall margin increased for fiscal 2021 due to an increase in revenues as discussed above, a change in our estimated losses related to ADP Indemnity compared to the prior year, and a decrease in selling expenses.
ADP Indemnity provides workers’ compensation and employer’s liability deductible reimbursement insurance protection for PEO Services’ worksite employees up to $1 million per occurrence. PEO Services has secured a workers’ compensation and employer’s liability insurance policy that caps the exposure for each claim at $1 million per occurrence and has also secured aggregate stop loss insurance that caps aggregate losses at a certain level in fiscal years 2012 and prior from an admitted and licensed insurance company of AIG. We utilize historical loss experience and actuarial judgment to determine the estimated claim liability, and changes in estimated ultimate incurred losses are included in the PEO segment.
Additionally, starting in fiscal year 2013, ADP Indemnity paid premiums to enter into reinsurance arrangements with ACE American Insurance Company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Chubb Limited (“Chubb”), to cover substantially all losses incurred by the Company up to the $1 million per occurrence related to the workers' compensation and employer's liability deductible reimbursement insurance protection for PEO Services' worksite employees. Each of these reinsurance arrangements limits our overall exposure incurred up to a certain limit. The Company believes the likelihood of ultimate losses exceeding this limit is remote. During fiscal 2021, ADP Indemnity paid a premium of $240 million to enter into a reinsurance arrangement with Chubb to cover substantially all losses incurred by ADP Indemnity for the fiscal 2021 policy year up to $1 million per occurrence. ADP Indemnity recorded a pre-tax benefit of approximately $32 million in fiscal 2021 and a pre-tax loss of approximately $20 million in fiscal 2020, which were primarily a result of changes in our estimated actuarial losses. ADP Indemnity paid a premium of $260 million in July 2021 to enter into a reinsurance agreement with Chubb to cover substantially all losses incurred by ADP Indemnity for fiscal 2022 policy year on terms substantially similar to the fiscal 2021 reinsurance policy.
Other
The primary components of “Other” are certain corporate overhead charges and expenses that have not been allocated to the reportable segments, including corporate functions, costs related to our transformation office, legal settlements, severance costs, non-recurring gains and losses, the elimination of intercompany transactions, and other interest expense.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our GAAP results, we use the adjusted results and other non-GAAP metrics set forth in the table below to evaluate our operating performance in the absence of certain items and for planning and forecasting of future periods:
Adjusted Financial Measures U.S. GAAP Measures
Adjusted EBIT Net earnings
Adjusted provision for income taxes Provision for income taxes
Adjusted net earnings Net earnings
Adjusted diluted earnings per share Diluted earnings per share
Adjusted effective tax rate Effective tax rate
Organic constant currency Revenues
We believe that the exclusion of the identified items helps us reflect the fundamentals of our underlying business model and analyze results against our expectations and against prior period, and to plan for future periods by focusing on our underlying operations. We believe that the adjusted results provide relevant and useful information for investors because it allows investors to view performance in a manner similar to the method used by management and improves their ability to understand and assess our operating performance. The nature of these exclusions is for specific items that are not fundamental to our underlying business operations. Since these adjusted financial measures and other non-GAAP metrics are not measures of performance calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, they should not be considered in isolation from, as a substitute for, or superior to their corresponding U.S. GAAP measures, and they may not be comparable to similarly titled measures at other companies.
(a) We include the interest income earned on investments associated with our client funds extended investment strategy and interest expense on borrowings related to our client funds extended investment strategy as we believe these amounts to be fundamental to the underlying operations of our business model. The adjustments in the table above represent the interest income and interest expense that are not related to our client funds extended investment strategy and are labeled as “All other interest expense” and “All other interest income.”
(b) In fiscal 2021, transformation initiatives include impairment charges as a result of recognizing certain owned facilities at fair value given intent to sell and accordingly classified as held for sale and lease asset impairment charges, offset by gain on sale of assets and net reversals of charges related to other transformation initiatives, including severance.
Unlike other severance charges which are not included as an adjustment to get to adjusted results, these specific charges relate to actions taken as part of our broad-based, company-wide transformation initiative.
(c) Represents net severance cost related to excess capacity. Unlike certain other severance charges in prior periods that are not
included as an adjustment to get to adjusted results, these specific charges relate to actions that are part of our broad-based,
company-wide initiatives to address excess capacity across our business and functions, including charges in fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
(d) Represents legal settlements including an insurance recovery in fiscal 2021.
(e) The income tax provision/(benefit) was calculated based on the marginal rate in effect for the year ended June 30, 2021.
(f) The Adjusted effective tax rate is calculated as our Adjusted provision for income taxes divided by the sum of our Adjusted net earnings plus our Adjusted provision for income taxes.
The following table reconciles our reported growth rates to the non-GAAP measure of organic constant currency, which excludes the impact of acquisitions, the impact of dispositions, and the impact of foreign currency. The impact of acquisitions and dispositions is calculated by excluding the current year revenues of acquisitions until the one-year anniversary of the transaction and by excluding the prior year revenues of divestitures for the one-year period preceding the transaction. The impact of foreign currency is determined by calculating the current year result using foreign exchange rates consistent with the prior year. The PEO segment is not impacted by acquisitions, dispositions or foreign currency.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of June 30, 2021, cash and cash equivalents were $2.6 billion, which were primarily invested in time deposits and money market funds.
For corporate liquidity, we expect existing cash, cash equivalents, long-term marketable securities, cash flow from operations together with our $9.7 billion of committed credit facilities and our ability to access both long-term and short-term debt financing from the capital markets will be adequate to meet our operating, investing, and financing activities such as regular quarterly dividends, share repurchases, and capital expenditures for the foreseeable future. Our financial condition remains solid at June 30, 2021 and we have sufficient liquidity as noted above; however, given the uncertainty in the rapidly changing market and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our financial condition and liquidity.
For client funds liquidity, we have the ability to borrow through our financing arrangements under our U.S. short-term commercial paper program and our U.S., Canadian and United Kingdom short-term reverse repurchase agreements, together with our $9.7 billion of committed credit facilities and our ability to use corporate liquidity when necessary to meet short-term funding requirements related to client funds obligations. Please see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” for a further discussion of the risks, including with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic, related to our client funds extended investment strategy. See Note 8 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our short-term financing including commercial paper.
Operating, Investing and Financing Cash Flows
Our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities, as reflected in the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows are summarized as follows:
Net cash flows provided by operating activities increased due to a net favorable change in the components of operating assets and liabilities as compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
Net cash flows from investing activities changed due to the timing of proceeds and purchases of corporate and client funds marketable securities of $6,771.2 million.
Net cash flows from financing activities changed due to a net increase in the cash flow from client funds obligations of $11,549.4 million, which is due to the timing of impounds from our clients and payments to our clients' employees and other payees, and proceeds from debt issuances. These were partially offset by payments of debt, more cash returned to shareholders via share repurchases and dividends, and settlement of cash flow hedges in fiscal 2021.
We purchased approximately 8.2 million shares of our common stock at an average price per share of $170.04 during fiscal 2021, as compared to purchases of 6.2 million shares at an average price per share of $160.61 during fiscal 2020. From time to time, the Company may repurchase shares of its common stock under its authorized share repurchase program. The Company considers several factors in determining when to execute share repurchases, including, among other things, actual and potential acquisition activity, cash balances and cash flows, issuances due to employee benefit plan activity, and market conditions.
Capital Resources and Client Fund Obligations
We have $3.0 billion of senior unsecured notes with maturity dates in 2025, 2028, and 2030. We may from time to time revisit the long-term debt market to refinance existing debt, finance investments including acquisitions for our growth, and maintain the appropriate capital structure. However, there can be no assurance that volatility in the global capital and credit markets would not impair our ability to access these markets on terms acceptable to us, or at all. See Note 9 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our notes.
Our U.S. short-term funding requirements related to client funds are sometimes obtained on an unsecured basis through the issuance of commercial paper, rather than liquidating previously-collected client funds that have already been invested in available-for-sale securities. This commercial paper program provides for the issuance of up to $9.7 billion in aggregate maturity value. Our commercial paper program is rated A-1+ by Standard and Poor’s, Prime-1 (“P-1”) by Moody’s and+ by Fitch. These ratings denote the highest quality commercial paper securities. Maturities of commercial paper can range from overnight to up to 364 days. At June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had no commercial paper borrowing outstanding. Details of the borrowings under the commercial paper program are as follows:
Our U.S., Canadian, and United Kingdom short-term funding requirements related to client funds obligations are sometimes obtained on a secured basis through the use of reverse repurchase agreements, which are collateralized principally by
government and government agency securities, rather than liquidating previously-collected client funds that have already been invested in available-for-sale securities. These agreements generally have terms ranging from overnight to up to five business days. We have successfully borrowed through the use of reverse repurchase agreements on an as-needed basis to meet short-term funding requirements related to client funds obligations. At June 30, 2021 and 2020, there were $23.5 million and $13.6 million, respectively, of outstanding obligations related to the reverse repurchase agreements. Details of the reverse repurchase agreements are as follows:
We vary the maturities of our committed credit facilities to limit the refinancing risk of any one facility. We have a $3.75 billion, 364-day credit agreement that matures in June 2022 with a one year term-out option. In addition, we have a five-year $2.75 billion credit facility and a five-year $3.2 billion credit facility maturing in June 2024 and June 2026, respectively, each with an accordion feature under which the aggregate commitment can be increased by $500 million, subject to the availability of additional commitments. The primary uses of the credit facilities are to provide liquidity to the commercial paper program and funding for general corporate purposes, if necessary. We had no borrowings through June 30, 2021 under the credit facilities. We believe that we currently meet all conditions set forth in the revolving credit agreements to borrow thereunder, and we are not aware of any conditions that would prevent us from borrowing part or all of the $9.7 billion available to us under the revolving credit agreements. See Note 8 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our short-term financing including credit facilities.
Our investment portfolio does not contain any asset-backed securities with underlying collateral of sub-prime mortgages, alternative-A mortgages, sub-prime auto loans or sub-prime home equity loans, collateralized debt obligations, collateralized loan obligations, credit default swaps, derivatives, auction rate securities, structured investment vehicles or non-investment grade fixed-income securities. We own AAA-rated senior tranches of primarily fixed rate auto loan, credit card, equipment lease, and rate reduction receivables, secured predominantly by prime collateral. All collateral on asset-backed securities is performing as expected through June 30, 2021. In addition, we own U.S. government securities which primarily include debt directly issued by Federal Farm Credit Banks and Federal Home Loan Banks. Our client funds investment strategy is structured to allow us to average our way through an interest rate cycle by laddering the maturities of our investments out to five years (in the case of the extended portfolio) and out to ten years (in the case of the long portfolio). This investment strategy is supported by our short-term financing arrangements necessary to satisfy short-term funding requirements relating to client funds obligations. See Note 4 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our corporate investments and funds held for clients.
Capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 were $178.3 million, as compared to $168.3 million for fiscal 2020. We expect capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 to be between $200 million and $225 million.
Contractual Obligations
The following table provides a summary of our contractual obligations at June 30, 2021:
(1)These amounts represent the principal and interest payments of our debt.
(2)Included in these amounts are various facilities and equipment leases. We enter into operating leases in the normal course of business relating to facilities and equipment. The majority of our lease agreements have fixed payment terms based on the passage of time. Certain facility and equipment leases require payment of maintenance and real estate taxes and contain escalation provisions based on future adjustments in price indices. Our future operating lease obligations could change if we exit certain contracts or if we enter into additional operating lease agreements.
(3)Purchase obligations are comprised of a $260 million reinsurance premium with Chubb for the fiscal 2022 policy year, as well as obligations related to software subscription licenses and purchase and maintenance agreements on our software, equipment, and other assets.
(4)Based on current estimates, we expect to make cash payments up to $14.8 million in the next twelve months for obligations related to unrecognized tax benefits across various jurisdictions and tax periods. For $85.1 million of obligations related to unrecognized tax benefits we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates as to the period in which cash payments are expected to be paid.
(5)Compensation and benefits primarily relates to amounts associated with our employee benefit plans and other compensation arrangements. These amounts exclude the estimated contributions to our defined benefit plans, which are expected to be $10.0 million in fiscal 2022.
In addition to the obligations quantified in the table above, we had obligations for the remittance of funds relating to our payroll and payroll tax filing services. As of June 30, 2021, the obligations relating to these matters, which are expected to be paid in fiscal 2022, total $34,403.8 million and were recorded in client funds obligations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We had $34,905.8 million of cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities that were impounded from our clients to satisfy such obligations recorded in funds held for clients on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2021.
Separately, ADP Indemnity paid a premium of $260 million in July 2021 to enter into a reinsurance agreement with Chubb to cover substantially all losses incurred by ADP Indemnity for the fiscal 2022 policy year. At June 30, 2021, ADP Indemnity had total assets of $564.2 million to satisfy the actuarially estimated unpaid losses of $487.4 million for the policy years since July 1, 2003. ADP Indemnity paid claims of $3.3 million and $4.4 million, net of insurance recoveries, in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Refer to the “Analysis of Reportable Segments - PEO Services” above for additional information regarding ADP Indemnity.
In the normal course of business, we also enter into contracts in which we make representations and warranties that relate to the performance of our services and products. We do not expect any material losses related to such representations and warranties.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Our overall investment portfolio is comprised of corporate investments (cash and cash equivalents, short-term and long-term marketable securities) and client funds assets (funds that have been collected from clients but have not yet been remitted to the applicable tax authorities or client employees).
Our corporate investments are invested in cash and cash equivalents and highly liquid, investment-grade marketable securities. These assets are available for our regular quarterly dividends, share repurchases, capital expenditures and/or acquisitions, as well as other corporate operating purposes. All of our short-term and long-term fixed-income securities are classified as available-for-sale securities.
Our client funds assets are invested with safety of principal, liquidity, and diversification as the primary objectives. Consistent with those objectives, we also seek to maximize interest income and to minimize the volatility of interest income. Client funds assets are invested in highly liquid, investment-grade marketable securities, with a maximum maturity of 10 years at the time of purchase, and money market securities and other cash equivalents.
We utilize a strategy by which we extend the maturities of our investment portfolio for funds held for clients and employ short-term financing arrangements to satisfy our short-term funding requirements related to client funds obligations. Our client funds investment strategy is structured to allow us to average our way through an interest rate cycle by laddering the maturities of our investments out to five years (in the case of the extended portfolio) and out to ten years (in the case of the long portfolio). As part of our client funds investment strategy, we use the daily collection of funds from our clients to satisfy other unrelated client funds obligations, rather than liquidating previously-collected client funds that have already been invested in available-for-sale securities. In circumstances where we experience a reduction in employment levels due to a slowdown in the economy, we may make tactical decisions to sell certain securities in order to reduce the size of the funds held for clients to correspond to client funds obligations. We minimize the risk of not having funds collected from a client available at the time such client’s obligation becomes due by impounding, in virtually all instances, the client’s funds in advance of the timing of payment of such client’s
obligation. As a result of this practice, we have consistently maintained the required level of client funds assets to satisfy all of our obligations.
There are inherent risks and uncertainties involving our investment strategy relating to our client funds assets. Such risks include liquidity risk, including the risk associated with our ability to liquidate, if necessary, our available-for-sale securities in a timely manner in order to satisfy our client funds obligations. However, our investments are made with the safety of principal, liquidity, and diversification as the primary goals to minimize the risk of not having sufficient funds to satisfy all of our client funds obligations. We also believe we have significantly reduced the risk of not having sufficient funds to satisfy our client funds obligations by consistently maintaining access to other sources of liquidity, including our corporate cash balances, available borrowings under our $9.7 billion commercial paper program (rated A-1+ by Standard and Poor’s, P-1 by Moody’s, and+ by Fitch, the highest possible short-term credit ratings), and our ability to engage in reverse repurchase agreement transactions and available borrowings under our $9.7 billion committed credit facilities. The reduced availability of financing during periods of economic turmoil, including the COVID-19 pandemic, even to borrowers with the highest credit ratings, may limit our ability to access short-term debt markets to meet the liquidity needs of our business. In addition to liquidity risk, our investments are subject to interest rate risk and credit risk, as discussed below.
We have established credit quality, maturity, and exposure limits for our investments. The minimum allowed credit rating at time of purchase for corporate, Canadian government agency and Canadian provincial bonds is BBB, for asset-backed securities is AAA, and for municipal bonds is A. The maximum maturity at time of purchase for BBB-rated securities is 5 years, for single A rated securities is 10 years, and for AA-rated and AAA-rated securities is 10 years. Time deposits and commercial paper must be rated A-1 and/or P-1. Money market funds must be rated AAA/Aaa-mf.
Details regarding our overall investment portfolio are as follows:
We are exposed to interest rate risk in relation to securities that mature, as the proceeds from maturing securities are reinvested. Factors that influence the earnings impact of interest rate changes include, among others, the amount of invested funds and the overall portfolio mix between short-term and long-term investments. This mix varies during the fiscal year and is impacted by daily interest rate changes. The annualized interest rate earned on our entire portfolio decreased from 2.1% for fiscal 2020 to 1.5% for fiscal 2021. A hypothetical change in both short-term interest rates (e.g., overnight interest rates or the federal funds rate) and intermediate-term interest rates of 25 basis points applied to the estimated average investment balances and any related short-term borrowings would result in approximately a $22 million impact to earnings before income taxes over the ensuing twelve-month period ending June 30, 2022. A hypothetical change in only short-term interest rates of 25 basis points applied to the estimated average short-term investment balances and any related short-term borrowings would result in approximately an $10 million impact to earnings before income taxes over the ensuing twelve-month period ending June 30, 2022.
We are exposed to credit risk in connection with our available-for-sale securities through the possible inability of the borrowers to meet the terms of the securities. We limit credit risk by investing in investment-grade securities, primarily AAA-rated and AA- rated securities, as rated by Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, DBRS for Canadian dollar denominated securities, and Fitch for asset-backed and commercial-mortgage-backed securities. Approximately 72% of our available-for-sale securities held a AAA-rating or AA-rating at June 30, 2021. In addition, we limit amounts that can be invested in any security other than U.S. government and government agency, Canadian government, and United Kingdom government securities.
We operate and transact business in various foreign jurisdictions and are therefore exposed to market risk from changes in foreign currency exchange rates that could impact our consolidated results of operations, financial position, or cash flows. We manage our exposure to these market risks through our regular operating and financing activities and, when deemed appropriate, through the use of derivative financial instruments. We may use derivative financial instruments as risk management tools and not for trading purposes.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1, Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and other comprehensive income. We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used to prepare the Consolidated Financial Statements. The estimates are based on historical experience and assumptions believed to be reasonable under current facts and circumstances. Actual amounts and results could differ from these estimates made by management. In addition, as the duration and severity of COVID-19 pandemic are uncertain, certain of our estimates could require further judgment or modification and therefore carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. As events continue to evolve, our estimates may change materially in future periods. Certain accounting policies that require significant management estimates and are deemed critical to our results of operations or financial position are Revenue Recognition (including Deferred Costs), Goodwill and Income Taxes. Refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of our policies for Revenue Recognition (including Deferred Costs), Goodwill and Income Taxes.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the value assigned to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment or more frequently when an event or circumstance indicates that goodwill might be impaired.
The Company’s annual goodwill impairment assessment as of June 30, 2021 was performed for all reporting units using a quantitative approach by comparing the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. We estimated the fair value of each reporting unit using, as appropriate, the income approach, which is derived using the present value of future cash flows discounted at a risk-adjusted weighted-average cost of capital, and the market approach, which is based upon using market multiples of companies in similar lines of business. Significant assumptions used in determining the fair value of our reporting units include projected revenue growth rates, profitability projections, working capital assumptions, the weighted average cost of capital, the determination of appropriate market comparison companies, and terminal growth rates. Several of these assumptions including projected revenue growth rates and profitability projections are dependent on our ability to upgrade, enhance, and expand our technology and services to meet client needs and preferences. As such, the determination of fair value requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions related to forecasts of future revenue and operating margins. Based upon the quantitative assessment, the Company has concluded that goodwill is not impaired. As the assumptions used in the income approach and market approach can have a material impact on the fair value determinations, we performed a sensitivity analysis and determined that a one percentage point increase in the weighted-average cost of capital would not result in an impairment of goodwill for all reporting units and their fair values substantially exceeded their carrying values.