ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
INTRODUCTION
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report to enhance the understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations. The following discussion and analysis represents year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion and analysis of year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 are omitted from this Annual Report and are located in Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on March 10, 2020.
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements about our business, operations, and financial performance based on current plans and estimates that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections of this Annual Report titled “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
OVERVIEW
We are a leading provider of security, automation, and smart home solutions serving consumer and business customers in the U.S. We offer many ways to help protect and connect customers by providing 24/7 professional monitoring services as well as delivering lifestyle-driven solutions through professionally installed DIFM, DIY, mobile, and digital-based offerings for residential, small business, and larger commercial customers.
Our baseline security and automation offerings involve the sale, installation, and monitoring of security and premises automation systems designed to detect intrusion; control access; sense movement, smoke, fire, carbon monoxide, flooding, temperature, and other environmental conditions and hazards; and address personal emergencies such as injuries, medical emergencies, or incapacitation. Upon the occurrence of certain initiating events, monitored security systems send event-specific signals to our monitoring centers. Our monitoring center personnel respond to alarms by relaying appropriate information to first responders, such as local police, fire departments, or medical emergency response centers; the customer; or others on the customer’s emergency contact list according to the type of service contract and customer preference. We continue to invest and innovate in our alarm verification technologies as well as partner with industry associations and various first responder agencies to help prioritize response events and enhance response policies. The breadth of our solutions allows us to meet a wide variety of customer needs.
The vast majority of our new customers enroll in our interactive and smart home solutions, which allow our customers to remotely monitor and manage their residential and commercial environments. Depending on the service plan and type of product installation, customers are able to remotely access information regarding the security of their residential or commercial environment, arm and disarm their security systems, adjust lighting or thermostat levels, monitor and react to defined events, or view real-time video from cameras covering different areas of their premises from web-enabled devices (such as smart phones, laptops, and tablet computers) and a customized web portal. Additionally, our interactive and smart home solutions enable customers to create customized and automated schedules for managing lights, thermostats, appliances, garage doors, cameras, and other connected devices. These systems can also be programmed to perform additional functions such as recording and viewing live video and sending text messages or other alerts based on triggering events or conditions.
As part of our innovative and dynamic emerging markets, we are extending the concept of security from the physical home or business to personal on-the-go security and safety with SoSecure, our mobile safety application, and other offerings. Customers’ increasingly mobile and active lifestyles have created new opportunities for us in the fast-growing market for self-monitored DIY products and mobile technology. Our technology also allows us to integrate with various third-party connected and wearable devices so that we can serve our customers whether they are at home or on-the-go. Additionally, we offer personal emergency response system products and services, which are supported by our monitoring centers and utilize our security monitoring infrastructure to provide customers with solutions helping to sustain independent living and encourage better self-care activities.
We have been successful in improving certain of our operating key performance indicators in recent years, such as customer acquisition efficiency and customer retention. We believe these improvements in our fundamentals have positioned us well to achieve long-term capital efficient growth. During 2020, we commenced certain ongoing strategic initiatives that we believe will be transformative to our business. We have seen an increase in interest in smart home offerings and other mobile technology applications that we believe is attributable to a variety of factors, including advancements in technology, younger
generations of consumers, and shifts to de-urbanization. Our strategic initiatives are intended to help us satisfy consumer and commercial demands in light of these macro-level dynamics and to position us for sustainable growth for years to come.
As of December 31, 2020, we served approximately 6.5 million recurring customers. We are one of the largest full-service security companies with a national footprint and we deliver an integrated customer experience by maintaining the industry’s largest sales, installation, and service field force, as well as a 24/7 professional monitoring network.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION
All financial information presented in this section has been prepared in U.S. dollars in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and includes the accounts of ADT Inc. and its subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions have been eliminated. We report financial and operating information in one segment. However, we expect the manner in which the CODM evaluates results to change during the first quarter of 2021, and as a result, we anticipate a change in our operating and reportable segment structure.
FACTORS AFFECTING OPERATING RESULTS
Our subscriber-based business requires significant upfront investment to generate new customers, which in turn provides predictable recurring revenue generated from our monitoring and other services. In order to optimize returns on customer acquisitions and cash flow generation, we focus on the following key drivers of our business: disciplined, high-quality customer additions; efficient customer acquisition; best-in-class customer service; customer retention; and costs incurred to provide ongoing services to customers.
Our ability to add new subscribers depends on the overall demand for our products and services, which is driven by a number of external factors. The overall economic condition in the geographies in which we operate can impact our ability to attract new customers and grow our business in all customer channels. Growth in our residential customer base can be influenced by the overall state of the housing market. Growth in our commercial customer base can be influenced by the rate at which new businesses begin operations or existing businesses grow. The demand for our products and services is also impacted by the perceived threat of crime, as well as the price and quality of the service of our competitors.
The monthly fees that we generate from any individual customer vary based on the level of service provided and customer tenure. We offer a wide range of services at various price points from basic burglar alarm monitoring to our full suite of interactive services. Our ability to increase monthly fees at the individual customer level depends on a number of factors, including our ability to effectively introduce and market additional features and services that increase the value of our offerings to customers, which we believe drives customers to purchase higher levels of service and supports our ability to make periodic adjustments to pricing.
A portion of our customer base can be expected to cancel its service every year. Customers may choose not to renew or may terminate their contracts for a variety of reasons, including relocation, cost, loss to competition, or service issues. Attrition has a direct impact on our financial results, including revenue, operating income, and cash flows.
COVID-19 Pandemic
During March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus as a pandemic (the “COVID-19 Pandemic”), which has become increasingly widespread in the U.S. Containment efforts and responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic have varied by individuals, businesses, and state and local municipalities, and in certain areas of the U.S, initial and precautionary measures helped mitigate the spread of the coronavirus. However, subsequent easing of such measures resulted in the re-emergence of the coronavirus. The COVID-19 Pandemic has had a notable adverse impact on general economic conditions, including the temporary closures of many businesses, increased governmental regulations, and reduced consumer spending due to significant unemployment and other effects attributable to the COVID-19 Pandemic. In order to continue to both protect our employees and serve our customers, we have adjusted and are continuously evolving certain aspects of our operations, which includes (i) detailed protocols for infectious disease safety for employees, (ii) daily wellness checks for employees, and (iii) certain work from home actions, including for the majority of our call center professionals.
While the COVID-19 Pandemic has impacted our commercial channel to a greater extent than our residential channel, we believe our overall recurring revenue and highly variable subscriber acquisition cost model provides a solid financial foundation for strong cash flow generation. Accordingly, we anticipate having sufficient liquidity and capital resources to continue (i) providing essential services, (ii) satisfying our debt requirements, and (iii) having the ability to return capital to our stockholders in the form of a regular quarterly dividend during the current challenging macroeconomic environment and the slowdown brought on by the COVID-19 Pandemic. We have not sought or requested government assistance as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic, but we did benefit from favorable cash flows and other benefits associated with certain income tax and
payroll tax provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). While we have incurred additional costs associated with personal protective equipment for our employees and work from home actions, we also instituted various temporary cost control measures. Furthermore, we believe the economic downturn, the recent civil unrest, and continued economic and COVID-19 Pandemic uncertainties increase awareness of the need for security, which together with a lower volume of customer relocations and the utilization of temporary pricing and retention initiatives for existing customers, may help counterbalance any increase in gross customer revenue attrition that we may experience as a result of reduced consumer or business spending caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic. Finally, we may see opportunities for additional acquisitions, continued investment in potential new revenue streams or capabilities, and low cost bulk account purchases.
We considered the emergence and pervasive economic impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in our assessment of our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, and certain accounting estimates as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020. Due to the evolving and uncertain nature of the COVID-19 Pandemic, it is possible that the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic could materially impact our estimates and consolidated financial statements in future reporting periods.
Radio Conversion Costs
The providers of 3G and CDMA cellular networks have notified us that they will be retiring their 3G and CDMA networks during 2022. Accordingly, during 2019, we commenced a program to replace the 3G and CDMA cellular equipment used in many of our security systems. We continue to estimate the range of net costs for this replacement program at $225 million to $300 million through 2022, of which we have incurred $77 million through December 31, 2020. We expect to incur approximately $145 million to $220 million of net costs during 2021. These amounts and ranges are net of any revenue we collect from customers associated with these radio replacements and cellular network conversions.
We seek to minimize these costs by converting customers during routine service visits whenever possible. During November 2020, we acquired Cell Bounce, a technology company with proprietary radio conversion technology in the form of a user-installable device, which is expected to allow for the transition of customers on 3G networks in a cost efficient and timely manner. The replacement program and pace of replacement are subject to change and may be influenced by our ability to access customer sites due to the COVID-19 Pandemic, cost-sharing opportunities with suppliers, carriers, and customers, as well as new and innovative technologies.
Commercial Agreement
In addition to the issuance and sale of Class B Common Stock to Google, we entered into the Commercial Agreement, pursuant to which Google has agreed to supply us with certain Google devices as well as certain Google video and analytics services (“Google Services”), for sale to our customers. Subject to customary termination rights related to breach and change of control, the Commercial Agreement has an initial term of seven years from the date that the Google Service is successfully integrated into our end-user security and automation platform, which is targeted for no later than June 30, 2022. If the integrated service is not launched by June 30, 2022 then we will be required to offer Google Services without integration for professional installations except for existing customers who already have ADT Pulse or ADT Control interactive services until such integration has been made. Further, subject to certain carve-outs, we have agreed to exclusively sell Google end-user video and sensing analytics services and smart-home, security and safety devices to our customers. The exclusivity restriction does not apply to, among others, sales of Blue by ADT DIY products and services, providing services to customers on certain of our legacy platforms, sales to large commercial customers, and sales of certain devices that Google does not supply to us.
The Commercial Agreement also contains customary termination rights for both parties. In addition, Google has rights to terminate the Commercial Agreement if (i) we divest any part of our direct to consumer business and the acquiring entity does not agree to assume all obligations under the Commercial Agreement, or (ii) we breach certain provisions of the Commercial Agreement and do not cure such breaches. In the event that we breach the Commercial Agreement in a manner reasonably likely to result in a material adverse effect on Google’s business or brand, or we breach certain data security and privacy obligations under the Commercial Agreement, we must suspend the sale of Google Services and certain devices during the applicable cure period. Upon termination of the Commercial Agreement, we will no longer have rights to sell the Google Service or devices to new customers, subject to an applicable transition period. In addition, the Google Services may not be accessible by our customers through our integrated end-user application during any cure period for our breach of certain data security and privacy provisions of the Commercial Agreement or upon termination of the agreement for a breach of such provisions.
The Commercial Agreement specifies that each party will contribute $150 million towards the joint marketing of devices and services, customer acquisition, training of our employees for the sales, installation, customer service, and maintenance for the product and service offerings, and technology updates for products included in such offerings. Each party is required to contribute such funds in three equal tranches, subject to the attainment of certain milestones.
Next Generation Platform
In November 2020, we announced the ongoing development of our ADT-owned next-generation professional security and automation technology platform, which is currently being developed in coordination with Google. Our comprehensive interactive platform is expected to provide customers with a seamless experience across security, life safety, automation, and analytics through a common application. Additionally, our platform is expected to integrate the user experience, customer service experience, and back-end support.
We expect to incur approximately $50 million during 2021 associated with the development of our next generation platform. These initiatives are in the early stages, and it is possible that we could experience a material increase in the costs associated with these initiatives.
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
The comparability of our results of operations has been impacted by the following:
Initial Public Offering
During January 2018, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 105,000,000 shares of common stock at an initial public offering price of $14.00 per share. Net proceeds from the IPO were $1.4 billion, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and offering expenses. The proceeds received from the IPO were used to reduce our debt and redeem the mandatorily redeemable preferred securities in full, which resulted in an aggregate loss on extinguishment of debt of $275 million. In addition, we modified certain share-based compensation awards as well as granted one-time awards in connection with the IPO, which represented approximately $116 million of share-based compensation expense during 2018.
As a result of our IPO, we incur additional legal, accounting, board compensation, and other expenses that we did not previously incur prior to becoming a public company, including costs associated with SEC reporting and corporate governance requirements. These requirements include compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended, as well as other rules implemented by the SEC and the national securities exchanges. Our consolidated financial statements following our IPO reflect the impact of these expenses.
Red Hawk Acquisition
During December 2018, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Red Hawk, a leader in commercial fire, life safety, and security services, for total consideration of approximately $316 million and cash paid of $299 million, net of cash acquired. We funded the Red Hawk Acquisition from a combination of debt financing and cash on hand. This acquisition accelerated our growth in the commercial security market and expanded our product portfolio with the introduction of commercial fire safety related solutions.
Disposition of Canadian Operations
During November 2019, we sold ADT Canada to TELUS for a selling price of $514 million (CAD $676 million). In connection with the sale of ADT Canada, we entered into a transition services agreement with TELUS whereby we provide certain post-closing services to TELUS related to the business of ADT Canada. Additionally, we entered into a non-competition and non-solicitation agreement with TELUS pursuant to which we will not have any operations in Canada, subject to limited exceptions for cross-border commercial customers and mobile safety applications, for a period of seven years. Finally, we entered into a patent and trademark license agreement with TELUS granting (i) the use of our patents in Canada for a period of seven years and (ii) exclusive use of our trademarks in Canada for a period of five years and non-exclusive use for an additional two years thereafter.
The sale of ADT Canada did not represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations and financial results, and therefore, did not meet the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations.
Defenders Acquisition
During January 2020, we acquired our largest independent dealer, Defender Holdings, Inc. (“Defenders”) (the “Defenders Acquisition”), for total consideration of approximately $290 million, which consisted of cash paid of $173 million, net of cash acquired, and the issuance of approximately 16 million shares of our Common Stock with a fair value of $114 million. In connection with the Defenders Acquisition, we recorded a loss from the settlement of a pre-existing relationship with Defenders in the amount of $81 million in merger, restructuring, integration, and other in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Equipment Ownership Model Change
During February 2020, we launched a new revenue model initiative for certain residential customers which (i) revised the amount and nature of fees due at installation, (ii) introduced a 60 month monitoring contract option, and (iii) introduced a new retail installment contract which allows qualifying residential customers to repay the fees due at installation over the course of a 24, 36, or 60 month interest-free period. Due to the requirements of our initial third-party consumer financing program, we also transitioned our security system ownership model from a predominately Company-owned model to a predominately customer-owned model (the “Equipment Ownership Model Change”).
During March 2020, we entered into the Receivables Facility. Under the terms of the Receivables Facility, we may receive up to $200 million of financing secured by retail installment contract receivables from transactions involving security systems that were sold under a customer-owned model. During April 2020, we amended the Receivables Facility to also permit financing secured by retail installment contract receivables from transactions occurring under the Company-owned model. During May 2020, we started to transition our security system ownership model back to a predominately Company-owned model.
In connection with the above, and with respect to transactions arising through Defenders, which has historically used a customer-owned ownership model, subsequent to the Defenders Acquisition, our residential transactions during 2020 included an increase in transactions based on a customer-owned model. We expect our transition to a Company-owned model to negatively impact revenue during 2021 due to different revenue recognition policies applicable to each ownership model. We are in the early stages of our revenue model initiative and we cannot be certain that this initiative or our transition back to a predominately Company-owned model, which is anticipated to include transactions arising through Defenders for a portion of 2021, will achieve the desired outcomes. Accordingly, the results of the new revenue model initiative and impact of our transition back to a predominately Company-owned model could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and key performance indicators.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
In evaluating our results, we utilize key performance indicators which include non-GAAP measures as well as certain other operating metrics such as recurring monthly revenue and gross customer revenue attrition. Our computations of key performance indicators may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Additionally, our operating metric key performance indicators are approximated as there may be variations to reported results in each period due to certain adjustments we might make in connection with the integration over several periods of acquired companies that calculated these metrics differently, or otherwise, including periodic reassessments and refinements in the ordinary course of business. These refinements, for example, may include changes due to systems conversions or historical methodology differences in legacy systems.
Recurring Monthly Revenue (“RMR”)
RMR is generated by contractual recurring fees for monitoring and other recurring services provided to our customers. We believe the presentation of RMR is useful because it measures the volume of revenue under contract at a given point in time.
Gross Customer Revenue Attrition
A portion of our customer base can be expected to cancel its service every year. Customers may choose not to renew or may terminate their contracts for a variety of reasons, including relocation, cost, loss to competition, or service issues. Gross customer revenue attrition has a direct impact on our financial results, including revenue, operating income, and cash flows.
Gross customer revenue attrition is defined as RMR lost as a result of customer attrition, net of dealer charge-backs and reinstated customers, excluding contracts monitored but not owned and DIY customers. Customer sites are considered canceled when all services are terminated. Dealer charge-backs represent customer cancellations charged back to the dealers because the customer canceled service during the charge-back period, which is generally thirteen months.
Gross customer revenue attrition is calculated on a trailing twelve-month basis, the numerator of which is the RMR lost during the period due to attrition, net of dealer charge-backs and reinstated customers, excluding contracts monitored but not owned and DIY customers, and the denominator of which is total annualized RMR based on an average of RMR under contract at the beginning of each month during the period.
As of January 1, 2019, in conjunction with the acquisition of LifeShield LLC, we began presenting gross customer revenue attrition excluding existing and new DIY customers. As a result, trailing twelve-month gross customer revenue attrition excludes DIY customers for all periods presented in this Annual Report. For all prior reports covering periods prior to January 1, 2019, trailing twelve-month gross customer revenue attrition included DIY customers. Including DIY customers as of December 31, 2018 rounds to the same percentage as presented in this Annual Report.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that we believe is useful to investors to measure the operational strength and performance of our business. Our definition of Adjusted EBITDA, a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) (the most comparable GAAP measure), and additional information, including a description of the limitations relating to the use of Adjusted EBITDA, are provided under “-Non-GAAP Measures.”
Free Cash Flow
Free Cash Flow is a non-GAAP measure that our management employs to measure cash that is available to repay debt, make other investments, and pay dividends. Our definition of Free Cash Flow, a reconciliation of Free Cash Flow to cash flows from operating activities (the most comparable GAAP measure), and additional information, including a description of the limitations relating to the use of Free Cash Flow, are provided under “-Non-GAAP Measures.”
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations, summary cash flow data, and key performance indicators for the periods presented.
_______________________
(1)Refer to the “-Key Performance Indicators” section for the definitions of these key performance indicators.
(2)Trailing twelve-month gross customer revenue attrition excludes DIY customers for all periods presented in this Annual Report. For all prior reports covering periods prior to January 1, 2019, trailing twelve-month gross customer revenue attrition included DIY customers. Including DIY customers as of December 31, 2018 rounds to the same percentage as presented in this Annual Report. Refer to the “-Key Performance Indicators” section for further details.
(3)Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are non-GAAP measures. Refer to the “-Non-GAAP Measures” section for the definitions of these terms and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
2020 Compared to 2019
Monitoring and Related Services Revenue
The decrease in monitoring and related services revenue was driven by a decrease in recurring revenue primarily due to the sale of ADT Canada. This decrease was offset by an increase in recurring revenue in the U.S. largely due to improvements in average pricing as new and existing residential customers selected higher priced interactive services as well as temporary price escalations on our existing customer base. Average customer count remained relatively flat due to recent improvements in attrition and customer additions.
The increase in RMR to $343 million as of December 31, 2020 from $336 million as of December 31, 2019 was primarily due to improvements in average pricing and net customer additions. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, gross customer revenue attrition was 13.1% and 13.4%, respectively. The improvement in attrition was primarily due to fewer customer relocations and the benefit of customer retention initiatives.
Installation and Other Revenue
The increase in installation and other revenue was primarily due to a higher volume of revenue from equipment sold outright to residential customers as a result of the Defenders Acquisition and the Equipment Ownership Model Change. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in the volume of revenue from equipment sold outright to commercial customers as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the sale of ADT Canada.
We expect our transition to a Company-owned model for our residential transactions to negatively impact revenue during 2021 due to different revenue recognition policies applicable to each ownership model.
Cost of Revenue
The increase in cost of revenue was primarily due to an increase in installation costs associated with a higher volume of transactions in which equipment was sold outright to residential customers as a result of the Defenders Acquisition and the Equipment Ownership Model Change. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in installation costs associated with a lower volume of transactions in which equipment was sold outright to commercial customers as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the sale of ADT Canada.
We expect our transition to a Company-owned model for our residential transactions to favorably impact cost of revenue during 2021 due to different accounting policies applicable to each ownership model.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to (i) an increase in expenses, excluding provision for credit losses, of $282 million associated with the Defenders Acquisition; (ii) a greater provision for credit losses of $58 million due to the estimated impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic, a higher volume of longer duration receivables, and from recent acquisitions; (iii) an increase in radio conversion costs of $59 million; and (iv) an increase in selling costs, which includes amortization of deferred subscriber acquisition costs. These increases were partially offset by (i) a decrease in advertising expenses, exclusive of incremental advertising expenses from recent acquisitions; (ii) a decrease of $43 million as a result of the sale of ADT Canada, (iii) a decrease of $20 million as a result of recoveries on notes receivable from a former strategic investment, and (iv) a decrease of $18 million from financing and consent associated with financing transactions.
Depreciation and Intangible Asset Amortization
The decrease in depreciation and intangible asset amortization expense was primarily due to a decrease of $70 million associated with the sale of ADT Canada as well as a decrease in the depreciation of subscriber system assets. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of the amortization of customer contracts acquired under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program.
Merger, Restructuring, Integration, and Other
The increase in merger, restructuring, integration, and other was primarily due to a loss of $81 million associated with the settlement of a pre-existing relationship in connection with the Defenders Acquisition. This increase was partially offset by $12 million of losses on a strategic investment, substantially all of which was recognized in 2019.
Goodwill Impairment
During 2019, we recorded a goodwill impairment loss of $45 million in connection with the sale of ADT Canada. We did not record a goodwill impairment loss during 2020.
Loss on Sale of Business
During 2019, we recorded a loss on sale of business of $62 million in connection with the sale of ADT Canada. The impact in connection with the sale of ADT Canada was not material during 2020.
Interest Expense, net
The increase in interest expense, net, was primarily due to (i) an increase of $52 million related to the reclassification of accumulated unrealized losses associated with interest rate swap contracts that have been de-designated as cash flow hedges, (ii) an increase of $52 million related to unrealized losses on interest rate swap contracts as a result of cash flow hedges no longer being highly effective, and (iii) an increase of $27 million related to an increase in outstanding principal on our fixed-rate first lien notes due to our financing transactions during 2020 and 2019. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in interest expense of $53 million related to our second lien notes due to partial redemptions during 2019 and a reduced interest rate as a result of refinancing during January 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
During 2020, loss on extinguishment of debt totaled $120 million and included (i) $66 million associated with the call premium and write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs in connection with the $1.2 billion redemption of second lien notes in February 2020, (ii) $49 million associated with the call premium and write-off of unamortized fair value adjustments in connection with the $1 billion redemption of first lien notes in September 2020, and (iii) $5 million associated with the partial write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and discount in connection with the $300 million repayment on a first lien term loan in December 2020.
During 2019, loss on extinguishment of debt totaled $104 million and included (i) $22 million associated with the call premium and partial write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs in connection with the $300 million partial redemption of the second lien notes in February 2019, (ii) $61 million associated with the call premium and partial write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs in connection with the $1 billion partial redemption of second lien notes in April 2019, (iii) $6 million associated with the partial write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and discount in connection with the $500 million repayment of a first lien term loan in April 2019, and (iv) $13 million associated with the partial write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and discount in connection with the amendment and restatement to our first lien credit agreement in September 2019.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit for 2020 was $147 million, resulting in an effective tax rate for the period of 18.8%. The effective tax rate primarily represents the federal income tax rate of 21.0%, a state statutory tax rate, net of federal benefits, of 2.9%, a 3.1% unfavorable impact from non-deductible charges primarily due to the Defenders Acquisition, and a 1.5% unfavorable impact from an increase in valuation allowances primarily due to tax credits and state net operating losses not expected to be utilized prior to expiration.
Income tax benefit for 2019 was $98 million, resulting in an effective tax rate for the period of 18.8%. The effective tax rate primarily represents the federal income tax rate of 21.0%, a state statutory tax rate, net of federal benefits, of 1.4%, a 6.8% favorable impact from net capital losses generated in the U.S. and Canada related to the sale of ADT Canada, a 1.9% favorable impact from amendments to prior year tax returns, a 9.4% unfavorable impact from valuation allowances established on the net capital losses generated in the U.S. and Canada related to the sale of ADT Canada, and a 2.3% unfavorable impact from non-deductible goodwill impairment loss.
NON-GAAP MEASURES
To provide investors with additional information in connection with our results as determined in accordance with GAAP, we disclose Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow as non-GAAP measures. These measures are not financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net income, operating income, cash flows, or any other measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is appropriate to provide additional information to investors about our operating profitability adjusted for certain non-cash items, non-routine items that we do not expect to continue at the same level in the future, as well as other items that are not core to our operations. Further, we believe Adjusted EBITDA provides a meaningful measure of operating profitability because we use it for evaluating our business performance, making budgeting decisions, and comparing our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss adjusted for (i) interest, (ii) taxes, (iii) depreciation and amortization, including depreciation of subscriber system assets and other fixed assets and amortization of dealer and other intangible assets, (iv) amortization of deferred costs and deferred revenue associated with subscriber acquisitions, (v) share-based compensation expense, (vi) merger, restructuring, integration, and other, (vii) losses on extinguishment of debt, (viii) radio conversion costs, (ix) financing and consent fees, (x) foreign currency gains/losses, (xi) acquisition related adjustments, and (xii) other charges and non-cash items.
There are material limitations to using Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA does not take into account certain significant items, including depreciation and amortization, interest, taxes, and other adjustments which directly affect our net income or loss. These limitations are best addressed by considering the economic effects of the excluded items independently, and by considering Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with net income or loss as calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Free Cash Flow
We believe that the presentation of Free Cash Flow is appropriate to provide additional information to investors about our ability to repay debt, make other investments, and pay dividends.
We define Free Cash Flow as cash flows from operating activities less cash outlays related to capital expenditures. We define capital expenditures to include accounts purchased through our network of authorized dealers or third parties outside of our authorized dealer network; subscriber system asset expenditures; and purchases of property and equipment. These items are subtracted from cash flows from operating activities because they represent long-term investments that are required for normal business activities.
Free Cash Flow adjusts for cash items that are ultimately within management’s discretion to direct, and therefore, may imply that there is less or more cash that is available than the most comparable GAAP measure. Free Cash Flow is not intended to represent residual cash flow for discretionary expenditures since debt repayment requirements and other non-discretionary expenditures are not deducted. These limitations are best addressed by using Free Cash Flow in combination with the cash flows as calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA
The table below reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to net loss for the periods presented:
___________________
(1)Represents costs, net of any incremental revenue earned, associated with replacing cellular technology used in many of our security systems pursuant to a replacement program.
(2)Represents fees expensed associated with financing transactions.
(3)Represents the conversion of intercompany loans that are denominated in Canadian dollars to U.S. dollars.
(4)Represents amortization of purchase accounting adjustments and compensation arrangements related to acquisitions.
(5)Represents other income related to $22 million of one-time licensing fees.
(6)Represents other charges and non-cash items. During 2020, included recoveries of $10 million associated with notes receivable from a former strategic investment. During 2019, included losses of $10 million associated with notes receivable from a former strategic investment and $6 million associated with an estimated legal settlement, net of insurance. During 2018, included a gain of $7.5 million from the sale of equity in a third-party that we received as part of a settlement.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to (i) an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, excluding items outside of our definition of Adjusted EBITDA, largely due to the Defenders Acquisition and the provision for credit losses and (ii) the sale of ADT Canada. The decrease was partially offset by an increase from transactions in which equipment is sold outright to customers, net of the associated costs.
We expect our transition to a Company-owned model for our residential transactions to negatively impact Adjusted EBITDA during 2021 due to different accounting policies applicable to each ownership model.
Refer to the discussions above under “-Results of Operations” for further details.
Free Cash Flow
The table below reconciles Free Cash Flow to cash flows from operating activities for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Refer to the discussion below under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further details regarding cash flows from operating activities.
Cash Outlays Related to Capital Expenditures
Dealer generated customer accounts and bulk account purchases, subscriber system asset expenditures, and purchases of property and equipment are included in cash flows from investing activities. Refer to the discussion below under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further details regarding cash flows from investing activities.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
Our principal liquidity requirements are to finance current operations, invest in acquiring and retaining customers, purchase property and equipment, service our debt, and finance potential mergers and acquisitions. Our liquidity requirements are primarily funded by our cash flows from operations, which include cash received from monthly recurring revenue and upfront fees received from customers, less cash costs to provide services to our customers, including general and administrative costs, certain costs associated with acquiring new customers, and interest payments.
We expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include cash generated from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and Receivables Facility, and the issuance of equity and/or debt securities as appropriate given market conditions. Our future cash needs are expected to include cash for operating activities, working capital, capital expenditures, strategic investments, periodic principal and interest payments on our debt, and potential dividend payments to our stockholders. We may, from time to time, seek to repay, redeem, repurchase, or refinance our indebtedness, or seek to retire or purchase our outstanding securities through cash purchases in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions or through a 10b5-1 repurchase plan or otherwise, and any such transactions may involve material amounts. We believe our cash position, borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility and Receivables Facility, and cash provided by operating activities are, and will continue to be, adequate to meet our operational and business needs in the next twelve months as well as our long-term liquidity needs.
Our ability to meet our debt service obligations and other capital requirements, including capital expenditures, as well as finance acquisitions, will depend on our future operating performance, which is subject to future general economic, financial, business, competitive, legislative, regulatory, and other conditions, many of which are beyond our control. Changes in our operating plans, material changes in anticipated sales, increased expenses, acquisitions, or other events may cause us to seek equity and/or debt financing in future periods. There can be no guarantee that financing will be available on acceptable terms or at all. Debt financing, if available, could impose additional cash payment obligations and subject us to additional covenants and operating restrictions.
We are a highly leveraged company with significant debt service requirements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $205 million in cash and cash equivalents and $400 million available under our revolving credit facility. In addition, we had an uncommitted available borrowing capacity of $124 million under our Receivables Facility, which is dependent on the volume of eligible retail installment contract receivables that can be sold under our Receivables Facility. The carrying amount of total debt outstanding was approximately $9.5 billion as of December 31, 2020.
Long-Term Debt
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following outstanding debt balances (excluding finance leases, deferred financing costs, discount, premium, and fair value adjustments):
First Lien Credit Agreement
Concurrently with the consummation of the Formation Transactions, we entered into a first lien credit agreement dated as of July 1, 2015 (together with subsequent amendments and restatements, the “First Lien Credit Agreement”), which has since been amended and restated on May 2, 2016, June 23, 2016, December 28, 2016, February 13, 2017, June 29, 2017, March 16, 2018, December 3, 2018, March 15, 2019 (effective April 4, 2019), and September 23, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the First Lien Credit Agreement consisted of the following:
•A term loan facility (“The First Lien Term Loan due 2026”) with an outstanding aggregate principal balance of $2.8 billion. Below is a summary of key events related to the First Lien Term Loan due 2026 during 2020 and 2019:
◦September 2019 - In connection with the amendment and restatement dated as of September 23, 2019 and with a $300 million repayment, we refinanced and replaced the $3.4 billion aggregate principal amount of the first lien term loan due in May 2022 (the “First Lien Term B-1 Loan”) with $3.1 billion aggregate principal amount of the First Lien Term Loan due 2026; and
◦December 2020 - We made a $300 million prepayment, which was applied to the remaining required principal payments of $8 million per quarter.
The First Lien Term Loan due 2026 is payable at maturity and we may make voluntary prepayments on the First Lien Term Loan due 2026 at any time prior to maturity at par. In addition, we are required to make annual prepayments on the outstanding First Lien Term Loan due 2026 with a percentage of our excess cash flow, as defined in the First Lien Credit Agreement, if our excess cash flow exceeds a certain specified threshold. We were not required to make any annual prepayments based on our excess cash flow as of December 31, 2020.
The First Lien Term Loan due 2026 had an interest rate calculated as, at our option, either (a) LIBOR determined by reference to the costs of funds for Eurodollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, adjusted for certain additional costs (“Adjusted LIBOR”) with a floor of 1.00%, or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50% per annum, (ii) the prime rate published by the Wall Street Journal, and (iii) one-month Adjusted LIBOR plus 1.00% per annum (“Base Rate”), in each case, plus the applicable margin of 3.25% for Adjusted LIBOR loans and 2.25% for Base Rate loans and is payable at least quarterly.
In January 2021, we amended the First Lien Credit Agreement to refinance the First Lien Term Loan due 2026, which reduced the applicable margin for Adjusted LIBOR loans from 3.25% to 2.750% and reduced the floor from 1.00% to 0.75%. Additionally, the amendment requires us to make quarterly payments equal to 0.250% of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the First Lien Term Loan due 2026, or approximately $7 million per quarter. We may make voluntary prepayments on the First Lien Term Loan due 2026 at any time prior to maturity at par, subject to a 1.00% prepayment premium in the event of certain specified events at any time during the six months after the closing date of the amendment.
•The first lien revolving credit facility with an aggregate available commitment of up to $400 million through March 16, 2023 (the “First Lien Revolving Credit Facility”). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility.
Borrowings under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility will bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (a) Adjusted LIBOR, or (b) the Base Rate, plus the applicable margin of 2.75% for Adjusted LIBOR loans and 1.75% for Base Rate loans. Additionally, we are required to pay a commitment fee between 0.375% and 0.50% (determined based on a net first lien leverage ratio) with respect to the unused commitments under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility.
Second Lien Notes due 2028
As of December 31, 2020, the 6.250% second-priority senior secured notes due 2028 (the “Second Lien Notes due 2028”) had an outstanding balance of $1.3 billion. The Second Lien Notes due 2028 were issued in January 2020 to refinance and redeem the then outstanding $1.2 billion aggregate principal amount of our 9.250% second-priority senior secured notes due 2023 (the “Prime Notes”).
The Second Lien Notes due 2028 will mature on January 15, 2028 with semi-annual interest payment dates of January 15 and July 15, and may be redeemed at our option as follows:
•Prior to January 15, 2023, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, (a) at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 redeemed, plus a make-whole premium and accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date or (b) for up to 40% of the original aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 and in an aggregate amount equal to the net cash proceeds of any equity offerings, at a redemption price equal to 106.250%, plus accrued and unpaid interest, so long as at least 50% of the original aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 shall remain outstanding after each such redemption.
•On or after January 15, 2023, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to 103.125% of the principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2028 redeemed and accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date. The redemption price decreases to 101.563% on or after January 15, 2024 and decreases to 100% on or after January 15, 2025.
Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the Second Lien Notes due 2028 at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date. The indenture governing the Second Lien Notes due 2028 also provides for customary events of default.
First Lien Notes due 2024 and First Lien Notes due 2026
As of December 31, 2020, the 5.250% first-priority senior secured notes due 2024 (the “First Lien Notes due 2024”) had an outstanding balance of $750 million and the 5.750% first-priority senior secured notes due 2026 (the “First Lien Notes due 2026”) had an outstanding balance of $1.4 billion. Below is a summary of key events related to the First Lien Notes due 2024 and First Lien Notes due 2026 during 2020 and 2019:
•April 2019 - We issued $750 million of First Lien Notes due 2024 and $750 million First Lien Notes due 2026, the proceeds of which were used to repurchase and cancel $1 billion of the Prime Notes and repay $500 million of the First Lien Term B-1 Loan (prior to refinancing as discussed above); and
•September 2019 - We issued an additional $600 million of the First Lien Notes due 2026, the proceeds of which were used to repay approximately $300 million of the First Lien Term B-1 Loan and repurchase and cancel $300 million of the 5.250% notes due 2020 issued by The ADT Corporation (our notes originally issued by The ADT Corporation, collectively, the “ADT Notes”).
Both the First Lien Notes due 2024 and the First Lien Notes due 2026 are due at maturity, and may be redeemed, in whole or in part, at any time at a make-whole premium plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the notes at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date.
First Lien Notes due 2027
As of December 31, 2020, the 3.375% first-priority senior secured notes due 2027 (the “First Lien Notes due 2027”) had an outstanding balance of $1 billion. The First Lien Notes due 2027 were issued in August 2020 to refinance and redeem the then outstanding $1 billion aggregate principal amount of the 6.250% ADT Notes due 2021 (the “ADT Notes due 2021”).
The First Lien Notes due 2027 will mature on August 31, 2027 with semi-annual interest payment dates of June 15 and December 15, and may be redeemed at our option as follows:
•Prior to August 31, 2026, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a make-whole premium plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to the redemption date.
•On or after August 31, 2026, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the First Lien Notes due 2027 redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to the redemption date.
Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the First Lien Notes due 2027 at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date. The indenture governing the First Lien Notes due 2027 also provides for customary events of default.
ADT Notes
As of December 31, 2020, the ADT Notes had an outstanding balance of $2.4 billion. Below is a summary of key events related to the ADT Notes during 2020 and 2019:
•September 2019 - We repurchased and cancelled $147 million aggregate principal amount of the ADT Notes due 2020 at a price of $149 million;
•October 2019 - We redeemed the remaining $153 million aggregate principal amount of the ADT Notes due 2020 at a price of $155 million; and
•September 2020 - We redeemed the outstanding $1 billion aggregate principal amount of the ADT Notes due 2021 at a price of $1.1 billion.
The ADT Notes are due at maturity, and may be redeemed, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus a make-whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest as of, but excluding, the redemption date. Additionally, upon the occurrence of specified change of control events, we must offer to repurchase the ADT Notes at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date.
Receivables Facility
During March 2020, we entered into the Receivables Facility. Under the terms of the Receivables Facility, we may receive up to $200 million of financing secured by retail installment contract receivables from transactions involving security systems that were sold under a customer-owned model. During April 2020, we amended the Receivables Facility to also permit financing secured by retail installment contract receivables from transactions occurring under our Company-owned model. The Receivables Facility has a one year revolving period until March 5, 2021, which may be extended, and bears interest at a variable rate. If the revolving period is not extended, we are required to repay the Receivables Facility in a manner consistent with the contractual collections of the underlying retail installment contract receivables. We may make voluntary prepayments on the Receivables Facility at any time prior to maturity at par.
We obtain financing by selling or contributing certain retail installment contract receivables to our wholly-owned consolidated bankruptcy-remote special purpose entity (the “SPE”), which, pursuant to the Receivables Facility, borrows funds secured by the transferred retail installment contract receivables. The SPE is a separate legal entity with its own creditors who will be entitled, prior to and upon the liquidation of the SPE, to be satisfied out of the SPE’s assets prior to any assets in the SPE becoming available to us (other than the SPE). Accordingly, the assets of the SPE are not available to pay our creditors (other than the SPE), although collections from the transferred retail installment contract receivables in excess of amounts required to repay the SPE’s creditors may be remitted to us during and after the term of the Receivables Facility. The SPE’s creditors have legal recourse to the transferred retail installment contract receivables owned by the SPE, but do not have any recourse to us (other than the SPE) for the payment of principal and interest on the SPE’s financing.
We service the transferred retail installment contract receivables and are responsible for ensuring that amounts collected from the transferred retail installment contract receivables are remitted to the SPE. We are required to deposit payments received from the transferred retail installment contract receivables into a segregated account subject to the control of the creditors under the Receivables Facility. On a monthly basis, the segregated account is utilized to make required principal, interest, and other payments due under the Receivables Facility.
During 2020, we received proceeds of $83 million under the Receivables Facility and repaid $7 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had an outstanding balance of $76 million and an uncommitted available borrowing capacity of $124 million under the Receivables Facility.
Debt Covenants
The First Lien Credit Agreement and indentures associated with the borrowings above contain certain covenants and restrictions that limit our ability to, among other things, incur additional debt or issue certain preferred equity interests; create liens on certain assets; make certain loans or investments (including acquisitions); pay dividends on or make distributions in respect of the capital stock or make other restricted payments; consolidate, merge, sell, or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets; sell assets; enter into certain transactions with affiliates; enter into sale-leaseback transactions; restrict dividends from our subsidiaries or restrict liens; change our fiscal year; and modify the terms of certain debt or organizational agreements.
We are also subject to a springing financial maintenance covenant under the First Lien Credit Agreement, which requires us to not exceed a specified first lien leverage ratio at the end of each fiscal quarter if the testing conditions are satisfied. The covenant is tested if the outstanding loans under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility, subject to certain exceptions, exceed 30% of the total commitments under the First Lien Revolving Credit Facility at the testing date (i.e., the last day of any fiscal quarter).
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenant and other maintenance tests for all our debt obligations, and we do not believe there is a material risk of future noncompliance with our financial covenant and other maintenance tests as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Dividends
During February 2019, we approved a dividend reinvestment plan (the “DRIP”), which allows stockholders to designate all or a portion of the cash dividends on their shares of common stock for reinvestment in additional shares of our common stock. The number of shares issued is determined based on the volume weighted average closing price per share of our common stock for the five trading days preceding the dividend payment and adjusted for any discounts, as applicable. The DRIP will terminate in accordance with its terms on February 27, 2021.
We declared the following dividends on common stock during 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Apollo elected to discontinue participation in the DRIP with respect to dividends on our Common Stock subsequent to the October 2, 2019 dividend payment.
On February 25, 2021, we announced a dividend of $0.035 per share to holders of Common Stock and Class B Common Stock of record on March 18, 2021, which will be distributed on April 1, 2021.
During 2020, we declared aggregate dividends of $0.14 per share on Common Stock ($108 million) and $0.07 per share on Class B Common Stock ($4 million). The amount of dividends settled in shares of Common Stock was not material.
During 2019, we declared aggregate dividends of $0.84 per share on Common Stock ($633 million), which included a special dividend of $0.70 per share on Common Stock. The amount of dividends settled in shares of Common Stock was approximately $68 million, which resulted in the issuance of 11 million shares of Common Stock.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 27, 2019, we approved the Share Repurchase Program, which authorized us to repurchase up to $150 million of our shares of Common Stock through February 27, 2021. On March 23, 2020, we approved an increase to $75 million, inclusive of the amount then remaining under the Share Repurchase Program, in the authorized repurchase amount and an extension of the Share Repurchase Program through March 23, 2021.
We may effect these repurchases pursuant to one or more trading plans to be adopted in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 (each, a “10b5-1 plan”) under the Exchange Act, in privately negotiated transactions, in open market transactions, or pursuant to an accelerated share repurchase program. We intend to conduct the Share Repurchase Program in accordance with Rule 10b-18 under the Exchange Act. We are not obligated to repurchase any of our shares of Common Stock and the timing and amount of any repurchases will depend on legal requirements, market conditions, stock price, alternative uses of capital, and other factors.
During 2020, there were no material repurchases of shares of our Common Stock under the Share Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $75 million remaining under the Share Repurchase Program.
During 2019, we repurchased 24 million shares of Common Stock for approximately $150 million under the Share Repurchase Program.
Cash Flow Analysis
The following table is a summary of our cash flow activity for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The decrease in net cash flows provided by operating activities during 2020 was primarily due to (i) an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses largely due to the Defenders Acquisition, (ii) an increase in the volume of transactions in which equipment was sold outright to residential customers, (iii) the sale of ADT Canada, (iv) $81 million related to the settlement of a pre-existing relationship in connection with the Defenders Acquisition, and (v) the acceleration of a portion of our 2020 incentive compensation payments into 2020. These decreases were partially offset by the favorable cash flow benefit associated with the deferral of payroll tax payments provided by the CARES Act and a decrease in interest payments of $35 million due to changes to the timing and amount of interest payments as a result of our recent financing transactions. The remainder of the activity in cash flows provided by operating activities related to changes in assets and liabilities due to the volume and timing of other operating cash receipts and payments with respect to when the transactions are reflected in earnings.
We expect our transition to a Company-owned model for our residential transactions to favorably impact net cash provided by operating activities during 2021 due to different accounting policies applicable to each ownership model.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The increase in net cash used in investing activities during 2020 was primarily due to the non-recurrence of $496 million of proceeds received as a result of the sale of ADT Canada during 2019 and an increase in cash used for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $116 million primarily due to the Defenders Acquisition during 2020. These increases were partially offset by (i) a decrease in the volume of dealer and bulk account purchases primarily due to the Defenders Acquisition, (ii) a decrease in the volume of subscriber system asset expenditures as a result of the Equipment Ownership Model Change and the sale of ADT Canada, and (iii) a decrease as a result of proceeds received associated with the sale of a strategic investment during 2020.
We expect our transition to a Company-owned model for our residential transactions to negatively impact net cash used in investing activities during 2021 due to different accounting policies applicable to each ownership model.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During 2020, net cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of (i) $415 million related to the net repayments of long-term borrowings, including call premiums, (ii) $109 million related to dividend payments on common stock, (iii) $38 million related to payments on interest rate swap contracts that included an other-than-insignificant financing element at inception, and (iv) $29 million related to the payment of deferred financing fees. These cash outflows were partially offset by (i) $448 million of proceeds, net of expenses, associated with the issuance of Class B Common Stock and (ii) $76 million of net proceeds under the Receivables Facility.
During 2019, net cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of (i) $565 million related to dividend payments on common stock, (ii) $442 million related to the net repayment of long-term borrowings, including call premiums, (iii) $150 million related to repurchases of common stock, and (iv) $54 million related to the payment of deferred financing fees.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table provides a summary of our commitments and contractual obligations for debt, leases, and other purchase obligations as of December 31, 2020:
______________________
(1)Represents the contractual principal payments of our debt obligations as of December 31, 2020. Finance lease obligations, discounts, deferred financing costs, and purchase accounting fair value adjustments are excluded.
(2)Represents the estimated interest payments on our debt obligations as of December 31, 2020. Interest payments on our fixed-rate debt are calculated based on the contractual terms. Interest payments on our variable-rate debt, including the effects of our interest rate swaps, are calculated based on a forward LIBOR curve (or floor, whichever is higher) plus the applicable margin in effect as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Represents lease payments on our operating lease obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(4)Represents the principal and interest payments on our finance lease obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(5)Represents contractual obligations for purchases of goods or services, including purchase orders, related to agreements entered into in the ordinary course of business that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms of the transaction as of December 31, 2020. Excludes contractual obligations related to the Commercial Agreement with Google, which requires us and Google to each contribute $150 million towards certain joint commercial efforts. Each party is required to contribute such funds in three equal tranches, subject to the attainment of certain milestones. Refer to Note 9 “Equity” for further details.
We have not included in the contractual obligations table approximately $66 million of unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, related to various tax positions we have taken. These liabilities may increase or decrease over time primarily as a result of tax examinations, and given the status of the examinations, we cannot reliably estimate the period of any cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. In addition, we have not included the minimum required contributions to our defined benefit pension plans as the aggregate contributions are not material. Finally, we have not included our off-balance sheet guarantees of $83 million, which primarily relate to standby letters of credit on our insurance programs.
During the first quarter of 2021, we entered into commitments of approximately $54 million to purchase certain parts used in the program to replace 3G and CDMA cellular equipment used in our security systems.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of December 31, 2020, our guarantees totaled $83 million and primarily related to standby letters of credit on our insurance programs. We do not have any other material off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to select accounting policies and make estimates that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Management’s estimates are based on the relevant information available at the end of each period. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or market conditions. The following accounting policies are based on, among other things, estimates and judgments made by management that include inherent risks and uncertainties.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily through contractual monthly recurring fees received for monitoring and related services provided to customers. In transactions in which we provide monitoring and related services but retain ownership of the security system, our performance obligations primarily include monitoring, related services (such as maintenance agreements), and a material right associated with the one-time non-refundable fees received in connection with the initiation of a monitoring contract that the customer will not be required to pay again upon a renewal of the contract, which is referred to as deferred subscriber acquisition revenue. The portion of the transaction price associated with monitoring and related services revenue is recognized when the services are provided to the customer and is reflected in monitoring and related services revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Deferred subscriber acquisition revenue is deferred and recorded as deferred subscriber acquisition revenue in the Consolidated Balance Sheets upon initiation of a monitoring contract. Deferred subscriber acquisition revenue is amortized on a pooled basis into installation and other revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations over the estimated life of the customer relationship using an accelerated method consistent with the amortization of subscriber system assets and deferred subscriber acquisition costs associated with the transaction.
In transactions involving a security system that is sold outright to the customer, our performance obligations generally include monitoring, related services, and the sale and installation of the security system. For such arrangements, we allocate a portion of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on relative standalone selling price, which is determined using observable internal or external pricing and profitability metrics. Revenue associated with the sale and installation of a security system is recognized either at a point in time or over time based upon the nature of the transaction and contractual terms and is reflected in installation and other revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For revenue recognized over time, progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation is primarily measured using a cost-to-cost measure of progress method. The cost input is based primarily on contract cost incurred to date compared to total estimated contract cost. This measure of progress method includes forecasts based on the best information available and reflects our judgment to faithfully depict the value of the services transferred to the customer. The portion of the transaction price associated with monitoring and related services revenue is recognized when the services are provided to the customer and is reflected in monitoring and related services revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Subscriber System Assets, net and Deferred Subscriber Acquisition Costs, net
We capitalize certain costs associated with transactions in which we retain ownership of the security system as well as incremental selling expenses related to acquiring customers. These costs include equipment, installation costs, and other incremental costs and are recorded in subscriber system assets, net and deferred subscriber acquisition costs, net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These assets embody a probable future economic benefit as they contribute to the generation of future monitoring and related services revenue for us.
Subscriber system assets represent capitalized equipment and installation costs incurred in connection with transactions in which we retain ownership of the security system. Upon customer termination, we may retrieve such assets. Deferred subscriber acquisition costs represent incremental selling expenses (primarily commissions) related to acquiring customers.
Subscriber system assets and any related deferred subscriber acquisition costs resulting from customer acquisitions are accounted for on a pooled basis based on the month and year of acquisition. We depreciate and amortize our pooled subscriber system assets and related deferred subscriber acquisition costs using an accelerated method over the estimated life of the customer relationship, which is 15 years. We periodically perform lifing studies to estimate the expected life of the customer relationship and the attrition pattern of our customers. The lifing studies are based on historical customer terminations and are used to establish the amortization rates of our customer account pools in order to reflect the pattern of future benefit. The results of the lifing studies indicate that we can expect attrition to be the greatest in the initial years of asset life; therefore, an accelerated method best matches the future amortization cost with the estimated revenue stream from these customer pools. In order to align the depreciation and amortization of subscriber system assets and related deferred costs to the pattern in which their economic benefits are consumed, the accelerated method utilizes an average declining balance rate of approximately 250%
and converts to straight-line methodology when the resulting charge is greater than that from the accelerated method, resulting in an average charge of approximately 55% of the pool within the first five years, 25% within the second five years, and 20% within the final five years.
Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
Definite-lived intangible assets relate to customer relationships, dealer relationships, and other definite-lived intangible assets that originated from business acquisitions as well as contracts with customers purchased under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program or from other third parties.
Customer relationships, which primarily originated from the Formation Transactions and the ADT Acquisition, are amortized over a period of up to 20 years based on management estimates about the amounts and timing of estimated future revenue from customer accounts and average customer account life that existed at the time of the related business acquisition. Dealer relationships originated from the Formation Transactions and the ADT Acquisition and are primarily amortized over 19 years based on management estimates about the longevity of the underlying dealer network and the attrition of those respective dealers that existed at the time of the related business acquisition. Other definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over a period of up to 10 years on a straight-line basis.
We maintain a network of agreements with third-party independent alarm dealers who sell alarm equipment and ADT Authorized Dealer-branded monitoring and interactive services to end users. The dealers in this program generate new end-user contracts with customers which we have the right, but not the obligation, to purchase from the dealer. Purchases of contracts with customers under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program, or from other third parties, are considered asset acquisitions and are recorded at their contractually determined purchase price. We may charge back the purchase price of any end-user contract if the contract is canceled during the charge-back period, which is generally thirteen months from the date of purchase. We record the amount of the charge back as a reduction to the purchase price.
Purchases of contracts with customers under the ADT Authorized Dealer Program, or from other third parties, are accounted for on a pooled basis based on the month and year of acquisition. We amortize our pooled contracts with customers using an accelerated method over the estimated life of the customer relationship, which is 15 years. The accelerated method for amortizing these contracts utilizes an average declining balance rate of approximately 300% and converts to straight-line methodology when the resulting amortization charge is greater than that from the accelerated method, resulting in an average amortization of approximately 65% of the pool within the first five years, 25% within the second five years, and 10% within the final five years.
Long-Lived Asset Impairments
We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be fully recoverable. We group assets at the lowest level for which cash flows are separately identified. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of the asset group to its expected future undiscounted cash flows. If the expected future undiscounted cash flows of the asset group are less than its carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value less costs to sell. The calculation of the fair value less costs to sell of an asset group is based on assumptions concerning the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows and assumed discount rates, reflecting varying degrees of perceived risk.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Impairment
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized and are tested for impairment at least annually as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each year and more often if an event occurs or circumstances change which indicate it is more-likely-than-not that fair value is less than carrying amount. The annual impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets may be completed through qualitative assessments. We may elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to a quantitative impairment test for any reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset in any period. We may resume the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset in any subsequent period.
Goodwill
Under a qualitative approach, the impairment test for goodwill consists of an assessment of whether it is more-likely-than-not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit, or if a qualitative assessment indicates it is more-likely-than-not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we proceed to a quantitative approach.
Under a quantitative approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit and compare it to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using the income approach, which discounts projected cash flows using market participant assumptions. The income approach includes significant assumptions including, but not limited to, forecasted revenue, operating profit margins, operating expenses, cash flows, perpetual growth rates, and discount rates. The estimated fair value of a reporting unit calculated using the income approach is sensitive to changes in the underlying assumptions. In developing these assumptions, we rely on various factors including operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows, and other market data. Examples of events or circumstances that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the underlying judgments and factors and ultimately impact the estimated fair value determinations may include such items as a prolonged downturn in the business environment, changes in economic conditions that significantly differ from our assumptions in timing or degree, volatility in equity and debt markets resulting in higher discount rates, and unexpected regulatory changes. As a result, there are inherent uncertainties related to these judgments and factors in applying them to the goodwill impairment tests. During the fourth quarter 2020, and in connection with a reporting unit change, we qualitatively tested our former reporting units immediately prior to the change and quantitatively tested our new reporting units immediately following the change. Based on the results of these tests, the fair values of both reporting units exceeded their carrying amounts.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Under a qualitative approach, the impairment test for an indefinite-lived intangible asset consists of an assessment of whether it is more-likely-than-not that an asset’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment for any indefinite-lived intangible asset, or if a qualitative assessment indicates it is more-likely-than-not that the estimated carrying amount of such asset exceeds its fair value, we proceed to a quantitative approach.
Under a quantitative approach, we estimate the fair value of an asset and compare it to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. The fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is determined based on the nature of the underlying asset. Our only indefinite-lived intangible asset is the ADT trade name. The fair value of the ADT trade name is determined under a relief from royalty method, which is an income approach that estimates the cost savings that accrue to us that we would otherwise have to pay in the form of royalties or license fees on revenue earned through the use of the asset. The utilization of the relief from royalty method requires us to make significant assumptions including revenue growth rates, the implied royalty rate, and the discount rate.
Business Combinations
We account for business acquisitions under the acquisition method of accounting. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business acquisitions are recorded at the date of acquisition at their estimated fair values, with any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired recorded as goodwill. Significant judgment is required in estimating the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and in assigning useful lives to certain definite-lived intangible and tangible assets. Accordingly, we may engage third-party valuation specialists to assist in these determinations. The fair value estimates are based on available information as of the acquisition date and assumptions deemed reasonable by management but are inherently uncertain.
Loss Contingencies
We record accruals for losses that are probable and reasonably estimable. These accruals are based on a variety of factors such as judgment, probability of loss, opinions of internal and external legal counsel, and actuarially determined estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported based upon historical claims experience. Legal costs in connection with claims and lawsuits in the ordinary course of business are expensed as incurred. Additionally, we record insurance recovery receivables from third-party insurers when recovery has been determined to be probable.
Income Taxes
We file a consolidated federal return for our U.S. entities and separate returns for each Canadian entity.
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between the recognition of revenue and expenses for income tax and financial reporting purposes and between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. We record the effect of a tax rate or law change on our deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period of enactment. Future tax rate or law changes could have a material effect on our results of operations, financial condition, or cash flows.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, and our forecast of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we develop assumptions related to the amount of future pre-tax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage our underlying businesses.
We recognize positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return in the consolidated financial statements when it is more-likely-than-not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50%) that the position would be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. A recognized tax position is then measured at the largest amount of benefit with greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We record liabilities for positions that have been taken but do not meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. We adjust the liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits in light of changing facts and circumstances; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a change to the estimated liabilities.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Refer to Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for further discussion about recent accounting pronouncements.