ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those we currently anticipate as a result of the factors we describe under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and other risks as well as other factors that are not currently known to us, that we currently consider immaterial or that are not specific to us, such as general economic conditions.
Overview
We are a home care services provider operating in three segments: personal care, hospice and home health. Our services are principally provided in-home under agreements with federal, state and local government agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private individuals. Our consumers are predominantly “dual eligible,” meaning they are eligible to receive both Medicare and Medicaid benefits. Managed care revenues accounted for 38.6%, 37.8% and 33.9% of our revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
A summary of our financial results for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is provided in the table below.
As of December 31, 2020, we provided our services in 22 states through approximately 214 offices. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we served approximately 66,000, 61,000 and 57,000 discrete individuals, respectively. Our personal care segment also includes staffing services, with clients including assisted living facilities, nursing homes and hospice facilities.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On January 31, 2020, the HHS Secretary declared a national public health emergency due to a novel coronavirus. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, the disease caused by this novel coronavirus, a pandemic. This disease continues to spread throughout the United States and other parts of the world. State and local governments, together with public health officials, have recommended and mandated precautions to mitigate the spread of the virus, including closures of and limitations on public facilities, parks, schools, restaurants, many businesses and other locations of public assembly. As a result, COVID-19 continues to affect the overall economic conditions in the United States. Although many of the restrictions have eased across the country, some areas are re-imposing closures and other restrictions as a result of increasing rates of COVID-19 infection in recent months. As vaccines are being distributed across the country, the FDA continues to facilitate the development of therapeutics to combat COVID-19 as well as provide oversight for the development of additional vaccines. There are no reliable estimates of how long the pandemic will last, how many people are likely to be affected by it or the duration or types of restrictions that will be imposed or re-imposed as the situation is continuously evolving. For these and other reasons, we are unable to predict the long-term impact of the pandemic on our business at this time.
We continue to monitor the impacts on our operations, and have taken precautions intended to minimize the risk to our consumers, patients, caregivers and employees. We have created a COVID-19 Response Team that is responsible for creating and communicating policy, training and the latest COVID-19 updates to all employees. Most employees in our headquarters in Frisco, TX, and our support center in Downers’ Grove, IL, continue to work remotely, and we do not believe this arrangement has had a material impact on our ability to maintain business operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, COVID-19 expenses were approximately $7.8 million, which were mostly offset by $4.9 million of temporary rate increases from certain payors in our personal care segment and $1.4 million related to the utilization of a portion of the Provider Relief Funds received in November 2020 and included in cost of service revenues on the Consolidated Statements of Income. As of December 31, 2020, the Company deferred the recognition of $4.2 million of payments received from payors for COVID-19 reimbursement, included within accrued expenses, which will be recognized if we incur specific expenses such as additional PPE or will be returned as stipulated if COVID-19 expenses are not incurred. Three of our primary markets, New Mexico, New York and Illinois, have been significantly affected by the pandemic, with high numbers of cases reported. However, relevant authorities have universally designated our services as “essential,” exempting our services and providers from many of the
restrictions described above. In addition, the impact of the travel restrictions and social distancing requirements on the Company’s operations for our consumer population has been minimal. For example, in our personal care services segment, we provide non-medical assistance with activities of daily living, primarily to persons who are at increased risk of hospitalization or institutionalization, such as the elderly, chronically ill or disabled. Most of these consumers are largely confined to their homes, and a significant number of our caregivers provide services to only one consumer, often a family member. We have implemented several new procedures to further reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission, including a new screening process for both the caregiver and the consumer and the expansion of the use of PPE from our hospice and home health segments to include our personal care segment. We are not able to reasonably predict the total costs we will incur related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and such costs could be substantial. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, older adults and people with certain underlying medical conditions are at a higher risk for serious illness from COVID-19.
Prior to the widespread impacts of COVID-19, the primary limitation on our growth had been the difficulty to attract and retain sufficient caregivers in an environment of very low unemployment rates. Under the CARES Act, all states provided 13 additional weeks of federally funded Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Assistance benefits to people who exhaust their regular state benefits, followed by additional weeks of federally funded unemployment benefits in states with high unemployment (up to 13 or 20 weeks depending on state laws) through December 31, 2020. This relief was expanded by the Continued Assistance for Unemployed Workers Act, signed into law on December 27, 2020, which provides up to 50 weeks of unemployment benefits plus an additional $300 per week in supplemental benefits. With the widespread adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the hospitality and other labor-intensive industries, we continue to believe we will have an opportunity to increase our hiring of new caregivers in the long term. However, in the near term, the enhanced unemployment benefits offered by several states have suppressed the opportunity to attract this new pool of potential caregivers in these states. For example in September 2020, the state of New York announced the LWA program, which provides an additional $300 in weekly benefits to unemployed individuals.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also impacted our reimbursements from payors. Although we experienced a high volume of consumers suspending their personal care services due to health concerns, many of these consumers subsequently resumed our services. This reduction was partially offset by an increase in demand for our services by patients recovering from COVID-19 who have been released from the hospital but are still suffering lingering effects of the virus.
COVID-19 Relief
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal and state governments have passed legislation, promulgated regulations, and taken other administrative actions intended to assist healthcare providers in providing care to COVID-19 patients and other patients during the public health emergency. These temporary measures include relief from Medicare conditions of participation requirements for healthcare providers, relaxation of licensure requirements for healthcare professionals, relaxation of privacy restrictions for telehealth remote communications, promoting use of telehealth by expanding the scope of services for which Medicare reimbursement is available, and limited waivers of fraud and abuse laws for activities related to COVID-19 during the emergency period. The current federal public health emergency declaration expires April 21, 2021, but HHS has indicated it will likely extend through 2021. The HHS Secretary may renew the declaration for successive 90-day periods for as long as the emergency continues to exist and may terminate the declaration whenever he determines that the emergency no longer exists.
One of the primary sources of relief for healthcare providers is the CARES Act, which was expanded by the PPPHCE Act and the CAA. In total, the CARES Act, the PPPHCE Act and the CAA include $178 billion in funding to be distributed through the Provider Relief Fund to eligible providers, including public entities and Medicare- and/or Medicaid-enrolled providers. Provider Relief Fund payments are intended to compensate healthcare providers for lost revenues and health care related expenses incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and are not required to be repaid, provided that recipients attest to and comply with certain terms and conditions, including limitations on balance billing and not using funds received from the Provider Relief Fund to reimburse expenses or losses that other sources are obligated to reimburse.
In April 2020, the Company received grants in an aggregate principal amount of $6.9 million, for which it did not apply, from the Provider Relief Fund as part of the automatic general distributions by HHS. The Company returned these funds in June 2020. In November 2020, the Company received grants in an aggregate principal amount of $13.7 million from the Provider Relief Fund, for which we applied. The Company utilized $1.4 million of these funds for healthcare related expenses attributable to COVID-19 that were unreimbursed by other sources in the period ended December 31, 2020 and, in accordance with the current guidance issued by HHS, expects to utilize additional funds through June 30, 2021, at which point any unused funds will be returned. We are required to properly and fully document the use of such funds in reports to HHS. The Company’s ability to utilize and retain some or all of such funds will depend on the magnitude, timing and nature of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the terms and conditions of the funds received. In April 2020, Queen City Hospice received grants in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $2.5 million, for which it did not apply, from the Provider Relief Fund as part of the automatic general distributions by HHS. Queen City Hospice used approximately $0.6 million of the funds for healthcare related expenses attributable to COVID-19 that were unreimbursed by other sources. Queen City Hospice intends to repay $1.9 million, which represents the remainder of the grants received but not utilized, in 2021. Commercial organizations that receive annual total awards of $750,000 or more in federal funding, including payments received through the Provider Relief Fund, are subject to federal audit requirements.
In addition, the CARES Act expands the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program to increase cash flow to providers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Hospice and home health providers were able to request an advance or accelerated
payment of up to 100% of the Medicare payment amount for a three-month period (not including Medicare Advantage payments). The Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program payments are a loan that providers must pay back. Recoupment of these payments was due to begin in August, but CMS has delayed the recoupment process for these payments, based on amended repayment terms imposed by the CAA, enacted October 1, 2020, until one year after payment was issued. In April 2020, Queen City Hospice received an amount equal to $10.8 million pursuant to the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program. Queen City Hospice did not repay the funds prior to the completion of our acquisition of Queen City Hospice, however, Queen City Hospice intends to repay such funds in March 2021, prior to any CMS recoupment and before any interest accrues.
The CARES Act and related legislation also include other provisions offering financial relief, for example temporarily lifting the Medicare sequester, which would have otherwise reduced payments to Medicare providers by 2%, from May 1, 2020, through March 31, 2021 (but also extending sequestration through 2030). The Medicare sequester relief resulted in an increase of $0.2 million to home health net service revenues and $1.3 million to hospice net service revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additional financial relief under the CARES Act includes a temporary 6.2% increase in the FMAP intended to broadly support the solvency of state Medicaid programs.
The CARES Act also provides for certain federal income and other tax changes, including the deferral of the employer portion of Social Security payroll taxes. The Company received a cash benefit of approximately $7.1 million related to the deferral of employer payroll taxes for 2020 under the CARES Act, for the period April 2, 2020 through June 30, 2020. Effective July 1, 2020, the Company began paying its deferred portion of employer Social Security payroll taxes and expects to repay the $7.1 million in 2021.
As the COVID-19 pandemic has progressed, the federal government is considering additional stimulus measures, federal agencies continue to issue related regulations and guidance, and the public health emergency continues to evolve. We continue to assess the potential impact of COVID-19 and government responses to the pandemic, including the enactment and implementation of the CARES Act, the PPPHCE Act, the CAA and other stimulus legislation, on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Acquisitions
In addition to our organic growth, we have grown through acquisitions that have expanded our presence in current markets or facilitated our entry into new markets where in-home care has been moving to managed care organizations.
On June 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of VIP for approximately $29.9 million. With the purchase of VIP, we expanded our personal care services in the state of New York and into the New York City metropolitan area. We funded this acquisition through the delayed draw term loan portion of our credit facility and available cash.
On August 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Alliance for approximately $23.5 million. Additionally, we acquired the assets of Foremost Home Care (“Foremost”) for approximately $1.4 million. We funded these acquisitions through a combination of our revolving credit facility and available cash. With the purchase of Alliance, we expanded our personal care, home health and hospice operations in the state of New Mexico. The addition of Foremost supported our growth strategy in the New York City market area.
On October 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Hospice Partners for approximately $135.6 million including the amount of acquired excess cash held by Hospice Partners at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $5.5 million). We funded the acquisition with a portion of the net proceeds of our Public Offering. With the purchase of Hospice Partners, we expanded our hospice operations through 21 locations in Idaho, Kansas, Missouri, Oregon, Texas and Virginia. Hospice Partners also launched a palliative care program in Texas in 2018.
On July 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of A Plus for approximately $14.5 million, including the amount of excess cash held by A Plus at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $2.8 million), with funding provided by available cash. With the purchase of A Plus, we expanded our personal care services in the state of Montana.
On November 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of County Homemakers for approximately $15.8 million, including the amount of acquired excess cash held by County Homemakers at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $1.1 million), with funding provided by available cash. With the purchase of County Homemakers, we expanded our personal care services in the state of Pennsylvania.
On December 4, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Queen City Hospice for approximately $194.8 million, including the amount of acquired excess cash held by Queen City Hospice at the closing of the acquisition (approximately $15.4 million). With the purchase of Queen City Hospice, we expanded our Hospice services in the state of Ohio. Additionally, on December 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of SunLife Home Care for approximately $1.7 million. With the purchase of SunLife Home Care, we expanded our personal care services in the state of Arizona. We funded these acquisitions through a combination of our revolving credit facility and available cash.
Revenue by Payor and Significant States
Our payor clients are principally federal, state and local governmental agencies and managed care organizations. The federal, state and local programs under which the agencies operate are subject to legislative and budgetary changes and other risks that can influence reimbursement rates. We are experiencing a transition of business from government payors to managed care organizations, which we believe aligns with our emphasis on coordinated care and the reduction of the need for acute care.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our revenue by payor and significant states by segment were as follows:
We derive a significant amount of our net service revenues in Illinois, which represented 37.7%, 38.2% and 45.0% of our net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
A significant amount of our revenue is derived from one payor client, the Illinois Department on Aging, the largest payor program for our Illinois personal care operations, which accounted for 23.0%, 25.3% and 31.7% of our net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The state of Illinois finalized its fiscal year 2020 budget with the inclusion of an appropriation to raise in-home care rates to offset the costs of previous minimum wage increases in Chicago and other areas of the state that were imposed beginning on July 1, 2018. These rates were originally set to be effective July 1, 2019, with in-home care rates to be initially increased by 10.9% to $20.28 from $18.29 to partially offset the costs of the minimum wage hikes. Rates were then further increased on January 1, 2020 by an additional 7.7% to $21.84, providing full funding for both the Chicago minimum wage increases and a statewide raise for all current in-home caregivers.
The Illinois Department on Aging, in conjunction with Illinois’ Health Care and Family Services, announced that the new rates would become effective retroactive to July 1, 2019 for services covered by managed care organizations. On January 15, 2020, the Department on Aging announced confirmation that a one-time bonus payment would be paid to providers who have provided services to clients not enrolled in a managed care organization, for the time period of July 1, 2019 through November 30, 2019 using an updated hourly rate of $20.28. The bonus payment of $6.8 million was recognized as net service revenues as of December 31, 2019.
On November 26, 2019, the Chicago City Council voted to approve additional increases in the Chicago minimum wage to $14 per hour beginning July 1, 2020 to $15 per hour beginning July 1, 2021. The Company and its trade association will be looking for additional funding in the state of Illinois fiscal year 2022 budget to offset the cost of the July 1, 2021 additional minimum wage increases.
The state of Illinois finalized its fiscal year 2021 budget, with in-home care rates to be increased by 7.1% to $23.40 from $21.84, effective January 1, 2021, contingent upon federal CMS approval. Although federal CMS approval was obtained by the state, as a result of on-going state revenue declines due to COVID-19 and the failure of the November 2020 referendum to revise the Illinois income tax code, on December 15, 2020, the Governor of Illinois announced a delay in the implementation of the scheduled rate increase to April 1, 2021.
Our business will benefit from the rate increases noted above, but there is no assurance that additional offsetting rate increases will be adopted in Illinois for fiscal years beyond fiscal year 2021, and our financial performance will be adversely impacted for any periods in which an additional offsetting reimbursement rate increase is not in effect.
Impact of Changes in Medicare and Medicaid Reimbursement
Home Health
In June 2019, CMS began the Review Choice Demonstration for Home Health Services in Illinois to identify and prevent fraud, reduce the number of Medicare appeals, and improve provider compliance with Medicare program requirements. The demonstration expanded to Ohio in September 2019 and to Texas in March 2020. Home health agencies may initially select from the following claims review and approval processes: pre-claim review, post-payment review, or a minimal post-payment review with a 25% payment reduction. Home health agencies that maintain high compliance levels will be eligible for additional, less burdensome options. Beginning in March 2020, CMS temporarily paused certain claims processing requirements for the Review Choice Demonstration due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but the agency resumed its activities under the demonstration in August 2020. CMS is in the process of expanding the Review Choice Demonstration to North Carolina and Florida, but is phasing in participation due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. We are currently unable to predict what impact, if any, this program may have on our result of operations or financial position.
Home health services provided to Medicare beneficiaries are paid under the Medicare Home Health Prospective Payment System (“HHPPS”). Historically, the HHPPS was based on 60-day episodes of care and used a case-mix system that relied on the number of visits to determine payment. Effective January 1, 2020, CMS transitioned to 30-day periods of care within each 60-day certification of patient eligibility period for home health payments and implemented the Patient-Driven Groupings Model (“PDGM”) as part of the shift toward value-based care. The PDGM classifies patients based on clinical characteristics and other patient information into payment categories and eliminates the use of therapy service thresholds. Also effective January 1, 2020, CMS finalized a policy allowing therapy assistants to provide maintenance therapy services in the home and modified certain requirements relating to the home health plan of care.
CMS updates the HHPPS payment rates each calendar year. Effective January 1, 2021, HHPPS rates increased by 2.0%, which reflects a 2.3% market basket update, reduced by a multifactor productivity adjustment of 0.3 percentage points. CMS expects Medicare payments to home health agencies in 2021 to increase in the aggregate by 1.9% after accounting for the 0.1 percentage point decrease in payments to home health agencies due to changes in the rural add-on percentages also mandated by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. Home health providers that do not comply with quality data reporting requirements are subject to a 2 percentage point reduction to their market basket update.
Historically, CMS paid home health providers 50% to 60% of anticipated payment at the beginning of a patient’s care episode through a request for anticipated payment (“RAP”). However, to address potential program integrity risks, CMS has phased out RAP payments. In calendar year 2021, CMS will not provide any up-front payments in response to a RAP but will continue to require home health providers to submit streamlined RAPs as notice that a beneficiary is under a home health period of care. In calendar year 2022, CMS will replace the RAP with a “Notice of Admission.”
Hospice
Hospice services provided to Medicare beneficiaries are paid under the Medicare Hospice Prospective Payment System, under which CMS sets a daily rate for each day a patient is enrolled in the hospice benefit. CMS updates these rates each federal fiscal year. Effective October 1, 2020, CMS increased hospice payment rates by 2.4%. This reflected a 2.4% market basket increase reduced by the multifactor productivity adjustment of 0.04 percentage points. Additionally, the aggregate cap, which limits the total Medicare reimbursement that a hospice may receive based on an annual per-beneficiary cap amount and the number of Medicare patients served, was updated to $30,683.93 for federal fiscal year 2021. If a hospice’s Medicare payments exceed its aggregate cap, it must repay Medicare the excess amount.
New York CDPAP
On February 11, 2021, the state of New York announced its initial selection of parties to enter into contracts as a Lead Fiscal Intermediary under its previously announced RFO process related to its CDPAP, in which the Company currently participates as a provider. The Company was not one of the selected entities in the initial RFO process. The announcement followed an extended RFO process first begun in 2019, with responses originally due in February 2020. It is unclear at this time whether the selected parties have the ability to fully meet the CDPAP Program needs or the timing and outcome of next steps in the process. Management believes changes are unlikely to occur during an estimated 6 to 12 month transition period and any financial impact to the Company in 2021 is expected to be immaterial. Based on its current run rate, the Company estimates that it receives approximately $52 million in annualized revenue from the program. The Company will continue to explore its options, including appeals, other arrangements under which the Company may continue to provide these services, and expense reductions to minimize any potential final impact of the RFO process.
Components of our Statements of Income
Net Service Revenues
We generate net service revenues by providing our services directly to consumers and primarily on an hourly basis in our personal care segment, on a daily basis in our hospice segment and on an episodic basis in our home health segment. We receive payment for providing such services from our payor clients, including federal, state and local governmental agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private consumers.
In our personal care segment, net service revenues are principally provided based on authorized hours, determined by the relevant agency, at an hourly rate, which is either contractual or fixed by legislation and are recognized at the time services are rendered. In our hospice segment, net service revenues are provided based on daily rates for each of the levels of care and are recognized as services are provided. In our home health segment, net service revenues are based on an episodic basis at a stated rate and recognized based on the number of days elapsed during a period of care within the reporting period. We also record estimated implicit price concessions (based primarily on historical collection experience) related to uninsured accounts to record self-pay revenues at the estimated amounts we expect to collect.
Cost of Service Revenues
We incur direct care wages, payroll taxes and benefit-related costs in connection with providing our services. We also provide workers’ compensation and general liability coverage for our employees. Employees are also reimbursed for their travel time and related travel costs in certain instances.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses include our costs for operating our network of local agencies and our administrative offices. Our agency expenses consist of costs for supervisory personnel, our community care supervisors and office administrative costs. Personnel costs include wages, payroll taxes, and employee benefits. Facility costs include rents, utilities, and postage, telephone and office expenses. Our corporate and support center expenses include costs for accounting, information systems, human resources, billing and collections, contracting, marketing and executive leadership. These expenses consist of compensation, including stock-based compensation, payroll taxes, employee benefits, legal, accounting and other professional fees, travel, general insurance, rents, provision for doubtful accounts and related facility costs. Expenses related to streamlining our operations such as costs related to terminated employees, termination of professional services relationships, other contract termination costs and asset write-offs are also included in general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciable assets consist principally of furniture and equipment, network administration and telephone equipment, and operating system software. Depreciable and leasehold assets are depreciated or amortized on a straight-line method over their useful lives or, if less and if applicable, their lease terms. We amortize our intangible assets with finite lives, consisting of customer and referral relationships, trade names, trademarks and non-competition agreements, principally using accelerated methods based upon their estimated useful lives.
Provision for Doubtful Accounts
For 2018 and subsequent periods, subsequent adjustments that are determined to be the result of an adverse change in the payor’s ability to pay are recognized as provision for doubtful accounts with the adoption of ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The majority of what historically was classified as provision for doubtful accounts under operating expenses is now treated as an implicit price concession factored into net service revenues.
Interest Income
Illinois law entitles designated service program providers to receive a prompt payment interest penalty based on qualifying services approved for payment that remain unpaid after a designated period of time. As the amount and timing of the receipt of these payments are not certain, the interest income is recognized when received. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we received $0.7 million and $2.3 million, respectively, in prompt payment interest. For the year ended December 31, 2020, prompt payment interest was immaterial. While we may be owed additional prompt payment interest, the amount, timing, and intent to provide such payments remains uncertain, and we will continue to recognize prompt payment interest income upon satisfaction of these constraints.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is reported in the Consolidated Statements of Income when incurred and consists of (i) interest and unused credit line fees on the credit facility evidenced by the Credit Agreement, as defined under “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” (ii) interest on our financing lease obligations and (iii) amortization and write-off of debt issuance costs.
Income Tax Expense
All of our income is from domestic sources. We incur state and local taxes in states in which we operate. Our effective income tax rate was 21.0%, 22.2% and 20.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, compared to our federal statutory rate of 21%. Our effective income tax rates were principally due to the inclusion of state taxes and non-deductible compensation, partially offset by an excess tax benefit and the use of federal employment tax credits.
Discontinued Operations
Effective March 1, 2013, we sold substantially all of the assets used in our then home health business (the “2013 Home Health Business”) in Arkansas, Nevada and South Carolina, and 90% of the 2013 Home Health Business in California and Illinois. Effective October 1, 2017, we sold the remaining 10% ownership interest in the 2013 Home Health Business in California and Illinois. Therefore, we have segregated the 2013 Home Health Business operating results and presented them separately as discontinued operations for all periods presented, see Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our consolidated results of operations.
Net service revenues increased by 17.9% to $764.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $648.8 million in 2019. The increase was due to an increase in same store growth of 5.9% and an 8.1% increase in revenues per billable hour for the year ended December 31, 2020 in our personal care segment. In addition, net service revenue increased by $47.7 million and $1.8 million from our hospice and home health segments, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in our hospice segment was primarily due to an increase in average daily census, partially attributed to the acquisitions of Alliance on August 1, 2019 and Hospice Partners on October 1, 2019. The increase in our home health segment was primarily due to an increase in total visits partially related to the acquisition of Alliance on August 1, 2019.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues, increased to 29.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 27.6% in 2019. The increase was mainly attributed to the full-year effect in 2020 of the acquisition of our relatively higher margin hospice segment businesses in 2019.
General and administrative expenses increased to $169.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $133.9 million in 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in an increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of $24.0 million, an increase in data processing of $1.9 million and an increase in rent expense of $3.1 million. In addition, professional fees increased by $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues increased to 22.2% for 2020, from 20.6% in 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs.
Depreciation and amortization increased to $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $10.6 million in 2019, primarily due to the increase of intangible asset amortization related to the full-year effect in 2020 of our fiscal year 2019 acquisitions and fiscal year 2020 acquisitions.
All of our income is from domestic sources. We incur state and local taxes in states in which we operate. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our federal statutory rate was 21.0%. The effective income tax rate was 21.0% and 22.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared to our federal statutory rate of 21%. Our effective income tax rates was principally due to the inclusion of state taxes and non-deductible compensation, partially offset by an excess tax benefit and the use of federal employment tax credits. The excess tax benefit is a discrete item, related to the vesting of equity shares, which requires us to recognize the benefit fully in the period.
Results of Operations - Segments
The following tables and related analysis summarize our operating results and business metrics by segment:
Personal Care Segment
(1)
Average billable census is the number of unique clients receiving a billable service during the year and is the total census divided by months in operation during the period.
(2)
Billable hours is the total number of hours served to clients during the period. Average billable hours per census per month is billable hours divided by average billable census. Billable hours per day is total billable hours divided by the number of business days in the period. Revenues per billable hour is revenue, attributed to billable hours, divided by billable hours.
(3)
Same store growth reflects the change in year-over-year revenue for the same store base. We define the same store base to include those stores open for at least 52 full weeks. This measure highlights the performance of existing stores, while excluding the impact of acquisitions, new store openings and closures.
*
Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
We derive a significant amount of our net service revenues from operations in Illinois, which represented 44.6% and 42.6% of our net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net service revenues from state, local and other governmental programs accounted for 50.2% and 52.2% of net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Managed care organizations accounted for 44.3% and 41.3% of net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with commercial insurance, private pay and other payors accounting for the remainder of net service revenues. One payor client, the Illinois Department on Aging, accounted for 23.0% and 25.3% of net service revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net service revenues increased by 11.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Net service revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in same store sales of 5.9% and an increase in revenues per billable hour of 8.1%. Revenue per billable hours increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly attributed to rate increases discussed above.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues, increased from 25.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 25.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a decrease in direct service employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of 0.4%.
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in a $4.5 million increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Hospice Segment
(1)
Represents referral process and new patients on service during the period.
(2)
Average daily census is total patient days divided by the number of days in the period, adjusted for patient days for acquisitions beginning on date of acquisition.
(3)
Average length of stay is the average number of days a patient is on service, calculated upon discharge, and is total patient days divided by total discharges in the period.
(4)
Patient days is days of service for all patients in the period.
(5)
Revenue per patient day is hospice revenue divided by the number of patient days in the period.
*
Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
Hospice generates revenue by providing care to patients with a life expectancy of six months or less, as well as related services for their families. Net service revenues from Medicare accounted for 92.9% and 92.6% and managed care organizations accounted for 4.9% and 5.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net service revenues increased by $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in average daily census, partially attributed to the acquisitions of Alliance on August 1, 2019 and Hospice Partners on October 1, 2019.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 53.4% and 49.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of net service revenues was partially due to a decrease of
pharmacy costs of 0.6%, direct service employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of 0.3%, medical equipment of 0.6%, direct service supply costs of 0.4% and other direct expenses related to acquisition synergies.
The hospice segment’s general and administrative expenses primarily consist of administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs, rent, information technology and office expenses. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 25.1% and 23.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in a $10.9 million increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs and a $0.9 million increase in rent expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Home Health Segment
(1)
Represents new patients during the period.
(2)
A home health certification period begins with a start of care visit and continues for 60 days. If at the end of the initial certification, the patient continues to require home health services, a recertification is required. This represents the number of recertifications during the period.
(3)
Total volume is total admissions and total recertifications in the period.
(4)
Represents number of services to patients in the period.
*
Management deems these metrics to be key performance indicators. Management uses these metrics to monitor our performance, both in our existing operations and acquisitions. Many of these metrics serve as the basis of reported revenues and assessment of these, provide direct correlation to the results of operations from period to period and facilitate comparison with the results of our peers. Historical trends established in these metrics can be used to evaluate current operating results, identify trends affecting our business, determine the allocation of resources and assess the quality and potential variability of our cash flows and earnings. We believe they are useful to investors in evaluating and understanding our business but should not be used solely in assessing the Company’s performance. These key performance indicators should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the GAAP financial measures presented herein to fully evaluate and understand the business as a whole. These measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled performance indicators used by other companies.
Home health generates revenue by providing home health services on a short-term, intermittent or episodic basis to individuals, generally to treat an illness or injury. Net service revenues from Medicare accounted for 78.6% and 77.6% and managed care organizations accounted for 19.6% and 20.3% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net service revenues
increased by $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue increased primarily due to an increase in total visits partially related to the acquisition of Alliance on August 1, 2019.
Gross profit, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 31.4% and 31.3% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of net service revenues was due to a decrease in mileage of 0.8%, partially offset by an increase of direct service supplies of 0.5% and direct employee wages, taxes and benefit costs of 0.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The home health segment’s general and administrative expenses consist of administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs, rent, information technology and office expenses. General and administrative expenses, expressed as a percentage of net service revenues was 23.2% and 22.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to acquisitions that resulted in a $0.6 million increase in administrative employee wages, taxes and benefit costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
For the comparison of fiscal years 2019 and 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 - “Results of Operations” on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on August 10, 2020 under the subheading-“Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand and cash from operations and borrowings under our credit facility. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash balances of $145.1 million and $111.7 million, respectively.
We drew approximately $135.0 million on the revolver portion of our credit facility to fund, in part, the acquisition of Queen City Hospice on December 4, 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had a total of $178.5 million in revolving loans, with an interest rate of 1.90%, and $18.1 million of term loans, with an interest rate of 1.90%, outstanding on our credit facility. After giving effect to the amount drawn on our credit facility, approximately $9.0 million of outstanding letters of credit and borrowing limits based on an advance multiple of adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreement), we had $112.6 million available for borrowing under our credit facility.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company drew approximately $23.5 million on the revolver portion of its credit facility to fund, in part, the purchase price for the Alliance acquisition on August 1, 2019. Additionally, the Company drew $19.6 million under the delayed draw term loan portion of its credit facility to fund, in part, the acquisition of VIP on June 1, 2019. At December 31, 2019, we had a total of $43.4 million revolving credit loans, with an interest rate of 3.44%, and $18.9 million of term loans, with an interest rate of 3.45%, outstanding on our credit facility. After giving effect to the amount drawn on our credit facility, approximately $10.0 million of outstanding letters of credit and borrowing limits based on an advance multiple of adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreement), we had $191.4 million available for borrowing under our credit loan facility.
Cash flows from operating activities represent the inflow of cash from our payor clients and the outflow of cash for payroll and payroll taxes, operating expenses, interest and taxes. Due to its revenue deficiencies as well as budget and financing issues, from time to time the state of Illinois has reimbursed us on a delayed basis with respect to our various agreements including with our largest payor, the Illinois Department on Aging. The open receivable balance from the Illinois Department on Aging decreased by $16.4 million from $37.6 million as of December 31, 2019 to $21.2 million as of December 31, 2020. As discussed in Part I, Item 1 - “Business” hereof, the state of Illinois finalized its fiscal year 2021 budget with the inclusion of an appropriation to raise in-home care rates to offset previous minimum wage increases by the Chicago City Counsel.
COVID-19
The economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic poses significant risks to states’ budgets for the 2021 fiscal year, which began July 1 in most states. Depending on the severity and length of a downturn, sales tax collections and income tax withholdings could continue to be depressed in fiscal 2021 and, potentially, future fiscal years. States could face significant fiscal challenges and may have no choice but to revise their revenue forecasts and adjust their budgets for fiscal 2021 and, potentially, future fiscal years, accordingly. Indeed, Illinois, New York and New Mexico, our top three markets, have revised revenue estimates down for the 2021 fiscal year. For example, in New York, which started its fiscal year April 1, the state comptroller recently estimated that the state would collect at least $10 billion less than originally forecasted, the first year-to-year cut since 2011. The current New York fiscal plan authorizes the state of New York to issue up to $8 billion in short-term bonds to provide funds in case of reduced revenues during the fiscal year. The state issued $1.1 billion of bonds on October 28, 2020. The New York fiscal plan also allows two state authorities to provide the state with a $3 billion line of credit in the new fiscal year. Congress could provide additional relief with
additional stimulus and relief legislation, including extension of unemployment benefits and relief for states. We cannot determine the impact that COVID-19 may have on states budgets for 2021 or beyond, however, such impacts could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
At December 31, 2020, we had $145.1 million of cash on hand and $112.6 million of available, unused committed capacity under our credit facility. Our credit facility requires us to maintain a total net leverage ratio not exceeding 3.75:1.00. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our financial covenants under the Credit Agreement. Although we believe our liquidity position remains strong, we can provide no assurance that we will remain in compliance with the covenants in our Credit Agreement, and in the future, it may prove necessary to seek an amendment with the bank lending group under our credit facility. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of financial and capital markets, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional funds on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
In April 2020, the Company received grants in an aggregate principal amount of $6.9 million, for which it did not apply, from the Provider Relief Fund as part of the automatic general distributions by HHS. The Company returned these funds in June 2020. In November 2020, the Company received grants in an aggregate principal amount of $13.7 million from the Provider Relief Fund, for which we applied. The Company utilized $1.4 million of these funds for healthcare related expenses attributable to COVID-19 that were unreimbursed by other sources in the period ended December 31, 2020 and, in accordance with the current guidance issued by HHS, expects to utilize additional funds through June 30, 2021, at which point any unused funds will be returned. We are required to properly and fully document the use of such funds in reports to HHS. The Company’s ability to utilize and retain some or all of such funds will depend on the magnitude, timing and nature of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the terms and conditions of the funds received. In April 2020, Queen City Hospice received grants in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $2.5 million, for which it did not apply, from the Provider Relief Fund as part of the automatic general distributions by HHS. Queen City Hospice utilized approximately $0.6 million of the funds for healthcare related expenses attributable to COVID-19 that were unreimbursed by other sources. Queen City Hospice intends to repay $1.9 million, which represents the remainder of the grants received but not utilized, in 2021. Commercial organizations that receive annual total awards of $750,000 or more in federal funding, including payments received through the Provider Relief Fund, are subject to federal audit requirements.
In addition, the CARES Act expands the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program to increase cash flow to providers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Hospice and home health providers were able to request an advance or accelerated payment of up to 100% of the Medicare payment amount for a three-month period (not including Medicare Advantage payments). The Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program payments are a loan that providers must pay back. Recoupment of these payments was due to begin in August, but CMS has delayed the recoupment process for these payments, based on amended repayment terms imposed by the CAA, enacted October 1, 2020, until one year after payment was issued. In April 2020, Queen City Hospice received an amount equal to $10.8 million pursuant to the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program. Queen City Hospice did not repay the funds prior to the completion of our acquisition of Queen City Hospice, however, Queen City Hospice intends to repay such funds in March 2021, prior to any CMS recoupment and before any interest accrues.
The CARES Act and related legislation also include other provisions offering financial relief, for example temporarily lifting the Medicare sequester, which would have otherwise reduced payments to Medicare providers by 2%, from May 1, 2020, through March 31, 2021 (but also extending sequestration through 2030). The Medicare sequester relief resulted in an increase of $0.2 million to home health net service revenues and $1.3 million to hospice net service revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additional financial relief under the CARES Act includes a temporary 6.2% increase in the FMAP intended to broadly support the solvency of state Medicaid programs.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is fluid and continues to evolve, and, therefore, we cannot currently predict with certainty the extent to which our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the related financial effect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is not expected to materially adversely impact our business. See Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic could negatively affect our operations, business and financial condition, and our liquidity could also be negatively impacted, particularly if the U.S. economy remains unstable for a significant amount of time” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Public Offering
On September 9, 2019, we completed a public offering of an aggregate 2,300,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share, including 300,000 shares of common stock sold pursuant to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $79.50 per share (the “Public Offering”). We received net proceeds of approximately $172.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses of approximately $9.9 million, in connection with the completion of the Public Offering. We used approximately $130.0 million from the net proceeds of the offering to fund the purchase price for our acquisition of Hospice Partners on October 1, 2019 and used any remaining net proceeds of the offering for general corporate purposes, and to fund, in part, 2020 acquisitions.
On August 20, 2018, we, together with Eos Capital Partners III, L.P. (the “Selling Stockholder”) completed a secondary public offering of an aggregate 2,100,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share at a purchase price per share to the public of $59.00 (the “2018 Public Offering Price”). Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Underwriting Agreement, 1,075,267 shares of common stock were issued and sold by us (the “Primary Shares”) and 1,024,733 shares of Common Stock were sold by the Selling Stockholder (the “Secondary Shares”). Net proceeds of approximately $59.1 million were received by us from the sale of 1,075,267 Primary Shares. On August 22, 2018, the underwriters exercised their full over-allotment option in connection with the offering and, as a result, we issued and sold an additional 315,000 shares of common stock to the underwriters at the 2018 Public Offering Price, less the underwriting discount. The over-allotment resulted in additional net proceeds to us of approximately $17.5 million. We used the proceeds received from this offering for general corporate purposes, and to pay down the $102.6 million of our delayed term loan discussed above in connection with the amendment and restatement of our credit facility. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the Secondary Shares. The secondary offering resulted in an increase to additional paid in capital of approximately $76.6 million, net of issuance costs of $5.4 million, on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2018.
Amended and Restated Senior Secured Credit Facility
On October 31, 2018, we entered into the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of October 31, 2018, with certain lenders and Capital One, National Association, as a lender and as agent for all lenders (as amended by the Amendment (as hereinafter defined), the “Credit Agreement”). This credit facility totaled $269.6 million, inclusive of a $250.0 million revolving loan and a $19.6 million delayed draw term loan and is evidenced by the Credit Agreement. This credit facility amended and restated our existing senior secured credit facility totaling $250.0 million. As used throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K, “credit facility” shall mean the credit facility evidenced by the Credit Agreement.
The maturity of this credit facility is May 8, 2023. Interest on this credit facility may be payable at (x) the sum of (i) an applicable margin ranging from 0.75% to 1.50% based on the applicable senior net leverage ratio plus (ii) a base rate equal to the greatest of (a) the rate of interest last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate,” (b) the sum of the federal funds rate plus a margin of 0.50% and (c) the sum of the adjusted LIBOR that would be applicable to a loan with an interest period of one month advanced on the applicable day (not to be less than 0.00%) plus a margin of 1.00% or (y) the sum of (i) an applicable margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.50% based on the applicable senior net leverage ratio plus (ii) the offered rate per annum for similar dollar deposits for the applicable interest period that appears on Reuters Screen LIBOR01 Page (not to be less than zero). Swing loans may not be LIBOR loans. The availability of additional draws under this credit facility is conditioned, among other things, upon (after giving effect to such draws) the Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) not exceeding 3.75:1.00. In certain circumstances, in connection with a Material Acquisition (as defined in the Credit Agreement), we can elect to increase our Total Net Leverage Ratio compliance covenant to 4.25:1.00 for the then current fiscal quarter and the three succeeding fiscal quarters. In connection with this credit facility, we incurred approximately $0.9 million of debt issuance costs.
Addus HealthCare, Inc. (“Addus HealthCare”) is the borrower, and its parent, Holdings, and substantially all of Holdings’ subsidiaries are guarantors under this credit facility, and it is collateralized by a first priority security interest in all of our and the other credit parties’ current and future tangible and intangible assets, including the shares of stock of the borrower and subsidiaries. The Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants customary for credit facilities of this type, including limitations on us with respect to liens, indebtedness, guaranties, investments, distributions, mergers and acquisitions and dispositions of assets.
We pay a fee ranging from 0.20% to 0.35% based on the applicable senior net leverage ratio times the unused portion of the revolving loan portion of the credit facility.
The Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants regarding, among other things, the maintenance of records, compliance with laws, maintenance of permits, maintenance of insurance and property and payment of taxes. The Credit Agreement also contains certain customary financial covenants and negative covenants that, among other things, include a requirement to maintain a minimum Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement), a requirement to stay below a maximum Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and a requirement to stay below a maximum permitted amount of capital expenditures, as well as restrictions on guarantees, indebtedness, liens, investments and loans, subject to customary carve outs, a restriction on dividends (provided that Addus HealthCare may make distributions to us in an amount that does not exceed $7.5 million in any year absent of an event of default, plus limited exceptions for tax and administrative distributions), a restriction on the ability to consummate acquisitions (without the consent of the lenders) under our credit facility subject to compliance with the Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) thresholds, restrictions on mergers, dispositions of assets, and affiliate transactions, and restrictions on fundamental changes and lines of business.
On September 12, 2019, we entered into a First Amendment (the “Amendment”) to our Credit Agreement. The Amendment increased our credit facility by $50.0 million in incremental revolving loans, for an aggregate $300.0 million in revolving loans. The Amendment provides that future incremental loans may be for term loans or an increase to the revolving loan commitments. The Amendment further provides that the proceeds of the incremental revolving loan commitments may be used for, among other things, general corporate purposes. In connection with this Amendment, we incurred approximately $0.4 million of debt issuance costs.
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our financial covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes historical changes in our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities was $109.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $12.0 million in 2019 due to changes in accounts receivable primarily related to the growth in revenue, a decrease in days sales outstanding (“DSO”) during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, as described below and $19.4 million of government stimulus advances received during 2020, net of acquisition activities. The related receivables due from the Illinois Department on Aging represented 15.9% and 25.1% of net accounts receivable at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities was $214.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $188.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $194.8 million for the acquisition of Queen City Hospice, $15.8 million for the acquisition of County Homemakers, $14.5 million for the acquisition of A Plus and $6.8 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily related to our ongoing investments in our technology infrastructure and investments in expanding our corporate office. Our investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $135.6 million for the acquisition of Hospice Partners, $29.9 million for the acquisition of VIP, $23.5 million for the acquisition of Alliance and $4.6 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily related to our ongoing investments in our technology infrastructure.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $138.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $218.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to borrowings of approximately $135.0 million on the revolver portion of our credit facility to fund, in part, the Queen City Hospice acquisition and $3.9 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options. Our financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to net proceeds from our Public Offering of $172.9 million, borrowings of approximately $23.5 million on the revolver portion of our credit facility to fund the Alliance acquisition, borrowings of $19.6 million on the delayed draw term loan portion of our credit facility to fund, in part, the VIP acquisition and $3.2 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
For the comparison of fiscal years 2019 and 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 - “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on August 10, 2020 under the subheading-“Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018.”
Outstanding Accounts Receivable
Gross accounts receivable as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $133.4 million and $150.6 million, respectively. Outstanding accounts receivable, net of the allowance for doubtful accounts, decreased by $17.0 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. This decrease is related to the decrease in DSO as described below. Accounts receivable for the Illinois Department on Aging decreased approximately $16.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our collection procedures include review of account aging and direct contact with our payors. We have historically not used collection agencies. An uncollectible amount is written off to the allowance account after reasonable collection efforts have been exhausted.
We calculate our DSO by taking the accounts receivable outstanding net of the allowance for doubtful accounts divided by the net service revenues for the last quarter, multiplied by the number of days in that quarter. Our DSOs were 61, 72 and 65 days at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The DSOs for our largest payor, the Illinois Department on Aging, at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were 46, 78 and 51 days, respectively. We may not receive payments on a consistent basis in the near term and our DSOs and the DSO for the Illinois Department on Aging may increase despite the state of Illinois’s enactment of state budgets for fiscal years 2020 and 2021.
The economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic poses significant risks to states’ budgets for the 2021 fiscal year, which began July 1 in most states. Depending on the severity and length of a downturn, sales tax collections and income tax
withholdings could continue to be depressed in fiscal 2021 and, potentially, future fiscal years. States could face significant fiscal challenges and may have no choice but to revise their revenue forecasts and adjust their budgets for fiscal 2021 and, potentially, future fiscal years, accordingly. For example, in New York, which started its fiscal year April 1, the state comptroller recently estimated that the state would collect at least $10 billion less than originally forecasted, the first year-to-year cut since 2011. The current New York fiscal plan authorizes the state of New York to issue up to $8 billion in short-term bonds to provide funds in case of reduced revenues during the fiscal year. The state issued $1.1 billion of bonds on October 28, 2020. The New York fiscal plan also allows two state authorities to provide the state with a $3 billion line of credit in the new fiscal year. Congress could provide additional relief with additional stimulus and relief legislation, including extension of unemployment benefits and relief for states. While we cannot determine the impact that COVID-19 may have on states budgets for 2021 or beyond, such impacts could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet guarantees or arrangements with unconsolidated entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expense and related disclosures.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other sources and factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Our critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Under business combination accounting, assets and liabilities are generally recognized at their fair values and the difference between the consideration transferred, excluding transaction costs, and the fair values of the assets and liabilities is recognized as goodwill. The Company’s significant identifiable intangible assets consist of customer and referral relationships, trade names and trademarks and state licenses. The Company uses various valuation techniques to determine initial fair value of its intangible assets, including relief-from-royalty, income approach, discounted cash flow analysis, and multi-period excess earnings, which use significant unobservable inputs, or Level 3 inputs, as defined by the fair value hierarchy. Under these valuation approaches, we are required to make estimates and assumptions about future market growth and trends, forecasted revenue and costs, expected periods over which the assets will be utilized, appropriate discount rates and other variables. The Company estimates the fair values of the trade names using the relief-from-royalty method, which requires assumptions such as the long-term growth rates of future revenues, the relief from royalty rate for such revenue, the tax rate and the discount rate. The Company estimates the fair value of existing indefinite-lived state licenses based on a blended approach of the replacement cost method and cost savings method, which involves estimating the total process costs and opportunity costs to obtain a license, by estimating future earnings before interest and taxes and applying an estimated discount rate, tax rate and time to obtain the license. The Company estimates the fair value of existing finite-lived state licenses based on a method of analyzing the definite revenue streams with the license and without the license, which involves estimating revenues and expenses, estimated time to build up to a current revenue base, which is market specific, and the non-licensed revenue allocation, revenue growth rates, discount rate and tax amortization benefits. The Company estimates the fair value of customer and referral relationships based on a multi-period excess earnings method, which involves identifying revenue streams associated with the assets, estimating the attrition rates based upon historical financial data, expenses and cash flows associated with the assets, contributory asset charges, rates of return for specific assets, growth rates, discount rate and tax amortization benefits. The Company estimates the fair value of non-competition agreements based on a method of analyzing the factors to compete and factors not to compete, which involves estimating historical financial data, forecasted financial statements, growth rates, tax amortization benefit, discount rate, review of factors to compete and factors not to compete as well as an assessment of the probability of successful competition for each non-competition agreement.
The carrying value of our goodwill is the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired from various acquisitions. In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis, as of October 1, or whenever potential impairment triggers occur, such as a significant change in business climate or regulatory changes that would indicate that an impairment may have occurred. We may use a qualitative test to determine whether impairment has occurred. Additionally, it is our policy to update the fair value calculation of our reporting units and perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test on a periodic basis. The goodwill impairment test involves comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then goodwill is not impaired. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then goodwill is impaired to the extent of the difference. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we performed the quantitative analysis to evaluate whether an impairment occurred. Based on the totality of the information available, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the estimated fair values were greater than the carrying values of the reporting units. For the fiscal year 2020 impairment test, the fair value of the reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values by at least 90% (commonly referred to as “headroom”). We concluded that there were no impairments for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, goodwill was $469.1 million and $275.4 million, respectively, included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Our identifiable intangible assets consist of customer and referral relationships, trade names, trademarks, state licenses and non-competition agreements. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized using straight-line and accelerated methods based upon the estimated useful lives of the respective assets, which range from one to twenty-five years, and assessed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Customer and referral relationships are amortized systematically over the periods of expected economic benefit, which range from five to ten years. We would recognize an impairment loss when the estimated future non-discounted cash flows associated with the intangible asset are less than the carrying value. An impairment charge would then be recorded for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using the income approach. In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized. We test intangible assets with indefinite useful lives for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis, as of October 1, or whenever potential impairment triggers occur, such as a significant change in business climate or regulatory changes that would indicate that an impairment may have occurred. No impairment charge was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, intangibles, net of accumulated amortization, was $71.5 million and $57.1 million, respectively, included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Amortization of intangible assets is reported in the statement of income caption, “Depreciation and amortization” and not included in the income statement caption cost of service revenues.
Revenue Recognition, Accounts Receivable and Allowances
Net service revenue is recognized at the amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for providing services directly to consumers. Receipts are from federal, state and local governmental agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private consumers for services rendered. The Company assesses the consumers' ability to pay at the time of their admission based on the Company's verification of the customer's insurance coverage under the Medicare, Medicaid, and other commercial or managed care insurance programs. Laws and regulations governing the governmental programs in which we participate are complex and subject to interpretation. Net service revenues related to uninsured accounts, or self-pay, is recorded net of implicit price concessions estimated based on historical collection experience to reduce revenue to the estimated amount we expect to collect. Amounts collected from all sources may be less than amounts billed due to implicit price concessions resulting from client eligibility issues, insufficient or incomplete documentation, services at levels other than authorized, pricing differences and other reasons unrelated to credit risk. We monitor our net service revenues and collections from these sources and record any necessary adjustment to net service revenues based upon management’s assessment of historical write offs and expected net collections, business and economic conditions, trends in federal, state and private employer health care coverage and other collection indicators.
Accounts receivable is reduced to the amount expected to be collected in future periods for services rendered to customers prior to the balance sheet date. Management estimates the value of accounts receivable, net of allowances for implicit price concessions based upon historical experience and other factors, including an aging of accounts receivable, evaluation of expected adjustments, past adjustments and collection experience in relation to amounts billed, current contract and reimbursement terms, shifts in payors and other relevant information. Collection of net service revenues we expect to receive is normally a function of providing complete and correct billing information to the payors within the various filing deadlines. The evaluation of these historical and other factors involves complex, subjective judgments impacting the determination of the implicit price concession assumption. In addition, we compare our cash collections to recorded net service revenues and evaluate our historical allowances, including implicit price concessions, based upon the ultimate resolution of the accounts receivable balance.
Prior to 2018, we established an allowance for doubtful accounts to the extent it was probable that a portion or all of a particular account would not be collected. We established a provision for doubtful accounts primarily by reviewing the creditworthiness of
significant customers and through evaluations over the collectability of the receivables. An allowance for doubtful accounts was maintained at a level that our management believed was sufficient to cover potential losses.
With the modified retrospective adoption of ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, in 2018 subsequent adjustments that are determined to be the result of an adverse change in the payor’s ability to pay are recognized as provision for doubtful accounts. The majority of what historically was classified as provision for doubtful accounts under operating expenses is now treated as an implicit price concession factored into the determination of net service revenues discussed above. Our collection procedures include review of account aging and direct contact with our payors. We have historically not used collection agencies. An uncollectible amount is written off to the allowance account after reasonable collection efforts have been exhausted. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the allowance for doubtful accounts balance was $1.0 million and $1.0 million, respectively, which is included in accounts receivable, net of allowances on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We had outstanding letters of credit of $9.0 million at December 31, 2020. These standby letters of credit benefit our third-party insurer for our high deductible workers’ compensation insurance program. The amount of the letters of credit is negotiated annually in conjunction with the insurance renewals.
The following table summarizes our cash contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
As described in Note 8 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, interest on borrowings under the revolving and term loan are variable. The calculated interest payable amounts above use actual rates available through January 2021 and assumes the January rates of 1.90%, respectively, are for all future interest payable on revolving and term loans.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation in the past several years in the United States has been modest. Future inflation would have mostly negative impacts on our business. Rising price levels might allow us to increase our fees to private pay clients, but would cause our operating costs, particularly the wages we pay our caregivers, to increase. Further, our ability to realize rate increases from government programs might be limited despite inflation.