Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Adverum is a clinical-stage gene therapy company targeting unmet medical needs in ocular and rare diseases. We develop gene therapy product candidates intended to provide durable efficacy by inducing sustained expression of a therapeutic protein. Our core capabilities include novel vector discovery, preclinical and clinical development, and pre-commercial planning. In addition, we have in-house manufacturing expertise, specifically in scalable process development, assay development, and current Good Manufacturing Practices (“GMP”) quality control, and have leased and are building out a GMP commercial manufacturing facility to support our commercial plans for our lead product candidate, ADVM-022. We believe ADVM-022 has the potential to be the first mass marketed gene therapy for wet age-related macular degeneration (“wet AMD”) and diabetic macular edema (“DME”).
ADVM-022 is a single, in-office intravitreal (“IVT”) injection gene therapy designed to deliver long-term durability with robust treatment response, reduce the treatment burden of frequent anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (“anti-VEGF”) injections, and improve real-world vision outcomes for patients. ADVM-022 is being developed for the treatment of patients with chronic retinal diseases who respond to standard-of-care anti-VEGF therapy, including wet AMD and DME. ADVM-022 utilizes a proprietary vector capsid, AAV.7m8, carrying an aflibercept coding sequence under the control of a proprietary expression cassette.
Wet AMD is a leading cause of blindness in patients over 65 years of age, with a prevalence of approximately 1.5 million individuals in the U.S. (with approximately 200,000 new diagnoses per year) and over 5 million individuals worldwide. In recognition of the need for new treatment options for wet AMD, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) granted Fast Track designation for ADVM-022 for the treatment of wet AMD.
We are conducting the OPTIC trial, designed as a multi-center, open-label, Phase 1, dose-ranging safety trial of ADVM-022 in patients with wet AMD who have demonstrated responsiveness to anti-VEGF treatment. Patients in OPTIC are treatment experienced, and previously required frequent anti-VEGF injections to control their wet AMD and to maintain functional vision. We completed enrollment for OPTIC in July 2020 and have regularly presented updated data from the trial.
Diabetes impacts over 400 million people globally, including 30 million people in the United States, and is increasing in prevalence. Approximately 5% of adults with diabetes are impacted by DME, a vision-threatening complication of diabetic retinopathy (“DR”), the leading cause of vision loss in working-age adults.
We are conducting the INFINITY trial, a multi-center, Phase 2, randomized, double-masked, active comparator-controlled study evaluating a single IVT injection of ADVM-022 in patients with DME. The INFINITY trial is designed to demonstrate superior control of disease activity following a single IVT injection of ADVM-022 compared to a single aflibercept injection, as measured by time to worsening of DME disease activity in the study eye. Additional objectives include assessments of treatment burden, visual acuity, retinal anatomy and safety outcomes. We have completed patient enrollment, and we plan to present clinical data in the second half of 2021.
Based on the promising data observed in OPTIC to date and our discussions with the FDA, we believe we have reached alignment on our clinical development and CMC requirements. We anticipate initiating two global Phase 3 trials for ADVM-022 in wet AMD in the fourth quarter of 2021. In addition, we believe that approximately 6% of patients with wet AMD are treated bilaterally from time of diagnosis and this grows to almost one-third within four years. We plan to evaluate the potential for bilateral treatment with ADVM-022 in order to include data on bilateral administration in our Biologics License Application (BLA) submission for the wet AMD application. With this approach, we are targeting submitting this BLA in 2024. As we advance ADVM-022 for these two large ocular disease indications, we are continuing to develop our manufacturing expertise to support the potential future commercial product launch. In addition, we are planning for in-house manufacturing capabilities, including building out our new GMP manufacturing facility in Durham, North Carolina. This new 174,000 square foot facility will be dedicated to providing commercial supply, if ADVM-022 is approved for marketing, while we will continue to leverage our contract manufacturing organization partnerships for clinical and additional commercial supply. We expect our GMP manufacturing facility will be production-ready by the end of 2023.
Impact of COVID-19
Our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2020 were not significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact these areas in the future is unknown at this time and will depend on future developments that are unpredictable. We are actively monitoring and managing our response and assessing actual and potential impacts to these areas. Please refer to the “Risk Factors” section for further discussion of the risks we face as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impact on Operations
We are continuously evaluating and addressing potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations. To date, we have experienced limited impact due to COVID-19 on our operations. Our offices, laboratories, clinical trial sites, contract research organizations (“CROs”), contract manufacturing organizations, and other collaborators and partners are located in jurisdictions where quarantines, executive orders, shelter-in-place orders, guidelines, and other similar orders and restrictions intended to control the spread of the disease have been put in place by governmental authorities.
We are committed to the health and safety of our employees and their families and doing our part to slow the community spread of COVID-19. In mid-March, we implemented a number of actions, including a work-from-home policy for employees whose jobs do not require them to be onsite, allowing for flexible work schedules, restricting in-person meetings, and limiting onsite activities to only the most time-critical or necessary operational activities. We have maintained certain essential in-person laboratory functions in order to advance key research and development initiatives, supported by the implementation of updated onsite procedures. We believe these measures and others have allowed us to mitigate, but not eliminate, the effects and risks on our on-site operations posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impact on Clinical Trials
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ongoing and planned clinical trials is uncertain and subject to change. To date, we believe we have experienced limited impact due to COVID-19 on our ongoing clinical programs, including the OPTIC and INFINITY clinical trials. We are working closely with our clinical trial sites to monitor and attempt to address or limit the potential negative impacts of the evolving COVID-19 outbreak on patient safety, continued participation of patients already enrolled in our clinical studies, protocol compliance, data quality, and overall study integrity. Despite these efforts, we are unsure as to whether the COVID-19 pandemic will significantly impact future trial enrollment or completion of our current or planned clinical studies.
Impact on Supply Chain and Manufacturing
While we have not yet experienced significant disruptions to our supply chain and manufacturing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot be certain that this trend will continue. Based on current information, we believe that our partners in our supply chain have been and will continue to serve us continuously during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, certain of these partners including our bulk drug substance and drug product suppliers have prioritized and allocated more resources and capacity to supply drug product or raw materials to other companies engaged in the study and/or supply of potential treatments or vaccinations for COVID-19, which could result in supply interruptions for us. To mitigate against future potential delays in product supply, we are continuously implementing additional measures to address potential risks as we identify them, including securing additional supplies and manufacturing capacity reserve, which have resulted in additional expenses and may result in other additional expenses in the future.
Financial Overview
Summary
We have not generated positive cash flow or net income from operations since our inception and, as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $502.5 million. We expect to incur substantial expenses and increasing losses from operations in the foreseeable future as we continue our research and development efforts, advance our product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, manufacture clinical study materials, seek regulatory approval, and prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization. We are at an early stage of development and may never be successful in developing or commercializing our product candidates.
While we may in the future generate revenue from a variety of sources, including license fees, milestone and research and development payments in connection with strategic partnerships, and potentially revenue from product sales if any of our product candidates are approved, to date we have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We currently have no operational clinical or commercial manufacturing facilities, and all of our clinical manufacturing activities are currently contracted out to third parties. Additionally, we use third-party CROs to carry out our clinical development and we do not have a sales organization.
We expect to incur substantial and increasing expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We will need substantial additional funding in the future to support our operating activities as we advance our product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seek regulatory approval and prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital, or to do so on acceptable terms, when needed, or to form additional collaboration partnerships to support our efforts, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or potential commercialization efforts.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $429.7 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. In February 2020, we sold an aggregate of 10,925,000 shares of our common stock for $140.8 million of net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. In August 2020, we sold an aggregate of 16,675,000 shares of our common stock for $203.5 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In December 2020, we entered into an at-the-market offering program sales agreement with Cowen, pursuant to which we may offer to sell our common stock for an aggregate offering price of up to $150.0 million through the agent from time to time.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are sufficient cash to fund operations into mid-2022.
Revenue
To date we have not generated any revenue from the sale of our products. We have generated revenue through research, collaboration and license arrangements with strategic partners. Our ability to generate product revenue and become profitable depends upon our ability to successfully develop and commercialize our product candidates. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the amount or timing of product revenue. Even if we are able to generate revenue from the sale of our products, our sales may not be sufficient to generate cash from operations, in which case we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce our operations.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no deferred revenue related to collaboration arrangements with our strategic partners. We recognized $250,000 and $1.6 million of revenue associated with our collaboration arrangements during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. No revenue was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Conducting a significant amount of research and development is central to our business model. Research and development expenses primarily include personnel-related costs, stock-based compensation expenses, laboratory supplies, consulting costs, external contract research and development expenses, including expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical study materials, and overhead expenses, such as rent, equipment depreciation, insurance and utilities.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We defer and expense advance payments for goods or services for future research and development activities as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
We estimate preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. We estimate the amounts incurred through communications with third party service providers and our estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on information available at the time. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or aggregate costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of a product candidate is highly uncertain, and clinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development and commercialization costs can differ materially from expectations.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily include personnel-related costs, stock-based compensation, professional fees for legal, consulting, audit and tax services, overhead expenses, such as rent, equipment depreciation, insurance and utilities, and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development expenses. Our general and administrative expenses may increase in future periods if and to the extent we elect to increase our investment in infrastructure to support continued research and development activities and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We will continue to evaluate the need for such investment in conjunction with our ongoing consideration of our pipeline of product candidates. We anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal and regulatory functions, as well as director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily comprises of interest income on our cash equivalents and investments in marketable securities.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Accrued and Prepaid Research and Development Expense
We estimate our accrued and prepaid research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. Expenses that are paid in advance of performance are deferred as a prepaid expense and expensed as the services are provided.
Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
•contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials;
•CROs and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
•investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•vendors in connection with preclinical development activities; and
•services providers for professional service fees such as consulting and related services.
Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred. However, due to the nature of these estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not adjust our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies or other research activities. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no material changes from our estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based awards granted to employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We estimate the grant-date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes valuation model for stock options, and using intrinsic value, which is the closing price of our common stock on the grant date for the restricted stock units (“RSUs”).
We recognize the grant-date fair value of the stock-based awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards. Prior to January 1, 2019, we recognized stock-based compensation expense related to awards for non-employees based on the then-current fair value at each measurement date over the associated service period of the award using the accelerated attribution method. As of January 1, 2019, we adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2018-07 (“ASU 2018-07”), Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“Topic 718”), which subjects nonemployee awards to fixed measurement over a vesting period.
We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to assist us in determining the fair value of our stock options, which includes our employee stock purchase plan. The Black-Scholes valuation model requires the use of following assumptions:
Expected volatility. We base the expected volatility for the year ended December 31, 2020 on our historical stock price volatility. In prior years, we estimated expected volatility based on the average historical volatility of a peer group of comparable publicly traded life sciences and biotechnology companies with product candidates in similar stages of clinical development, weighted with the historical volatility based on the trading history for our common stock.
Expected term. We derive the expected term using the “simplified” method that determines the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. The expected term of the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) rights equals to the six-month look-back period.
Risk-free interest rate. We base the risk-free interest rate on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options.
Expected dividend yield. We have never paid any dividends and do not plan to pay dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, used an expected dividend yield of zero in the valuation model.
Income Tax
We recognize deferred income taxes for temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statement and income tax purposes. We periodically evaluate the positive and negative evidence bearing upon realizability of our deferred tax assets. Based upon the weight of available evidence, which includes our historical operating performance, reported cumulative net losses since inception and difficulty in accurately forecasting our future results, we maintained a full valuation allowance on the net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 of approximately $94.6 million and $66.2 million, respectively. We intend to maintain a full valuation allowance on the federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of the valuation allowance.
As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of approximately $271.6 million to offset future federal income. Approximately $56.9 million of NOLs expire at various years beginning with 2036. As of December 31, 2020, we also had U.S. state NOL carryforwards of approximately $33.5 million to offset future state income. U.S. state NOLs expire at various years beginning with 2036. At December 31, 2020, we also had approximately $56.5 million of foreign net operating loss carryforwards which may be available to offset future foreign income; these carryforwards do not expire.
Under Section 382 of the Code, our ability to utilize NOL carryforwards or other tax attributes such as research tax credits, in any taxable year may be limited if we have experienced an “ownership change.” Generally, a Section 382 ownership change occurs if there is a cumulative increase of more than 50 percentage points in the stock ownership of one or more stockholders or groups of stockholders who own at least 5% of a corporation’s stock within a specified testing period. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. Due to a June 30, 2020 ownership change, we determined that certain NOLs and research and development tax credits for both federal and state purposes are subject to the 382 limitation; however, it was determined that there should be no material impact to the ability of the utilization before expiration.
We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available. Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to income taxes as a component of income tax expense. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. As of December 31,
2020, we accrued $257,000 interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions and no amount was accrued for 2019. There are no ongoing examinations by taxing authorities at this time.
Recent Accounting Update - In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“Topic 326”) and also issued subsequent amendments to the initial guidance: ASU 2018-19, ASU 2019-04, ASU 2019-05, and ASU 2019-11. The standard requires that financial assets measured at amortized cost be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The measurement of expected credit losses is based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect collectability. Topic 326 also eliminates the concept of “other-than-temporary” impairment when evaluating available-for-sale debt securities and instead focuses on determining whether any impairment is a result of a credit loss or other factors. An entity will recognize an allowance for credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities rather than an other-than-temporary impairment that reduces the cost basis of the investment. Topic 326 will become effective for us beginning after December 15, 2022 and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of adopting Topic 326, but do not expect the effect of adoption to be material.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations data for the years indicated. These historical operating results may not be indicative of the results for any future period.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
We recognized no revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized $250,000 of collaboration and license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to a milestone payment under our license agreement with GenSight.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased $32.9 million to $73.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $40.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This overall increase was primarily related to a $12.8 million increase in production costs related to product candidate ADVM-022 and earlier-stage research programs, a $10.2 million increase in personnel-associated costs including stock-based compensation expense, salaries and bonus mainly driven by headcount increase from 81 employees as of December 31, 2019 to 114 employees as of December 31, 2020, a $3.3 million increase in clinical trials-related expenses, a $2.3 million increase in laboratory costs, a $1.7 million increase in expenses for consultants, contractors, and other outside services, and a $1.7 million increase in facilities costs as we moved into the new facility during the first quarter of 2020. Stock-based compensation expense included in research and development expenses was $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the periods presented, our research and development activities were attributable to our wet AMD, DME, rare disease programs and earlier-stage research programs. We expect that research and development expenses will increase in future periods as we continue to invest in advancing our gene therapy product candidate ADVM-022 and earlier-stage research programs.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased $16.3 million to $44.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily related to an increase of $11.6 million in personnel-associated costs including stock-based compensation expense, salaries and bonuses mainly driven by headcount increase from 26 employees as of December 31, 2019 to 53 employees as of December 31, 2020. The overall increase was also caused by increases of $2.2 million in depreciation expense due to higher asset base of the new facility we moved into during the first quarter of 2020, $1.8 million in fees for audit, tax, patent and other professional services, and $0.7 million in insurance and license fees. Stock-based compensation expense included in general and administrative expenses was $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods as we continue to support advancing our gene therapy programs. We anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, finance and investor functions to support our organizational growth.
Other Income, Net
The decrease of $2.5 million in net other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower yield from our short term investments.
Income Tax Provision
We recognized an income tax provision of $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to foreign operations. There was no income tax provision recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
See “Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Plan of Operations
We have not generated positive cash flow or net income from operations since our inception and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $502.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $429.7 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments compared to $166.0 million as of December 31, 2019. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our operations into mid-2022.
In February 2020, we sold an aggregate of 10,925,000 shares of our common stock for $140.8 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
In August 2020, we sold an aggregate of 16,675,000 shares of our common stock for $203.5 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
In December 2020, we entered into an at-the-market offering program sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, pursuant to which we may offer to sell our common stock for an aggregate offering price of up to $150.0 million through the sales agent from time to time. As of February 25, 2021, we have sold an aggregate of 121,000 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $1.7 million.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates and ongoing internal research and development programs, and expenses to build out our new facility. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or aggregate amount of costs for our development, potential commercialization, and internal research and development programs. However, in order to complete our planned preclinical trials and current and future clinical trials, and to complete the process of obtaining regulatory approval for our product candidates, as well as to build the sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved, we will require substantial additional funding in the future.
If and when we seek additional funding, we will do so through equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources or through other sources of financing. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital in the future could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. To complete development and commercialization of any of our product candidates, we anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements of which will depend on many factors, including:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of preclinical studies and any clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the outcome, timing of and costs involved in, seeking and obtaining approvals from the FDA and other regulatory authorities, including the potential for the FDA and other regulatory authorities to require that we perform more studies than those that we currently expect;
•the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development activities successfully;
•our need to expand our research and development activities;
•the rate of progress and cost of our commercialization of our products;
•the cost of preparing to manufacture our products on a larger scale;
•the costs of commercialization activities including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution;
•the degree and rate of market acceptance of any products launched by us or future partners;
•the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•our need to implement additional infrastructure and internal systems;
•our ability to hire additional personnel;
•our ability to enter into additional collaboration, licensing, commercialization or other arrangements and the terms and timing of such arrangements;
•the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market developments; and
•the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license other technologies or clinical product candidates or programs that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented below:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $79.3 million, primarily as a result of net loss of $117.5 million due to the continued activities developing our product candidates, partially offset by $25.5 million of non-cash charges mainly related to $20.4 million of stock-based compensation expense and $4.2 million of depreciation and
amortization expenses, and $12.7 million of net increase in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities, which fluctuate due to timing of expenses and payments.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $49.2 million, primarily as a result of the net loss of $64.5 million mainly driven by our continued research and development activities, partially offset by $10.3 million of non-cash charges mainly related to stock-based compensation expense, and $5.1 million of net change in operating assets and liabilities primarily caused by increases in our lease liability of $7.6 million primarily as a result of the receipt of tenant improvement allowance and $1.9 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by $6.0 million change in prepaid expenses and other current assets and $2.2 million of amortization of our operating lease right-of-use assets.
Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $268.3 million of net purchases of marketable securities and $11.8 million of purchases of property and equipment primarily related to the new facility.
Net cash used in investing activities was $68.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted of $48.8 million of net purchases of marketable securities and $19.2 million of purchases of property and equipment. Purchases of property and equipment primarily consisted of the leasehold improvements related to the new facility.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $344.3 million of net proceeds from the sale of our common stock, $12.7 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $1.1 million in proceeds from employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $2.0 million in taxes paid relating to net share settlement of restricted stock units and repayment of loans.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $25.9 million of the net proceeds from the sale of our common stock, primarily through our at-the-market offering program sales agreement with Cowen completed in December 2019, $3.9 million of the proceeds from the exercises of stock options and employee stock purchases, partially offset by $1.5 million in taxes paid relating to net share settlement of restricted stock units and $0.1 million repayment of our Banque Publique d’Investissement (“BPI France”) loan.
See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report for discussion related to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have lease obligations consisting of an operating lease for our operating facility that expires in 2029.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we entered into a lease agreement to develop a manufacturing facility. For additional information regarding this lease agreement, including our payment obligations, see Note 15 to our financial statements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Regulation S-K, Item 303(a)(4)(ii).