Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Executive Overview
We are a leading business solutions provider to consumer goods manufacturers and retailers. We have a strong platform of competitively advantaged sales and marketing services built over multiple decades - essential, business critical services like headquarter sales, retail merchandising, in-store sampling, digital commerce and shopper marketing. For brands and retailers of all sizes, we help get the right products on the shelf (whether physical or digital) and into the hands of consumers (however they shop). We use a scaled platform to innovate as a trusted partner with our clients, solving problems to increase their efficiency and effectiveness across a broad range of channels.
We have two reportable segments: sales and marketing.
Through our sales segment, which generated approximately 65.3% of our total revenues in the year ended December 31, 2020, we offer headquarter sales representation services to consumer goods manufacturers, for whom we prepare and present to retailers a business case to increase distribution of manufacturers’ products and optimize how they are displayed, priced and promoted. We also make in-store merchandising visits for both manufacturer and retailer clients to ensure the products we represent are adequately stocked and properly displayed.
Through our marketing segment, which generated approximately 34.7% of our total revenues in the year ended December 31, 2020, we help brands and retailers reach consumers through two main categories within the marketing segment. The first and largest is our retail experiential business, also known as in-store sampling or demonstrations, where we create manage highly customized large scale sampling programs (both in-store and online) for leading retailers. The second business is our collection of specialized agency businesses, in which we provide private label services to retailers and develop granular marketing programs for brands and retailers through our shopper, consumer and digital marketing agencies.
Recent Developments
Business Combination with Conyers Park
On September 7, 2020, Advantage Solutions Inc., now known as ASI Intermediate Corp. (“ASI”), entered into an agreement and plan of merger (as amended, modified, supplemented or waived, the “Merger Agreement”), with Conyers Park II Acquisition Corp., a Delaware corporation now known as Advantage Solutions Inc. (“Conyers Park”), CP II Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of Conyers Park (“Merger Sub”), and Topco.
In September 2020 and in connection with its entry into the Merger Agreement, Conyers Park entered into subscription agreements (collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) pursuant to which certain investors, including participating equityholders of Topco (the “Advantage Sponsors”), agreed to purchase Class A Common Stock of Conyers Park (“Common Stock”) at a purchase price of $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Investment”).
On October 27, 2020, Conyers Park held a special meeting of stockholders (the “Special Meeting”), at which the Conyers Park stockholders considered and adopted, among other matters, a proposal to approve the business combination, including (a) adopting the Merger Agreement and (b) approving the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement and related agreements. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, following the Special Meeting, on October 28, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), Merger Sub was merged with and into ASI with ASI being the surviving company in the merger (the “Merger” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Transactions”). On the Closing Date, the PIPE Investment was consummated, and 85,540,000 shares of Common Stock were sold for aggregate gross proceeds of $855.4 million. Of the 85,540,000 shares of Common Stock, the Advantage Sponsors acquired 34,410,000 shares of Common Stock, and other purchasers acquired 51,130,000 shares of Common Stock.
Holders of 32,114,818 shares of Common Stock sold in its initial public offering properly exercised their right to have such shares redeemed for a full pro rata portion of the trust account holding the proceeds from Conyers Park’s initial public offering, calculated as of two business days prior to the consummation of the business combination, $10.06 per share, or $323.1 million in the aggregate (collectively, the “Redemptions”).
As a result of the Merger, among other things, pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Conyers Park issued to Topco, as sole stockholder of ASI prior to the Merger, aggregate consideration equal to (a) 203,750,000 shares of Common Stock, and (b) 5,000,000 shares of Common Stock that vested upon achievement of a market performance condition on January 15, 2021. After giving effect to the Transactions, the Redemptions, and the consummation of the PIPE Investment, there were 313,425,182 shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding as of the Closing Date, excluding the 5,000,000 shares of Common Stock subject to the market performance condition. The Common Stock and outstanding warrants of Conyers Park (renamed “Advantage Solutions Inc.” following the Transactions) commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbols “ADV” and “ADVWW”, respectively, on October 29, 2020.
As noted above, an aggregate of $323.1 million was paid from the Conyers Park’s trust account to holders in connection with the Redemption, and the remaining balance immediately prior to the closing of the Transactions of approximately $131.2 million remained in the trust account. The remaining amount in the trust account was used to fund the Transactions, including the entry into the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities (as defined below).
In connection with the Merger, ASI repaid and terminated $3.3 billion of debt arrangements under its First Lien Credit Agreement, Second Lien Credit Agreement, and accounts receivable securitization facility (the “AR Facility”) that existed in 2020 (collectively, the “Credit Facilities”) with incremental costs of $86.8 million. This amount was repaid by ASI through a combination of (i) cash on hand, (ii) proceeds from certain private investments in Common Stock, (iii) the entry by Advantage Sales & Marketing Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of ASI, into (a) a new senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility, which permits borrowing in an aggregate principal amount of up to $400.0 million, subject to borrowing base capacity (the “New Revolving Credit Facility”), of which $100.0 million of principal amount was borrowed as of October 28, 2020, and (b) a new secured first lien term loan credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1.325 billion (the “New Term Loan Facility” and, together with the New Revolving Credit Facility, the “New Senior Secured Credit Facilities”), and (iv) the issuance by Advantage Solutions FinCo LLC, a direct subsidiary of Advantage Sales & Marketing Inc., of $775.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “Notes”).
The Merger was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Conyers Park was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. This determination was primarily based on Topco having a relative majority of the voting power of the combined entity, the operations of ASI prior to the Merger comprising the only ongoing operations of the combined entity, and senior management of ASI comprising the senior management of the combined entity. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the financial statements of the combined entity represent a continuation of the financial statements of ASI with the acquisition being treated as the equivalent of ASI issuing stock for the net assets of Conyers Park, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Conyers Park was stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and is likely to continue to have, a severe and unprecedented impact on the world. Measures to prevent its spread, including government-imposed restrictions on large gatherings, closures of face-to-face events, “shelter in place” health orders and travel restrictions have had a significant effect on certain of our business operations. In response to these business disruptions, we have taken several actions including reducing certain of our discretionary expenditures, eliminating non-essential travel, terminating or amending certain office leases, furloughing, instituting pay reductions and deferrals and terminating some of our employees, particularly with respect to COVID-19 impacted operations.
These measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 have adversely impacted certain areas of our business operations, including our in-store sampling, foodservice and European businesses. Most notably, we temporarily suspended all in-store sampling in all U.S. locations starting in March and April of 2020 as well as in certain international locations. More recently, we have started to re-open in-store sampling activities in certain retailers in certain geographies on a prudent, phased basis. While the restrictions relating to in-store sampling services have materially and adversely affected our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020, we have been successful in growing other adjacent services in our experiential marketing business such as online grocery pick-up sampling and virtual product demonstrations, both of which have seen increased adoption and demand. Our foodservice business continues to be negatively impacted by lower away-from-home demand resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on various channels, including restaurants, education and travel and lodging. Our European business continues to be negatively impacted by activity restrictions implemented in the various European geographies in which we operate.
We have also experienced a positive impact in our headquarter sales and private label services where, due to the large increase in consumer purchases at retail to support incremental at-home consumption, our operations have experienced a favorable increase in volume and demand. Additionally, our e-commerce services have benefited due to the increase in consumer purchasing with online retailers.
These differing impacts are reflected in our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020. Compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, our sales segment revenues increased 5.4% and its operating income and Adjusted EBITDA decreased 50.5% and increased 16.3% in the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively, while revenues, operating income and Adjusted EBITDA for our marketing segment decreased 40.2%, 95.7% and 34.6% in the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. As a result, our sales segment revenues increased to almost two-thirds of our revenues in 2020, while in 2019, our revenues were split approximately 51.6% to 48.4% between our sales and marketing segments, respectively.
We also took various measures during the year ended December 31, 2020 to strengthen liquidity. For example, in accordance with the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), signed into law on March 27, 2020, we have deferred the deposit and payment of our portion of Social Security taxes. We have also received government aid from various countries in support of our local operations, including a government loan in Japan. Also, we consummated the Merger and the related Transactions, including the refinancing of our existing indebtedness and the incurrence of new indebtedness with the New Senior Secured
Credit Facilities and the Notes. As of December 31, 2020, we had $204.3 million in cash and cash equivalents. See “ -Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
We expect the ultimate significance of the impact of the pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be dictated by the length of time that such circumstances continue, which will depend on the currently unknowable extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the nature and effectiveness of governmental, commercial and personal actions taken in response. We expect the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our various businesses through at least the first half of 2021 based on the belief that certain restrictions on mobility and activities are likely to remain in place until such time a vaccine can be broadly distributed and administered.
Summary
Our financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 includes:
•
Revenues decreased by $629.4 million, or 16.6%, to $3,155.7 million;
•
Operating income decreased by $146.7 million, or 68.6%, to $67.0 million;
•
Net loss increased by $141.9 million, or 718.5%, to $161.7 million;
•
Adjusted Net Income increased by $13.9 million, or 8.2%, to $182.9 million; and
•
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $16.9 million, or 3.3%, to $487.2 million.
We completed five business acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of three sales agencies, which have been incorporated into our sales segment and two marketing agencies, which have been incorporated into our marketing segment. The aggregate purchase price for these acquisitions was $88.1 million, of which $68.0 million was paid in cash, $14.8 million in contingent consideration, and $5.3 million in holdbacks.
Factors Affecting Our Business and Financial Reporting
There are a number of factors, in addition to the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, that affect the performance of our business and the comparability of our results from period to period including:
•
Organic Growth. Part of our strategy is to generate organic growth by expanding our existing client relationships, continuing to win new clients, pursuing channel expansion and new industry opportunities, enhancing our digital technology solutions, developing our international platform, delivering operational efficiencies and expanding into logical adjacencies. We believe that by pursuing these organic growth opportunities we will be able to continue to enhance our value proposition to our clients and thereby grow our business.
•
Acquisitions. We have grown and expect to continue to grow our business in part by acquiring quality businesses, both domestic and international. In December 2017, we completed the Daymon Acquisition, a leading provider of retailer-centric services, including private label development and management, merchandising and experiential marketing services. In addition to the Daymon Acquisition, we have completed 65 acquisitions from January 2014 to March 1, 2021, ranging in purchase prices from approximately $0.3 million to $98.5 million. Many of our acquisition agreements include contingent consideration arrangements, which are described below. We have completed acquisitions at what we believe are attractive purchase prices and have regularly structured our agreements to result in the generation of long-lived tax assets, which have in turn reduced our effective purchase prices when incorporating the value of those tax assets. We continue to look for strategic and tuck-in acquisitions that can be completed at attractive purchase prices.
•
Contingent Consideration. Many of our acquisition agreements include contingent consideration arrangements, which are generally based on the achievement of financial performance thresholds by the operations attributable to the acquired businesses. The contingent consideration arrangements are based upon our valuations of the acquired businesses and are intended to share the investment risk with the sellers of such businesses if projected financial results are not achieved. The fair values of these contingent consideration arrangements are included as part of the purchase price of the acquired companies on their respective acquisition dates. For each transaction, we estimate the fair value of contingent consideration payments as part of the initial purchase price. We review and assess the estimated fair value of contingent consideration on a quarterly basis, and the updated fair value could differ materially from our initial estimates. Changes in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities related to the time component of the present value calculation are reported in “Interest expense, net.” Adjustments to the estimated fair value related to changes in all other unobservable inputs are reported in “Selling, general and administrative expenses” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
•
Depreciation and Amortization. As a result of the acquisition of our business by Topco on July 25, 2014 (the “2014 Topco Acquisition”), we acquired significant intangible assets, the value of which is amortized, on a straight-line basis, over 15 years from the date of the 2014 Topco Acquisition, unless determined to be indefinite-lived. The amortization of such intangible assets recorded in our consolidated financial statements has a significant impact on our operating income (loss) and net loss. Our historical acquisitions have increased, and future acquisitions likely will increase, our intangible assets. We do not believe the amortization expense associated with the intangibles created from our purchase accounting adjustments reflect a material economic cost to our business. Unlike depreciation expense which has an economic cost reflected by the fact that we must re-invest in property and equipment to maintain the asset base delivering our results of operations, we do not have any capital re-investment requirements associated with the acquired intangibles, such as client relationships and trade names, that comprise the majority of the finite-lived intangibles that create our amortization expense.
•
Foreign Exchange Fluctuations. Our financial results are affected by fluctuations in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and other currencies, primarily the Canadian dollars, British pounds and euros, due to our operations in such foreign jurisdictions. See also “ -Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk-Foreign Currency Risk.”
•
Seasonality. Our quarterly results are seasonal in nature, with the fourth fiscal quarter typically generating a higher proportion of our revenues than other fiscal quarters, as a result of higher consumer spending. We generally record slightly lower revenues in the first fiscal quarter of each year, as our clients begin to roll out new programs for the year, and consumer spending generally is less in the first fiscal quarter than other quarters. Timing of our clients’ marketing expenses, associated with marketing campaigns and new product launches, can also result in fluctuations from one quarter to another.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
Revenues
Revenues related to our sales segment are primarily comprised of commissions, fee-for-service and cost-plus fees for providing retail services, category and space management, headquarter relationship management, technology solutions and administrative services. A small portion of our arrangements include performance incentive provisions, which allow us to earn additional revenues on our performance relative to specified quantitative or qualitative goals. We recognize the incentive portion of revenues under these arrangements when the related services are transferred to the customer.
Marketing segment revenues are primarily recognized in the form of a fee-for-service (including retainer fees, fees charged to clients based on hours incurred, project-based fees or fees for executing in-person consumer engagements or experiences, which engagements or experiences we refer to as events), commissions or on a cost-plus basis, in each case, related to services including experiential marketing, shopper and consumer marketing services, private label development or our digital, social and media services.
Given our acquisition strategy, we analyze our financial performance, in part, by measuring revenue growth in two ways-revenue growth attributable to organic activities and revenue growth attributable to acquisitions, which we refer to as organic revenues and acquired revenues, respectively.
We define organic revenues as any revenues that are not acquired revenues. Our organic revenues exclude the impacts of acquisitions and divestitures, when applicable, which improves comparability of our results from period to period.
In general, when we acquire a business, the acquisition includes a contingent consideration arrangement (e.g., an earn-out provision) and, accordingly, we separately track the financial performance of the acquired business. In such cases, we consider revenues generated by such a business during the 12 months following its acquisition to be acquired revenues. For example, if we completed an acquisition on July 1, 2019 for a business that included a contingent consideration arrangement, we would consider revenues from the acquired business from July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020 to be acquired revenues. We generally consider growth attributable to the financial performance of an acquired business after the 12-month anniversary of the date of acquisition to be organic.
In limited cases, including the Daymon Acquisition, when the acquisition of an acquired business does not include a contingent consideration arrangement, or we otherwise do not separately track the financial performance of the acquired business due to operational integration, we consider the revenues that the business generated in the 12 months prior to its acquisition to be our acquired revenues for the 12 months following its acquisition, and any differences in revenues actually generated during the 12 months after its acquisition to be organic. For example, if we completed an acquisition on July 1, 2019 for a business that did not include a contingent consideration arrangement, we would consider the amount of revenues from the acquired business from July 1, 2018 to June 30, 2019 to be acquired revenues during the period from July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020, with any differences from that amount actually generated during the latter period to be organic revenues.
All revenues generated by our acquired businesses are considered to be organic revenues after the 12-month anniversary of the date of acquisition.
When we divest a business, we consider the revenues that the divested business generated in the 12 months prior to its divestiture to be subtracted from acquired revenues for the 12 months following its divestiture. For example, if we completed a divestiture on July 1, 2019 for a business, we would consider the amount of revenues from the divested business from July 1, 2018 to June 30, 2019 to be subtracted from acquired revenues during the period from July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020.
We measure organic revenue growth and acquired revenue growth by comparing the organic revenues or acquired revenues, respectively, period over period, net of any divestitures.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues consists of both fixed and variable expenses primarily attributable to the hiring, training, compensation and benefits provided to both full-time and part-time associates, as well as other project-related expenses. A number of costs associated with our associates are subject to external factors, including inflation, increases in market specific wages and minimum wage rates at federal, state and municipal levels and minimum pay levels for exempt roles. Additionally, when we enter into certain new client relationships, we may experience an initial increase in expenses associated with hiring, training and other items needed to launch the new relationship.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, payroll taxes and benefits for corporate personnel. Other overhead costs include information technology, occupancy costs for corporate personnel, professional services fees, including accounting and legal services, and other general corporate expenses. Additionally, included in selling, general and administrative expenses are costs associated with the changes in fair value of the contingent consideration of acquisitions and other acquisition-related costs. Acquisition-related costs are comprised of fees related to change of equity ownership, transaction costs, professional fees, due diligence and integration activities.
We also expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses necessary to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange and related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, as well as higher expenses for general and director and officer insurance, investor relations, and professional services.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates primarily to borrowings under our First Lien Credit Agreement (including the Revolving Credit Facility), Second Lien Credit Agreement and New Senior Secured Credit Facilities as described below. See “ -Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Depreciation and Amortization
Amortization Expense
Included in our depreciation and amortization expense is amortization of acquired intangible assets. We have ascribed value to identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill in our purchase price allocations for companies we have acquired. These assets include, but are not limited to, client relationships and trade names. To the extent we ascribe value to identifiable intangible assets that have finite lives, we amortize those values over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Such amortization expense, although non-cash in the period expensed, directly impacts our results of operations. It is difficult to predict with any precision the amount of expense we may record relating to future acquired intangible assets.
As a result of the 2014 Topco Acquisition, we acquired significant intangible assets, the value of which is amortized, on a straight-line basis, over 15 years from the date of the 2014 Topco Acquisition, unless determined to be indefinite-lived. We recognized a non-cash intangible asset impairment charge of $580.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, related to our sales trade name resulting from the 2014 Topco Acquisition considered to be indefinite lived. The impairment charge has been reflected in “Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived assets” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss, in addition to a $652.0 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge in the sales reporting unit.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense relates to the property and equipment that we own, which represented less than 1% of our total assets at December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
Income tax (benefit) expense and our effective tax rates can be affected by many factors, including state apportionment factors, our acquisition strategy, tax incentives and credits available to us, changes in judgment regarding our ability to realize our deferred tax assets, changes in our worldwide mix of pre-tax losses or earnings, changes in existing tax laws and our assessment of uncertain tax positions.
Cash Flows
We have positive cash flow characteristics, as described below, due to the limited required capital investment in the fixed assets and working capital needs to operate our business in the normal course. See “ -Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Prior to the consummation of the Transactions (including our entry into the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities), our principal sources of liquidity have been cash flows from operations, borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility (as herein defined) and other debt. Following the Transactions, our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, borrowings under the New Revolving Credit Facility, and other debt. Our principal uses of cash are operating expenses, working capital requirements, acquisitions and repayment of debt.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted Net Income is a non-GAAP financial measure. Adjusted Net Income means net loss before (i) impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived assets, (ii) amortization of intangible assets, (iii) private equity sponsors’ management fees and equity-based compensation expense, (iv) fair value adjustments of contingent consideration related to acquisitions, (v) acquisition-related expenses, (vi) costs associated with COVID-19, net of benefits received, (vii) EBITDA for economic interests in investments, (viii) restructuring expenses, (ix) litigation expenses, (x) (Recovery from) loss on Take 5, (xi) deferred financing fees, (xii) costs associated with the Take 5 Matter, (xiii) other adjustments that management believes are helpful in evaluating our operating performance, and (xiv) related tax adjustments.
We present Adjusted Net Income because we use it as a supplemental measure to evaluate the performance of our business in a way that also considers our ability to generate profit without the impact of items that we do not believe are indicative of our operating performance or are unusual or infrequent in nature and aid in the comparability of our performance from period to period. Adjusted Net Income should not be considered as an alternative for net loss, our most directly comparable measure presented on a GAAP basis.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA by Segment
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA by segment are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA means net loss before (i) interest expense, net, (ii) (benefit from) provision for income taxes, (iii) depreciation, (iv) impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived assets, (v) amortization of intangible assets, (vi) private equity sponsors’ management fees and equity-based compensation expense, (vii) fair value adjustments of contingent consideration related to acquisitions, (viii) acquisition-related expenses, (ix) costs associated with COVID-19, net of benefits received, (x) EBITDA for economic interests in investments, (xi) restructuring expenses, (xii) litigation expenses, (xiii) (Recovery from) loss on Take 5, (xiv) costs associated with the Take 5 Matter and (xv) other adjustments that management believes are helpful in evaluating our operating performance.
We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA by segment because they are key operating measures used by us to assess our financial performance. These measures adjust for items that we believe do not reflect the ongoing operating performance of our business, such as certain noncash items, unusual or infrequent items or items that change from period to period without any material relevance to our operating performance. We evaluate these measures in conjunction with our results according to GAAP because we believe they provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business than GAAP measures alone. Furthermore, the agreements governing our indebtedness contain covenants and other tests based on measures substantially similar to Adjusted EBITDA. Neither Adjusted EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA by segment should be considered as an alternative for net loss, for our most directly comparable measure presented on a GAAP basis.
For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss and Adjusted EBITDA by segment to operating income (loss), see “ -Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Take 5 Matter
On April 1, 2018, we acquired certain assets and liabilities of Take 5 for total consideration of $81.6 million, including the fair value of contingent consideration of $4.6 million and holdback liabilities of $0.8 million. As a result of a review of internal allegations related to inconsistency of data provided by Take 5 to its clients, we commenced an investigation into Take 5’s operations. In July 2019, as a result of our investigation, we determined that revenues during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018 attributable to the Take 5 business had been recognized for services that were not performed on behalf of clients of Take 5 and that inaccurate reports were made to Take 5 clients about those services. As a result of our investigation into Take 5, in July 2019, we terminated all operations of Take 5, including the use of its associated trade names and the offering of its services to its clients and have offered refunds to Take 5 clients of collected revenues attributable to Take 5 since our acquisition of Take 5.
As a result of the Take 5 Matter, we determined that Take 5’s reported revenues were improperly recognized during the year ended December 31, 2018. We also determined that the amounts previously assigned to the assets of Take 5 acquired on the acquisition date had been improperly established based on inaccurate assumptions as to the fair value of the assets acquired.
We also voluntarily disclosed information about the misconduct at Take 5 to the United States Attorney’s Office and the Federal Bureau of Investigation and committed to cooperate in any governmental investigation. We are currently in arbitration proceedings with the sellers of Take 5, in which both us and the sellers of Take 5 have brought claims against each other.
As a result of the Take 5 Matter, we may be subject to a number of harms, risks and uncertainties, including substantial unanticipated costs for potential lawsuits by clients or other interested parties who claim to have been harmed by the misconduct at Take 5, other related costs and fees (in excess of the amounts already being offered as refunds), potential resulting governmental investigations and a reduction in our current and anticipated revenues. In addition, if we do not prevail in any litigation or governmental investigation related to these matters, we could be subject to costs related to such litigation or governmental investigation, including equitable relief, civil monetary damages, treble damages, repayment or criminal penalties, which may not be covered by insurance or may materially increase our insurance costs. We have incurred and will continue to incur additional substantial defense and investigation costs regardless of the outcome of any such litigation or governmental investigation. In addition, there can be no assurance to what degree, if any, we will be able to recover any such costs or damages from the former owners of Take 5, or whether such former owners of Take 5 engaged in further unknown improper activities that may subject us to further costs or damages, including potential reputational harm.
The Take 5 Matter may lead to additional harms, risks and uncertainties for us, including litigation and governmental investigations, a reduction in our current or anticipated revenues, a potential deterioration in our relationships or reputation and a loss in investor confidence.
In connection with the Take 5 Matter, we have removed previously recognized revenues of $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, attributable to the Take 5 business. Additionally, we recognized a $79.2 million loss on Take 5 in our Statement of Comprehensive Loss during the year ended December 31, 2018, representing the $76.2 million in cash we paid for Take 5, together with restated acquired liabilities of $3.0 million.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred $3.6 million and $7.7 million, respectively, of costs associated with the investigation and remediation activities in connection with the Take 5 Matter,
primarily professional fees and other related costs. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the cost associated with the Take 5 Matter recognized as a component of Selling, general and administrative expenses was as follows;
On May 15, 2020, we received $7.7 million from our representation and warranty insurance policy related to the acquisition of Take 5 for claims related to the Take 5 Matter, the maximum aggregate recovery under the policy.
Restructuring Charges
Restructuring charges include severance plans designed to integrate and reduce costs intended to further improve efficiencies in operational activities and align cost structures consistent with revenue levels associated with business changes. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we commenced a plan involving terminating certain employees, particularly with respect to COVID-19 impacted operations. In addition, we established a global work from home policy. A significant portion of our office-based workforce temporarily transitioned to working from home and we commenced a plan to strategically exit certain offices during the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 8-Leases, for additional information. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, in connection with the Daymon Acquisition, we commenced restructuring programs designed to achieve cost savings through transaction synergies. We recorded severance expenses of $4.6 million, $2.3 million, and $7.9 million included in “Selling, general, and administrative expenses” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations provide details of our financial results for 2020 and 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part I, Item 7 of our Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed with the SEC on December 4, 2020.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
(1) Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA are financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP. For a discussion of our presentation of Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA and reconciliations of net loss to Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Total revenues decreased by $629.4 million, or 16.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The sales segment revenues increased $105.9 million, of which $61.3 million were revenues from acquired businesses during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding revenues from acquired businesses, the segment experienced an increase of $44.6 million in organic revenues primarily due to growth in our headquarter sales and retail services where we benefitted from several new clients and an increase in commission revenues as a result of significant increases in purchases of consumer goods in the retail channel with an increase in eat-at-home consumption due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as expansion in our e-commerce services. These were partially offset by weakness in both our foodservice and our European businesses due to the temporary closures affecting those industries and locations and other adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic has had on these services.
The marketing segment revenues declined $735.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which includes revenues of $9.4 million from acquired
businesses. Excluding revenues from acquired businesses, the segment experienced a decline of $744.7 million in organic revenues. The decrease in revenues were primarily due to temporary suspensions or reductions of certain in-store sampling services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 80.9%, as compared to 83.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease as a percentage of revenues was largely attributable to the change in the revenue mix of our services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, with an increase in commission-based revenues as a result of increased purchases of consumer goods within the retail channel, the temporary suspension or reduction of certain in-store sampling services and reduced travel related expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 9.7%, as compared to 4.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase as a percentage of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase in equity-based compensation expense related to equity units of Topco as a result of the consummation of the Transactions. The Company recognized non-cash compensation expenses of $62.7 million in connection with the Common Series C Units and $13.3 million in connection with the Common Series C-2 Units for the year ended December 31, 2020. For additional information, refer to Note 11-Equity-Based Compensation of our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. The activity and expense associated with the units at Topco had no impact on the outstanding Common Stock of Advantage Solutions Inc. Further contributing to the increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses was an increase in $34.3 million of restructuring charges primarily associated with terminating certain office leases, $39.8 million of transaction bonuses and certain retention and anniversary payments paid shortly following the completion of the Transactions, offset by $12.7 million reduction of expenses related to the Take 5 Matter.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $6.0 million, or 2.6%, to $238.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $232.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the amortization of additional intangibles from recently acquired businesses.
Operating Income
In the sales segment, the decrease in operating income during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase in equity-based compensation expense related to Topco units as a result of the consummation of the Transactions, acquisition-related expenses, and one-time restructuring charges associated with terminating certain office leases, offset by the growth in revenues in the sales segment as described above.
In the marketing segment, the decrease in operating income during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the decrease in revenues as described above coupled with an increase in equity-based
compensation expense related to the equity units of Topco as a result of the consummation of the Transactions and one-time restructuring charges associated with terminating certain office leases offset by reduction of expenses related to the Take 5 Matter including the insurance recovery and government grants received as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased $1.9 million, or 0.8%, to $234.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $232.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in interest expense, net was primarily due to an increase of $41.4 million of fees associated with the issuance of the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities and the Notes offset by the decrease in interest rates applicable to certain indebtedness for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
Benefit from income taxes was $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a provision for income taxes of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The fluctuation was primarily attributable to the greater pre-tax loss and lower tax adjustments associated with Global Intangible Low Tax Income (“GILTI”), meals and entertainment, foreign taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss was $161.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net loss of $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net loss was primarily driven by the decrease in operating income and increase in interest expense which were impacted by non-recurring expenses primarily as a result of the consummation of the Transactions, partially offset by favorability associated with the benefit from income taxes as described above.
Adjusted Net Income
The increase in Adjusted Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to the decrease in interest expense after adjusting for non-recurring costs incurred as part of the Transactions offset by the decline in the marketing segment related to the temporary suspension or reductions of in-store sampling programs during the pandemic and increase in provision for income taxes after adjusting for non-recurring costs incurred as a result of the consummation of the Transactions. For a reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income to Net loss, see “ -Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA by Segment
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $16.9 million, or 3.3%, to $487.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $504.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily attributable to the decline in revenues in the marketing segment, primarily due to the temporary suspension of certain in-store sampling services, offset by the growth in
revenues in the sales segment with favorable margin contributions from our headquarter sales services as described above. For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted Net Income is a non-GAAP financial measure. Adjusted Net Income means net loss before (i) impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived assets, (ii) amortization of intangible assets, (iii) private equity sponsors’ management fees and equity-based compensation expense, (iv) fair value adjustments of contingent consideration related to acquisitions, (v) acquisition-related expenses, (vi) costs associated with COVID-19, net of benefits received, (vii) EBITDA for economic interests in investments, (viii) restructuring expenses, (ix) litigation expenses, (x) (Recovery from) loss on Take 5, (xi) deferred financing fees, (xii) costs associated with the Take 5 Matter, (xiii) other adjustments that management believes are helpful in evaluating our operating performance, and (xiv) related tax adjustments.
We present Adjusted Net Income because we use it as a supplemental measure to evaluate the performance of our business in a way that also considers our ability to generate profit without the impact of items that we do not believe are indicative of our operating performance or are unusual or infrequent in nature and aid in the comparability of our performance from period to period. Adjusted Net Income should not be considered as an alternative for our Net loss, our most directly comparable measure presented on a GAAP basis.
A reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income to Net loss is provided in the following table:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA by segment are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA means net loss before (i) interest expense, net, (ii) (benefit from) provision for income taxes, (iii) depreciation, (iv) impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived assets,
(v) amortization of intangible assets, (vi) Advantage Sponsors’ management fees and equity-based compensation expense, (vii) fair value adjustments of contingent consideration related to acquisitions, (viii) acquisition-related expenses, (ix) costs associated with COVID-19, net of benefits received, (x) EBITDA for economic interests in investments, (xi) restructuring expenses, (xii) litigation expenses, (xiii) (Recovery from) loss on Take 5, (xiv) costs associated with the Take 5 Matter and (xv) other adjustments that management believes are helpful in evaluating our operating performance.
We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA by segment because they are key operating measures used by us to assess our financial performance. These measures adjust for items that we believe do not reflect the ongoing operating performance of our business, such as certain noncash items, unusual or infrequent items or items that change from period to period without any material relevance to our operating performance. We evaluate these measures in conjunction with our results according to GAAP because we believe they provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business than GAAP measures alone. Furthermore, the agreements governing our indebtedness contain covenants and other tests based on measures substantially similar to Adjusted EBITDA. Neither Adjusted EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA by segment should be considered as an alternative for our Net loss, our most directly comparable measure presented on a GAAP basis
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to Net loss is provided in the following table:
Financial information by segment, including a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA by segment to operating income (loss), the closest GAAP financial measure, is provided in the following table:
(a) Represents the management fees and reimbursements for expenses paid to certain of the Advantage Sponsors (or certain of the management companies associated with it or its advisors) pursuant to a management services agreement in years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Also represents expenses related to (i) equity-based compensation expense associated with grants of Common Series D Units of Topco made to one of the Advantage Sponsors, (ii) equity-based compensation expense associated
with the Common Series C Units of Topco as a result of the Transactions, (iii) compensation amounts associated with the Company’s Management Incentive Plan originally scheduled for potential payment March 2022 that were accelerated and terminated as part of the Transactions, and (iv) compensation amounts associated with the anniversary payments to Tanya Domier. Certain of Ms. Domier’s anniversary payments were accelerated as part of the Transactions.
(b) Represents adjustments to the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities related to our acquisitions, excluding the present value accretion recorded in interest expense, net, for the applicable periods. See Note 6-Other Liabilities to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(c) Represents fees and costs associated with activities related to our acquisitions and restructuring activities related to our equity ownership, including transaction bonuses paid in connection with the Transactions, professional fees, due diligence and integration activities.
(d) Represents fees and costs associated with various internal reorganization activities among our consolidated entities. The increase during the year ended December 31, 2020 relates primarily to costs related to the abandonment of certain office leases offset by the decrease relates primarily to the non-cash settlement of lease liabilities. For additional information, refer to Note 8-Leases of our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(e) Represents legal settlements that are unusual or infrequent costs associated with our operating activities.
(f) Represents the amortization of intangible assets recorded in connection with the 2014 Topco Acquisition and our other acquisitions.
(g) Represents (i) costs related to implementation of strategies for workplace safety in response to COVID-19, including employee-relief fund, additional sick pay for front-line associates, medical benefit payments for furloughed associates, and personal protective equipment; and (ii) benefits received from government grants for COVID-19 relief.
(h) Represents fees associated with the issuance of the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities and the Notes. For additional information, refer to Note 7 - Debt of our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(i) Represents $3.6 million and $7.7 million of costs associated with investigation and remediation activities related to the Take 5 Matter, primarily, professional fees and other related costs, respectively for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Represents $8.6 million and $14.2 million of operating expenses associated with the Take 5 business, which we believe do not reflect the ongoing operating performance of our business for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(j) Represents the tax provision or benefit associated with the adjustments above, taking into account the Company’s applicable tax rates, after excluding adjustments related to items that do not have a related tax impact.
(k) Represents additions to reflect our proportional share of Adjusted EBITDA related to our equity method investments and reductions to remove the Adjusted EBITDA related to the minority ownership percentage of the entities that we fully consolidate in our financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the Transactions, our principal sources of liquidity were cash flows from operations, borrowings under the Credit Facilities, including $2.5 billion under the First Lien Credit Agreement and $760 million under the Second Lien Credit Agreement which were scheduled to mature in July 2021 and July 2022, respectively. On October 28, 2020, in connection with the Transactions, we (i) repaid the outstanding debt under the First and Second Lien Credit Agreements and a separate accounts receivable securitization facility, (ii) entered into the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities consisting of the $1.325 billion New Term Loan Facility and the $400.0 million New Revolving Credit Facility, (iii) borrowed $100.0 million under the New Revolving Credit Facility and (iv) issued $775.0 million of Notes. Following the Transactions, our principal sources of liquidity have been cash flows from operations, borrowings under the New Revolving Credit Facility, and other debt. Our principal uses of cash are operating expenses, working capital requirements, acquisitions, and repayment of debt.
Cash Flows
A summary of our cash provided by or used in our operating, investing and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted of net loss of $161.7 million adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $238.6 million and effects of changes in working capital. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of net loss of $19.8 million adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $232.6 million and effects of changes in working capital. The increase in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 relative to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to the reduced working capital need as a result of the temporary suspension and reduction of certain in-store sampling services during the year ended December 31, 2020. To a lesser extent, the reduction of income taxes and the deferral of payment of our portion of Social Security taxes of $48.0 million have also contributed to the increase in cash provided by operating activities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of acquisitions. Additionally, we invest cash for the purchase of property and equipment to support our increased employee headcount and overall growth in our business. We expect that we will make additional capital expenditures and investments in the future to support the future growth of our business.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
We primarily finance our growth through cash flows from operations, however, we also incur long-term debt or borrow under lines of credit when necessary to execute acquisitions. Cash flows from financing activities consisted of borrowings related to these lines of credit and subsequent payments of principal and financing fees. Additionally, many of our acquisition agreements include contingent consideration arrangements, which are generally based on the achievement of future financial performance by the operations attributable to the acquired companies. The portion of the cash payment up to the acquisition date fair value of the contingent consideration liability are classified as financing outflows, and amounts paid in excess of the acquisition date fair value of that liability are classified as operating outflows.
Cash flows related to financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, were primarily related to the proceeds from new borrowings under the New Term Loan Facility and issuance of the Notes of $2.1 billion, the repayment of our First and Second Lien Credit Agreements and principal payments on our long-term debt of $3.2 billion, and the proceeds from issuance of our common stock of $929.2 million, net of fees, as a result of the consummation of the Transactions.
In connection with the Transactions, our debt arrangements that existed in 2020 were repaid and terminated. At the closing of the Transactions, we also had $100.0 million of borrowing under the New Revolving Credit Facility, of which, $50.0 million was paid off in 2020 due to the reduced working capital need. On May 25, 2020,
one of our majority owned subsidiaries operating in Japan entered into two loan agreements and had aggregate principal amount of $2.8 million borrowings from a bank lender pursuant to a local government loan program. Subsequently, one of the loans was refinanced on October 26, 2020 for reduction of the interest payments. The loans, which includes the refinanced loan, bear interest rates of 1.82% and 1.83% per annum with maturity dates of May 27, 2029, and October 27, 2029, respectively, and amounts under the loans will be repayable to the lender in monthly installments.
Cash flows related to financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily related to $25.8 million in principal payments on our long-term debt and $21.2 million related to payments of contingent consideration.
Description of Credit Facilities
New Senior Secured Credit Facilities
In connection with the consummation of the Transaction, Advantage Sales & Marketing Inc., an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Borrower”) entered into the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities consisting of (i) the New Revolving Credit Facility, which is a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $400.0 million, subject to borrowing base capacity and (ii) the New Term Loan Facility, which is a secured first lien term loan credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1.325 billion.
New Revolving Credit Facility
Our New Revolving Credit Facility provides for revolving loans and letters of credit in an aggregate amount of up to $400.0 million, subject to borrowing base capacity. Letters of credit are limited to the lesser of (a) $150.0 million and (b) the aggregate unused amount of commitments under our New Revolving Credit Facility then in effect. Loans under the New Revolving Credit Facility may be denominated in either U.S. dollars or Canadian dollars. Bank of America, N.A., will act as administrative agent and ABL Collateral Agent. The New Revolving Credit Facility matures five years after the date we enter into the New Revolving Credit Facility. We may use borrowings under the New Revolving Credit Facility to fund working capital and for other general corporate purposes, including permitted acquisitions and other investments.
Borrowings under the New Revolving Credit Facility are limited by borrowing base calculations based on the sum of specified percentages of eligible accounts receivable plus specified percentages of qualified cash, minus the amount of any applicable reserves. Borrowings will bear interest at a floating rate, which can be either an adjusted Eurodollar rate plus an applicable margin or, at the Borrower’s option, a base rate plus an applicable margin. The applicable margins for the New Revolving Credit Facility are 2.00%, 2.25% or 2.50%, with respect to Eurodollar rate borrowings and 1.00%, 1.25% or 1.50%, with respect to base rate borrowings, in each case depending on average excess availability under the New Revolving Credit Facility. The Borrower’s ability to draw under the New Revolving Credit Facility or issue letters of credit thereunder will be conditioned upon, among other things, the Borrower’s delivery of prior written notice of a borrowing or issuance, as applicable, the Borrower’s ability to reaffirm the representations and warranties contained in the credit agreement governing the New Revolving Credit Facility and the absence of any default or event of default thereunder.
The Borrower’s obligations under the New Revolving Credit Facility are guaranteed by Karman Intermediate Corp. (“Holdings”) and all of the Borrower’s direct and indirect wholly owned material U.S. subsidiaries (subject to certain permitted exceptions) and Canadian subsidiaries (subject to certain permitted exceptions, including exceptions based on immateriality thresholders of aggregate assets and revenues of Canadian subsidiaries) (the “Guarantors”). The New Revolving Credit Facility is secured by a lien on substantially all of Holdings’, the Borrower’s and the Guarantors’ assets (subject to certain permitted exceptions). The Borrower’s New Revolving Credit Facility has a first-priority lien on the current asset collateral and a second-priority lien on security interests in the fixed asset collateral (second in priority to the liens securing the Notes and the New Term Loan Facility discussed below), in each case, subject to other permitted liens.
The New Revolving Credit Facility has the following fees: (i) an unused line fee of 0.375% or 0.250% per annum of the unused portion of the New Revolving Credit Facility, depending on average excess availability under the New Revolving Credit Facility; (ii) a letter of credit participation fee on the aggregate stated amount of each letter of credit equal to the applicable margin for adjusted Eurodollar rate loans, as applicable; and (iii) certain other customary fees and expenses of the lenders and agents thereunder.
The New Revolving Credit Facility contains customary covenants, including, but not limited to, restrictions on the Borrower’s ability and that of our subsidiaries to merge and consolidate with other companies, incur indebtedness, grant liens or security interests on assets, make acquisitions, loans, advances or investments, pay dividends, sell or otherwise transfer assets, optionally prepay or modify terms of any junior indebtedness, enter into transactions with affiliates or change our line of business. The New Revolving Credit Facility will require the maintenance of a fixed charge coverage ratio (as set forth in the credit agreement governing the New Revolving Credit Facility) of 1.00 to 1.00 at the end of each fiscal quarter when excess availability is less than the greater of $25 million and 10% of the lesser of the borrowing base and maximum borrowing capacity. Such fixed charge coverage ratio will be tested at the end of each quarter until such time as excess availability exceeds the level set forth above.
The New Revolving Credit Facility provides that, upon the occurrence of certain events of default, the Borrower’s obligations thereunder may be accelerated and the lending commitments terminated. Such events of default include payment defaults to the lenders thereunder, material inaccuracies of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other material indebtedness, voluntary and involuntary bankruptcy, insolvency, corporate arrangement, winding-up, liquidation or similar proceedings, material money judgments, material pension-plan events, certain change of control events and other customary events of default.
New Term Loan Facility
The New Term Loan Facility consists of a term loan facility denominated in US dollars in an aggregate principal amount of $1.325 billion. Borrowings under the New Term Loan Facility amortize in equal quarterly installments in an amount equal to 1.00% per annum of the principal amount. Borrowings will bear interest at a floating rate, which can be either an adjusted Eurodollar rate plus an applicable margin or, at the Borrower’s option, a base rate plus an applicable margin. The applicable margins for the New Term Loan Facility are 5.25% with respect to Eurodollar rate borrowings and 4.25% with respect to base rate borrowings.
The Borrower may voluntarily prepay loans or reduce commitments under the New Term Loan Facility, in whole or in part, subject to minimum amounts, with prior notice but without premium or penalty (other than a 1.00% premium on any prepayment in connection with a repricing transaction prior to the date that is twelve months after the date we entered into the New Term Loan Facility).
The Borrower will be required to prepay the New Term Loan Facility with 100% of the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales (such percentage subject to reduction based on the achievement of specific first lien net leverage ratios) and subject to certain reinvestment rights, 100% of the net cash proceeds of certain debt issuances and 50% of excess cash flow (such percentage subject to reduction based on the achievement of specific first lien net leverage ratios).
The Borrower’s obligations under the New Term Loan Facility are guaranteed by Holdings and the Guarantors. Our New Term Loan Facility is secured by a lien on substantially all of Holdings’, the Borrower’s and the Guarantors’ assets (subject to certain permitted exceptions). The New Term Loan Facility has a first-priority lien on the fixed asset collateral (equal in priority with the liens securing the Notes) and a second-priority lien on security interests in the current asset collateral (second in priority to the liens securing the New Revolving Credit Facility), in each case, subject to other permitted liens.
The New Term Loan Facility contains certain customary negative covenants, including, but not limited to, restrictions on the Borrower’s ability and that of our restricted subsidiaries to merge and consolidate with other
companies, incur indebtedness, grant liens or security interests on assets, pay dividends or make other restricted payments, sell or otherwise transfer assets or enter into transactions with affiliates.
The New Term Loan Facility provides that, upon the occurrence of certain events of default, the Borrower’s obligations thereunder may be accelerated. Such events of default will include payment defaults to the lenders thereunder, material inaccuracies of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross-defaults to other material indebtedness, voluntary and involuntary bankruptcy, insolvency, corporate arrangement, winding-up, liquidation or similar proceedings, material money judgments, change of control and other customary events of default.
Senior Secured Notes
In connection with the Transactions, Advantage Solutions FinCo LLC (“Finco”) issued $775.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “Notes”). Substantially concurrently with the Transactions, Finco merged with and into Advantage Sales & Marketing Inc. (the “Issuer”), with the Issuer continuing as the surviving entity and assuming the obligations of Finco. The Notes were sold to BofA Securities, Inc., Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC and Apollo Global Securities, LLC. The Notes were resold to certain non-U.S. persons pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and to persons reasonably believed to be qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act at a purchase price equal to 100% of their principal amount. The terms of the Notes are governed by an Indenture, dated as of October 28, 2020 (the “Indenture”), among Finco, the Issuer, the guarantors named therein (the “Notes Guarantors”) and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee and collateral agent.
Interest and maturity
Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 at a rate of 6.50% per annum, commencing on May 15, 2021. The Notes will mature on November 15, 2028.
Guarantees
The Notes are guaranteed by Holdings and each of the Issuer’s direct and indirect wholly owned material U.S. subsidiaries (subject to certain permitted exceptions) and Canadian subsidiaries (subject to certain permitted exceptions, including exceptions based on immateriality thresholders of aggregate assets and revenues of Canadian subsidiaries) that is a borrower or guarantor under the New Term Loan Facility.
Security and Ranking
The Notes and the related guarantees are the general, senior secured obligations of the Issuer and the Notes Guarantors, are secured on a first-priority pari passu basis by security interests on the fixed asset collateral (equal in priority with liens securing the New Term Loan Facility), and are secured on a second-priority basis by security interests on the current asset collateral (second in priority to the liens securing the New Revolving Credit Facility and equal in priority with liens securing the New Term Loan Facility), in each case, subject to certain limitations and exceptions and permitted liens.
The Notes and related guarantees rank (i) equally in right of payment with all of the Issuer’s and the Guarantors’ senior indebtedness, without giving effect to collateral arrangements (including the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities) and effectively equal to all of the Issuer’s and the Guarantors’ senior indebtedness secured on the same priority basis as the Notes, including the New Term Loan Facility, (ii) effectively subordinated to any of the Issuer’s and the Guarantors’ indebtedness that is secured by assets that do not constitute collateral for the Notes to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness and to indebtedness that is secured by a senior-priority lien, including the New Revolving Credit Facility to the extent of the value of the current asset collateral and (iii) structurally subordinated to the liabilities of the Issuer’s non-Guarantor subsidiaries.
Optional redemption for the Notes
The Notes are redeemable on or after November 15, 2023 at the applicable redemption prices specified in the Indenture plus accrued and unpaid interest. The Notes may also be redeemed at any time prior to November 15, 2023 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of such Notes to be redeemed plus a “make-whole” premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, the Issuer may redeem up to 40% of the original aggregate principal amount of Notes before November 15, 2023 with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 106.5% of the aggregate principal amount of such Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Furthermore, prior to November 15, 2023 the Issuer may redeem during each calendar year up to 10% of the original aggregate principal amount of the Notes at a redemption price equal to 103% of the aggregate principal amount of such Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. If the Issuer or its restricted subsidiaries sell certain of their respective assets or experience specific kinds of changes of control, subject to certain exceptions, the Issuer must offer to purchase the Notes at par. In connection with any offer to purchase all Notes, if holders of no less than 90% of the aggregate principal amount of Notes validly tender their Notes, the Issuer is entitled to redeem any remaining Notes at the price offered to each holder.
Restrictive covenants
The Notes are subject to covenants that, among other things limit the Issuer’s ability and its restricted subsidiaries’ ability to: incur additional indebtedness or guarantee indebtedness; pay dividends or make other distributions in respect of, or repurchase or redeem, the Issuer’s or a parent entity’s capital stock; prepay, redeem or repurchase certain indebtedness; issue certain preferred stock or similar equity securities; make loans and investments; sell or otherwise dispose of assets; incur liens; enter into transactions with affiliates; enter into agreements restricting the Issuer’s subsidiaries’ ability to pay dividends; and consolidate, merge or sell all or substantially all of the Issuer’s assets. Most of these covenants will be suspended on the Notes so long as they have investment grade ratings from both Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and S&P Global Ratings and so long as no default or event of default under the Indenture has occurred and is continuing.
Events of default
The following constitute events of default under the Notes, among others: default in the payment of interest; default in the payment of principal; failure to comply with covenants; failure to pay other indebtedness after final maturity or acceleration of other indebtedness exceeding a specified amount; certain events of bankruptcy; failure to pay a judgment for payment of money exceeding a specified aggregate amount; voidance of subsidiary guarantees; failure of any material provision of any security document or intercreditor agreement to be in full force and effect; and lack of perfection of liens on a material portion of the collateral, in each case subject to applicable grace periods.
First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement
In connection with the Transactions, our debt arrangements under the First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement as well as the AR Facility that existed as of September 30, 2020 were repaid and terminated with incremental costs of $86.8 million. For a description of the First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement that have been refinanced in connection with the consummation of the Transactions on October 28, 2020, please see the additional information set forth in Note 7-Debt, to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Future Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes certain estimated future cash requirements under the Company’s various contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, in total and disaggregated into current and long-term obligations:
(1) Refer to Note 8 - Leases of our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for additional information regarding the maturity of operating lease liabilities.
(2) Represents payments collected from our clients, primarily, associated with market development funds that arise out of our business.
(3) We have an aggregate principal amount of $1.325 billion borrowing on the New Term Loan Facility, which bears interest at a floating rate, which can be either an adjusted Eurodollar rate plus an applicable margin or, at the Borrower’s option, a base rate plus an applicable margin, and $775.0 million in Senior Secured Notes, which is subject to a fixed interest rate of 6.5%. Refer to Note 7 - Debt of our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for additional information regarding the maturities of debt principal. Total debt excluding deferred issuance costs does not include the obligation of future interest payments.
(4) Refer to Note 6 - Other Liabilities of our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for additional information regarding the contingent consideration liabilities.
(5) Represents $56.2 million of an estimated liability under our workers’ compensation programs for claims incurred but unpaid and $8.8 million of employee insurance reserves as of December 31, 2020.
(6) Represents $6.2 million of holdback amounts which are used to withhold a portion of the initial purchase price payment until certain post-closing conditions are satisfied and are typically settled within 24 months of the acquisition.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Held Outside the United States
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $87.7 million and $59.3 million, respectively, of our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $28.9 million and $31.8 million, respectively, of our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign branches.
We assessed our determination as to our indefinite reinvestment intent for certain of our foreign subsidiaries and recorded a deferred tax liability of approximately $2.1 million of withholding tax as of December 31, 2020 for unremitted earnings in Canada with respect to which the Company does not have an indefinite reinvestment assertion. We will continue to evaluate our cash needs, however we currently do not intend, nor do we foresee a need, to repatriate funds from the foreign subsidiaries except for Canada. We have continued to assert indefinite reinvestment on all other earnings as it is necessary for continuing operations and to grow the business. If at a point in the future our assertion changes, we will evaluate tax-efficient means to repatriate the income. In addition, we expect existing domestic cash and cash flows from operations to continue to be sufficient to fund our domestic operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities, such as debt repayment and capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.
If we should require more capital in the United States than is generated by our domestic operations, for example, to fund significant discretionary activities such as business acquisitions, we could elect to repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions. These alternatives could result in higher tax expense or increased interest expense. We consider the majority of the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, as of December 31, 2020, to be indefinitely reinvested and, accordingly, no provision has been made for taxes in excess of the $2.1 million noted above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. We do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not included in our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we do not have an interest in, or relationships with, any special-purpose entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate our accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
We evaluated the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates and believe that the following involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position, and are therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. More information on all of our significant accounting policies can be found in the footnotes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues when control of promised goods or services are transferred to the client in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for such goods or services. Substantially all of our contracts with clients involve the transfer of a service to the client, which represents the performance obligation that is satisfied over time because the client simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services provided. In most cases, the contracts include a performance obligation that is comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). We allocate variable consideration to each period of service to which it relates.
Revenues related to the sales segment are primarily recognized in the form of commissions, fee-for-service or on a cost-plus basis for providing headquarter relationship management, analytics, insights and intelligence services, administrative services, retail services, retailer client relationships and in-store media programs and digital technology solutions (which include our business intelligence solutions, e-commerce services and content services).
Marketing segment revenues are primarily recognized in the form of a fee-for-service (including retainer fees, fees charged to clients based on hours incurred, project-based fees or fees for executing in-person consumer engagements or experiences, which engagements or experiences we refer to as events), commissions or on a cost-plus basis for providing experiential marketing, shopper and consumer marketing services, private label development and our digital, social and media services.
Our revenue recognition policies generally result in recognition of revenues at the time services are performed. Our accounting policy for revenue recognition has an impact on our reported results and relies on certain estimates that require judgments on the part of management. We record an allowance as a reduction to revenue for differences between estimated revenues and the amounts ultimately invoiced to our clients based on our historical experience and current trends. Cash collected in advance of services being performed is recorded as deferred revenues.
We have contracts that include variable consideration whereby the ultimate consideration is contingent on future events such as the client’s sales to retailers, hours worked, event count, costs incurred and performance incentive bonuses. Commission revenues are generally earned upon performance of headquarter relationship management, analytics, insights and intelligence, e-commerce, administration and retail services arrangements. As part of these arrangements, we provide a variety of services to consumer goods manufacturers in order to improve the manufacturer’s sales to retailers. This includes primarily outsourced sales, business development, category and space management, relationship management and in-store sales strategy services. In exchange for these services, we earn an agreed upon percentage of our client’s sales to retailers, which is agreed upon on a manufacturer-by-manufacturer basis. We may be entitled to additional fees upon meeting specific performance goals or thresholds, which we refer to as bonus revenue. The variability of the consideration for the services transferred during a reporting period is typically resolved by the end of the reporting period. However, for certain client contracts, we estimate the variable consideration for the services that have been transferred to the client during the reporting period. We typically estimate the variable consideration based on the expected value method. Estimates are based on historical experience and current facts known during the reporting period. We recognize revenue related to variable consideration if it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue recognized will not occur. When such probable threshold is not satisfied, we will constrain some or all of the variable consideration, and such constrained amount will not be recognized as revenue until the probable threshold is met or the uncertainty is resolved and the final amount is known. We record an adjustment to revenue for differences between estimated revenues and the amounts ultimately invoiced to the client. Adjustments to revenue during the current period related to services transferred during prior periods were not significant for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We have contracts that include fixed consideration such as a fee per project or a fixed monthly fee. For contracts with a fee per project, revenue is recognized over time using an input method such as hours worked that reasonably depicts our performance in transferring control of the services to the client. We determined that the input method represents a reasonable method to measure the satisfaction of the performance obligation to the client. For contracts with a fixed monthly fee, revenue is recognized using a time-based measure resulting in a straight-line revenue recognition. A time-based measure was determined to represent a reasonable method to measure the satisfaction of the performance obligation to the client because we have a stand ready obligation to make itself available to provide services upon the client’s request or the client receives the benefit from our services evenly over the contract period.
We evaluate each client contract individually in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance to determine whether we act as a principal (whereby we would present revenue on a gross basis) or as an agent (whereby we would present revenue on a net basis). While we primarily act as a principal in our arrangements and report revenues on a gross basis, given the varying terms of our client contracts, we will occasionally act as an agent and in such instances present revenues on a net basis. For example, for certain advertising arrangements, our clients purchase media content in advance, and we do not take on any risk of recovering the cost to acquire the media. As a result, we determined we act as the agent in these arrangements and record revenues and their
related costs on a net basis as its agency services are performed. However, in cases where media is not purchased in advance by our clients, we record such revenues and the related costs on a gross basis, as we bear the risk of recovering the costs to acquire the media and are responsible for fulfillment of the services.
We record revenues from sales of services and the related direct costs in accordance with the accounting guidance on reporting revenue gross as a principal versus net as an agent. In situations where we act as a principal in the transaction, we report gross revenues and cost of revenues. When we act as an agent, we report the revenues and their related costs on a net basis. Cost of revenues does not include depreciation charges for fixed assets.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired in an acquisition. We test for impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit level. We generally combine reporting units, which are a component of an operating segment when they have similar economic characteristics, nature of services, types of client, distribution methods and regulatory environment. We have two reporting units, sales and marketing, which are also our operating segments.
We test our goodwill for impairment at the beginning of the fourth quarter of a given fiscal year, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of a reporting unit may exceed its fair value. We have the option to perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value before performing a quantitative impairment test. If the qualitative assessment indicates it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit, as determined applying the quantitative impairment test described below, is less than the carrying amount, then there is no need to perform the quantitative impairment test. Upon performing the quantitative impairment test, if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, goodwill is impaired and the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over the fair value is recognized as an impairment loss; however, the loss recognized would not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Our annual goodwill impairment assessment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was performed as of October 1, 2020. We utilize a combination of income and market approaches to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. The income approach utilizes estimates of discounted cash flows of the reporting units, which requires assumptions for, the reporting units’ revenue growth rates, operating margins terminal growth rates, and discount rates, all of which require significant management judgment. These assumptions are based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy (described in “Fair Value Measurements in Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Policies,”). The market approach applies market multiples derived from the historical earnings data of selected guideline publicly-traded companies to our reporting units’ businesses to yield a second assumed value of each reporting unit, which requires significant management judgement. The guideline companies are first screened by industry group and then further narrowed based on the reporting units’ business descriptions, markets served, competitors, operating margins and revenue size. Market multiples are then selected from within the range of these guideline companies multiples based on the subject reporting unit. We based our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. A change in these underlying assumptions would cause a change in the results of the tests and, as such, could cause fair value to be less than the carrying amounts and result in an impairment of goodwill in the future. Additionally, if actual results are not consistent with the estimates and assumptions or if there are significant changes to our planned strategy, it may cause fair value to be less than the carrying amounts and result in an impairment of goodwill in the future.
We compare a weighted average of the output from the income and market approaches to the carrying value of each reporting unit. We also compare the aggregate estimated fair value of our reporting units to the estimated value of our total invested capital on a marketable basis.
Based on the results of our quantitative impairment test performed for our reporting units, we determined that our goodwill was not impaired for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the sales reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by 8.3%. The fair value of the marketing reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value, which we define as greater than 20%. Management determined that no additional triggering events occurred that required us to perform an interim goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2020.
In performing the quantitative impairment test for the year ended December 31, 2019, we had also determined that our goodwill was not impaired. The fair value of the sales reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by 3.5%. The fair value of the marketing reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value. Management determined that no additional triggering events occurred that required us to perform an interim goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, based on the results of our quantitative impairment test performed for the sales reporting unit, we recognized a $652.0 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge in the sales reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2018. While there was no single determinative event or factor, the consideration of the weight of evidence of several factors that led us to conclude that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the sales reporting unit was below its carrying value. These factors included: (i) the decrease of revenues and profitability due to a large retailer revising its in-store retail merchandising program to restrict manufacturers’ ability to select any third-party outsource provider to perform unrestricted and unmonitored retail merchandising, (ii) the unrelated decrease of revenues and profitability related to reduced services from several clients in the grocery channel and foodservice channel, (iii) the combination of our completed third quarter and preliminary fourth quarter results being below management’s expectations and (iv) the development and approval of our 2019 annual operating plan in the fourth quarter of 2018, which provided additional insights into expectations such as lower long-term revenue growth and profitability expectations.
We are not aware of other larger retailers that intend to adopt a similar model and we have not identified any anticipated limitations on the services we provide to clients that would have a material and adverse impact on our future cash flows. We do not believe the circumstances described above are representative of a broader trend. However, uncertainty in the way retailers conduct business could have an impact on our future growth and could result in future impairment charges. We recorded the non-cash goodwill impairment charge in 2018, which has been reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Based on the results of our quantitative impairment test performed for the sales reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2018, our sales reporting unit was written down to its respective fair value, resulting in zero excess fair value over its carrying value. Based on the results of our quantitative impairment test performed for the marketing reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2018, we determined that goodwill was not impaired. The fair value of the marketing reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value, which we define as being greater than 20%.
Indefinite-Lived Assets
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are comprised of our sales and marketing trade names. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized but tested annually, at the beginning of the fourth quarter, for impairment or more often if events occur or circumstances change that would create a triggering event. We have the option to perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value is less than its carrying value before performing a quantitative impairment test. We test our indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment using a relief from royalty method by comparing the estimated fair values of the indefinite-lived intangible assets with the carrying values. The estimates used in the determination of fair value are subjective in nature and involve the use of significant assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, terminal growth rates, discount rates and royalty rates. which requires significant management judgement. The assumptions are based on significant inputs not
observable in the market and thus represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from the estimates.
In connection with our annual quantitative impairment test as of October 1, 2020 and 2019, we concluded that our indefinite-lived intangible assets were not impaired for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets related to sales trade names exceeded its carrying value by 13.3% and 8.3% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets related to marketing trade names exceeded its carrying value by 8.4% and 10.0% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Management determined that no additional triggering events occurred that required us to perform an interim impairment test of indefinite-lived intangible assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we concluded the carrying value of the indefinite-lived trade name in the sales reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value. While there was no single determinative event or factor, the factors that led to the impairment were the same circumstances outlined in the goodwill impairment discussion above. As a result, we recognized a non-cash intangible asset impairment charge of $580.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, which has been reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. Based on the quantitative test performed for the indefinite-lived marketing trade name, we determined that the indefinite-lived marketing trade name was not impaired for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Equity-Based Compensation
In January 2021 and February 2021, we granted performance restricted stock units with respect to our Class A common stock (“PSUs”) under the Advantage Solutions Inc. 2020 Incentive Award Plan (the “2020 Plan”). The grants provided for a target of 2,557,188 shares to be issued pursuant to the PSUs under the 2020 Plan. The PSUs are subject to the achievement of certain performance conditions based on the Company’s Adjusted EBITDA and revenues and the recipient’s continued service to the Company, the PSUs are scheduled to vest over a three-year period from the date of grant and may vest from 0% to 150% of the targeted number of shares set forth in the immediately preceding sentence (any shares that may be earned above the target number are scheduled to vest on the third anniversary of the grant date).
In January 2021 and February 2021, we granted restricted stock units with respect to our Class A common stock (“RSUs”) of 1,703,663 shares. RSUs for 125,000 shares of our Class A common stock are scheduled to vest in two equal tranches on the first and second anniversaries of the grant date. The remaining RSUs are scheduled to vest in three equal tranches, and a tranche shall vest on each of the first, second and third anniversaries of the grant date.
In January 2021, we also granted RSUs to certain of our directors (Ronald E. Blaylock, Beverly Chase, Virginie Costa and Elizabeth Muñoz-Guzman) with respect to 10,356 shares each. The grants were made in accordance with the Company’s Non-Employee Director Compensation Policy. The RSUs granted to these directors are scheduled to vest on the earlier of the one-year anniversary of the date of grant or the day immediately preceding the date of the first annual meeting of the Company’s stockholders occurring after the date of grant.
Topco, the parent company of the Company, has a long-term equity incentive plan that allows for the grant of time- and performance-based profit interests, or Common Series C Units, in Topco to certain of its and its subsidiaries’ directors and employees in exchange for services provided to us. Since we receive the benefit associated with such services the related expense is recorded within our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. These profit interests are subject to certain vesting requirements including time and performance requirements based on specified annual targets substantially similar to Adjusted EBITDA
thresholds. These awards are subject to forfeiture unless the following performance conditions are met: (i) 75% of the awards will vest when certain of the Advantage Sponsors as of the date of the 2014 Topco Acquisition, or the Common Series A Limited Partners of Topco, realize a pre-tax internal rate of return of 8% compounded annually and (ii) the remaining 25% of the awards vest when the Common Series A Limited Partners of Topco realize a pre-tax internal rate of return of 20% compounded annually. On March 15, 2018, Topco modified the vesting requirements. In accordance with the performance conditions, generally 75% of the awards will vest over a four-year term, subject to the employee’s continued employment. The remaining 25% of the equity awards vest when the Advantage Sponsors as of the date of the 2014 Topco Acquisition realize a pre-tax internal rate of return of 20% compounded annually. Once the equity awards vest, forfeiture may still occur as a result of termination of employment of the equity award holders or if an exit event occurs which is not a vesting exit event. Notwithstanding prior vesting, certain awards are subject to a requirement that the Advantage Sponsors receive a specific return on their equity investment, prior to the awards participating in any distribution whether in cash, property or securities of Topco. Certain awards vest over the remaining initial four-year terms, subject to the employee’s continued employment. The limited partnership agreement also authorizes Topco to issue up to 35,000 Common Series C-2 Units to members of our management, which Common Series C-2 Units are subject to substantially similar vesting and forfeiture provisions as the Common Series C Units, including forfeiture upon certain terminations of employment of the applicable holders or a non-qualifying exit event.
As a result of the Transactions, the Company recognized non-cash compensation expenses of $62.7 million in connection with the Common Series C Units and $13.3 million in connection with the Common Series C-2 Units for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additional expenses of $5.7 million and $0.4 million are anticipated to occur, when the time-based options further vest in 2021 and 2022, respectively. If the vesting exit event of the remaining 25% of the equity awards is deemed probable to occur, the Company would have recognized a compensation expense of $8.2 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. No expense was recorded in the years ended December 31, 2019, or 2018 since a vesting exit event was not yet deemed probable of occurring.
Topco also issued time-vesting profit interests to entities affiliated with one of the Advantage Sponsors, from whom we received services. These time-vesting profit interests vested on a monthly basis beginning on October 1, 2014 through September 1, 2019. We record the compensation expense associated with the issuance of such awards for non-employees as we receive the benefit of the services being provided by the non-employees.
Topco is a private company with no active market for its equity securities. In determining the fair value of Topco’s equity, we utilize three widely recognized valuation models:
•
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis (Income Model)-The discounted cash flow analysis is dependent on a number of significant management assumptions regarding the expected future financial results of us and Topco as well as upon estimates of an appropriate cost of capital;
•
Guideline Public Companies (Market Model)-Multiples of historical and projected EBITDA from guideline public companies are applied to estimate the fair value for the equity of Topco; and
•
Mergers and Acquisition (Market Model)-Multiples of historical enterprise value divided by last twelve months revenues, and enterprise value divided by last twelve months EBITDA for mergers and acquisitions of comparable companies.
After considering the results of each of these valuation models, we then use the Backsolve Option Pricing Method, or OPM, to determine the fair value of the profit interest awards and resulting equity-based compensation expense.
Assumptions used in the OPM include the expected life, volatility, risk-free rate and dividend yield. We utilize the observable data for a group of peer companies that grant options with substantially similar terms to assist in developing our volatility assumption. The risk-free rate is based on U.S. Treasury yields in effect at the time of grant over the expected term. We assume a dividend yield of 0% as we have not historically paid distributions.
The assumptions used in estimating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, equity-based compensation expense could be different in the future.
As a result of the publicly traded price of our common stock, certain key valuation inputs to the option pricing method will be based on publicly available information. These key valuation inputs include the fair value of our common stock, and once there is a sufficient trading history, the volatility would be derived from the historical trading activity of our common stock.
Refer to Notes 11-Equity-Based Compensation and 18-Subsequent Events, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for details regarding Topco’s and our equity-based compensation plans.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.