ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations and other portions of this report contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking information. Factors that may cause such differences include, but are not limited to, availability and cost of financial resources, product demand, market acceptance and other factors discussed in this report under the heading “Risk Factors”. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Advaxis, Inc. (“Advaxis” or the “Company”) is a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the development and commercialization of proprietary Lm Technology antigen delivery products based on a platform technology that utilizes live attenuated Listeria monocytogenes, or Lm, bioengineered to secrete antigen/adjuvant fusion proteins. These Lm-based strains are believed to be a significant advancement in immunotherapy as they integrate multiple functions into a single immunotherapy by accessing and directing antigen presenting cells to stimulate anti-tumor T cell immunity, stimulate and activate the innate immune system with the equivalent of multiple adjuvants, and simultaneously reduce tumor protection in the Tumor Microenvironment, or TME, to enable the T cells to attack tumor cells.
The Company believes that Lm Technology immunotherapies can complement and address significant unmet needs in the current oncology treatment landscape. Specifically, our product candidates (i.e., ADXS-PSA and ADXS-503) have the potential to optimize checkpoint performance, while having a generally well-tolerated safety profile, and most of our product candidates have an expected low cost of goods. A new Investigator-Sponsored-Study with our FDA-approved IND is expected to start with ADXS-504-HOT construct in biochemically recurrent prostate cancer patients at a leading US Medical Institution in the first quarter of 2021.
Advaxis is currently winding down clinical studies of Lm Technology immunotherapies in three program areas:
●
Human Papilloma Virus (“HPV”)-associated cancers
● Personalized neoantigen-directed therapies
● Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) associated cancers
All these clinical program areas are anchored in the Company’s Lm TechnologyTM, a unique platform designed for its ability to safely and effectively target various cancers in multiple ways. While we are currently winding down clinical studies of Lm Technology immunotherapies in these three program areas, our license agreements continue with OS Therapies, LLC for ADXS-HER2 and with Global BioPharma, or GBP, for the exclusive license for the development and commercialization of AXAL in Asia, Africa, and the former USSR territory, exclusive of India and certain other countries.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended October 31, 2020 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended October 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue decreased $20.6 million to $0.3 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 compared to $20.9 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019. The decrease was due to the fact that the Company did not have another large collaboration in current year after the Amgen agreement was terminated. On December 10, 2018, we received a written notice of termination from Amgen with respect to the global agreement with Amgen (the “Amgen Agreement”). The termination was effective as of February 8, 2019. As of the notification date, we adjusted revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis considering the revised measure of progress for the combined performance obligation based on the modified service period up to and through the contract termination date of February 8, 2019 resulting in total revenue of $18.7 million in the prior period. In addition, the reimbursement of research and development costs of approximately $2.0 million by Amgen was included in revenue in the prior period.
Research and Development Expenses
We invest in research and development to advance our Lm technology through our preclinical and clinical development programs. Research and development expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were categorized as follows (in thousands):
Hotspot/Off-the-Shelf Therapies (ADXS-HOT)
Research and development costs associated with our hotspot mutation-based therapy for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 increased approximately 9% to $3.5 million compared to the same period in 2019. The increase is attributable to the costs associated with the Part B and Part C expansion of the study.
Prostate Cancer Therapy (ADXS-PSA)
Research and development costs associated with our prostate cancer therapy for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 increased approximately $0.1 million, or 10%, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase is attributable to a change order from the contract research organization during the current period. The Phase 1/2 study of our ADXS-PSA compound is in combination with KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab), Merck’s humanized monoclonal antibody. During 2020, we presented updated data from this study which demonstrated an increase in the median overall survival, or mOS, to 33.7 months for patients in the combination arm of this study and mOS of 16.4 for patients with visceral metasteses (n=11). We are in currently seeking potential partners on next steps for this therapy.
HPV-Associated Cancers (AXAL)
The majority of the HPV-associated research and development costs include clinical trial and other related costs associated with our AXAL programs in cervical and head and neck cancers. HPV-associated costs for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 decreased approximately $4.5 million, or 55%, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease resulted from the announcement made in June 2019 regarding the closing of our Phase 3 AIM2CERV study in high-risk locally advanced cervical cancer. We anticipate that we will continue to incur costs associated with the wind down of the study. Additionally, a winding down of several studies, including our Fawcett study in anal cancer and our MEDI4736 study in combination with MedImmune’s investigational anti-PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, durvalumab, drove further reduction in costs as compared to the prior period. We anticipate that our costs surrounding HPV-associated studies will continue to decline as we wrap up the remaining clinical and regulatory obligations of the program. We currently do not anticipate funding any new AXAL studies.
Personalized Neoantigen-Directed Therapies (ADXS-NEO)
Research and development costs associated with personalized neoantigen-directed therapies for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 decreased approximately $1.7 million, or 57%, compared to the same period in 2019. In October 2019, we announced that we enrolled our last patient in the ADXS-NEO program in monotherapy and will not continue into Part B of this study. As a result, the costs incurred for ADXS-NEO during the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 consisted of wind down costs associated with terminating the study. We anticipate that we will incur wind down costs for this study and we plan to close our ADXS-NEO program IND as a next step.
Other Expenses
Other expenses include salary and benefit costs, stock-based compensation expense, professional fees, laboratory costs and other internal and external costs associated with our research & development activities. Other expenses for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 decreased approximately $5.3 million, or 46%, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in salary related expenses, including stock compensation, and travel expenses resulting from cost control measures put in place beginning in June 2018. In addition, there were decreases in laboratory and manufacturing costs, as we are focused on the clinical development of our HOT program and less on early research programs. Additionally, we announced in October 2019 that we are winding down ADXS-NEO and therefore no longer incurring costs to manufacture ADXS-NEO.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily include salary and benefit costs and stock-based compensation expense for employees included in our finance, legal and administrative organizations, outside legal and professional services, and facilities costs. General and administrative expenses for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 decreased approximately $1.1 million, or 9%, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease is attributable to lower legal fees and business development costs partially offset by increased abandonment of certain non-strategic intellectual property.
Changes in Fair Values
For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash expense from changes in the fair value of the warrant liability of $0.
For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019, we recorded non-cash income from changes in the fair value of the warrant liability of approximately $2.6 million. The decrease in the fair value of liability warrants resulted from a decrease in our share price from $0.56 at October 31, 2018 to $0.32 at October 31, 2019, as well as a decrease in the number of liability warrants as a result of the warrant exchange (see Loss on shares issued in settlement of warrants below).
Loss on shares issued in settlement of warrants
On October 16, 2020, the Company entered into private exchange agreements with certain holders of warrants issued in connection with the Company’s January 2020 public offering of common stock and warrants. The warrants being exchanged provide for the purchase of up to an aggregate of 5,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.25 per share. The warrants became exercisable on July 21, 2020 and have an expiration date of July 21, 2025. Pursuant to such exchange agreements, the Company agreed to issue 3,000,000 shares of common stock to the investors in exchange for the warrants. In connection with the exchange of warrants for common stock, the Company recorded a loss of approximately $77 thousand as the fair value of the shares issued exceeded the fair value of warrants exchanged.
On March 14, 2019, we entered into private exchange agreements with certain holders of warrants issued in connection with our September 2018 public offering of common stock and warrants. Pursuant to the exchange agreements, we issued 856,865 shares of common stock to the investors in exchange for warrants on a 1:1 basis. In connection with the warrant exchange, we recorded a loss of approximately $1.6 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Management’s Plans
Similar to other development stage biotechnology companies, our products that are being developed have not generated significant revenue. As a result, we have suffered recurring losses and we require significant cash resources to execute our business plans. These losses are expected to continue for the foreseeable future.
Historically, our major sources of cash have comprised proceeds from various public and private offerings of our securities (including our common stock), debt financings, clinical collaborations, option and warrant exercises, income earned on investments and grants, and interest income. From October 2013 through October 31, 2020, we raised approximately $309.4 million in gross proceeds ($17.2 million in fiscal year 2020) from various public and private offerings of our common stock. We have sustained losses from operations in each fiscal year since our inception, and we expect losses to continue for the indefinite future. As of October 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $410.7 million and $384.3 million, respectively, and stockholders’ equity of approximately $30.2 million and $39.5 million, respectively.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economy and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. An extended period of economic disruption could negatively affect our business, financial condition, and access to sources of liquidity. As of October 31, 2020, we had approximately $25.2 million in cash and cash equivalents. The actual amount of cash that we will need to continue operating is subject to many factors. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use available capital resources sooner than currently expected.
The Company has reduced its operating expenses to $26.7 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 as compared to $38.9 million during the comparable prior period. Based on this, we expect to have sufficient capital to fund our obligations as they become due in the ordinary course of business until at least January 2022. In addition, we expect to adjust spending accordingly based on the budgeted cash flow requirements developed and the excess cash on hand.
We recognize that we will need to raise additional capital in order to continue to execute our business plan in the future. There is no assurance that additional financing will be available when needed or that we will be able to obtain financing on terms acceptable to us or whether we will become profitable and generate positive operating cash flow. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional funds, we will have to further scale back our operations.
On May 8, 2020, the Company entered into a sales agreement related to an at-the-market equity offering program pursuant to which the Company may sell, from time to time, common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $40 million through A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners, as sales agent, for general corporate purposes.
On July 30, 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”). Over the 36-month term of the purchase agreement, the Company has the right, but not the obligation, from time to time, in its sole discretion and subject to certain conditions, to direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to an aggregate amount of $20,000,000 of its common stock, subject to certain limitations.
Due to the current state of the Company’s stock price and general market conditions, these programs have not been utilized to their fullest extent, thereby resulting in lower capital availability than anticipated. Management’s plans to mitigate an expected shortfall of capital and to support future operations include obtaining additional funds through partnerships or strategic or financing investors.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $21.9 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 compared to $36.1 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities includes reduced spending associated with our clinical trial programs and general and administrative activities. The decrease was due to measures to control costs for non-essential items in areas that did not support our strategic direction, and as a result, we have continued to reduce non-strategic operating expenditures over the past several quarters.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $0.7 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 compared to $1.2 million for the nine months ended July 31, 2019. The reduction is a result of the abandonment of certain non-strategic intellectual property.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $15.5 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 as compared to $24.6 million for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019. In January 2020, we completed a public offering of 10,000,000 shares of our common stock, which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $9.7 million. Additionally, during the year end October 31, 2020, we sold 2,489,104 shares under the ATM program for net proceeds of $1.531 million, and we sold 11,242,048 shares of common stock under the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million. In fiscal year 2019, we received net proceeds of approximately $24.5 million from the sales of 13,150,000 shares of our common stock and 13,656,000 pre-funded warrants in public offerings.
On November 27, 2020, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 26,666,666 shares of common stock and common stock warrants to purchase up to 13,333,333 shares of common stock (the “November 2020 Offering”). On November 24, 2020, the underwriters notified us that they had exercised their option to purchase an additional 3,999,999 shares of common stock and 1,999,999 warrants in full. After giving effect to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option, we issued and sold an aggregate 30,666,665 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to 15,333,332 shares of common stock pursuant to our existing shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-226988). We received gross proceeds of approximately $9.2 million, before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and fees and expenses payable by us in connection with the November 2020 Offering.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of October 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Revenue Recognition
Effective November 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue form Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), using the modified retrospective transition method. Under this method, results for reporting periods beginning on November 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with ASC Topic 605, Revenue Recognition (ASC 605). The Company only applied the modified retrospective transition method to contracts that were not completed as of November 1, 2018, the effective date of adoption for ASC 606. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards. Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract, determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company enters into licensing agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606, under which it may exclusively license rights to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize its product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to the Company of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement of certain costs; customer option exercise fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under its agreements, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, the Company must use significant judgment to determine: (a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; (b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and (c) the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of transaction price in step (iv) above. The Company uses judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties, should be included in the transaction price as described further below. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which the Company recognizes revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied.
Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion.
Exclusive Licenses. If the license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. In assessing whether a performance obligation is distinct from the other performance obligations, the Company considers factors such as the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, the Company considers whether the collaboration partner can benefit from a performance obligation for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining performance obligation, whether the value of the performance obligation is dependent on the unsatisfied performance obligation, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining performance obligation, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining performance obligation. For licenses that are combined with other performance obligation, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. The measure of progress, and thereby periods over which revenue should be recognized, are subject to estimates by management and may change over the course of the research and development and licensing agreement. Such a change could have a material impact on the amount of revenue the Company records in future periods.
Research and Development Services. The performance obligations under the Company’s collaboration agreements may include research and development services to be performed by the Company on behalf of the partner. Payments or reimbursements resulting from the Company’s research and development efforts are recognized as the services are performed and presented on a gross basis because the Company is the principal for such efforts.
Milestone Payments. At the inception of each arrangement that includes research or development milestone payments, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. An output method is generally used to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of a milestone. Milestone payments that are not within the control of the Company or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, the Company reevaluates the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenue and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties. For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, which are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, the Company recognizes revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company has an equity plan which allows for the granting of stock options to its employees, directors and consultants for a fixed number of shares with an exercise price equal to the fair value of the shares at date of grant. The Company measures the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. The fair value of the award is measured on the grant date and is then recognized over the requisite service period, usually the vesting period, in both research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses on the statement of operations, depending on the nature of the services provided by the employees or consultants.
The process of estimating the fair value of stock-based compensation awards and recognizing stock-based compensation cost over their requisite service period involves significant assumptions and judgments. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option awards on the date of grant using the Black Scholes Model (“BSM”) for the remaining awards, which requires that the Company makes certain assumptions regarding: (i) the expected volatility in the market price of its common stock; (ii) dividend yield; (iii) risk-free interest rates; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise (referred to as the expected holding period). As a result, if the Company revises its assumptions and estimates, stock-based compensation expense could change materially for future grants.
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation using fair value recognition and records forfeitures as they occur. As such, the Company recognizes stock-based compensation cost only for those stock-based awards that vest over their requisite service period, based on the vesting provisions of the individual grants.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company used the Monte Carlo simulation model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets primarily consist of legal and filing costs associated with obtaining patents and licenses and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their remaining useful lives which are estimated to be twenty years from the effective dates of the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) License Agreements, beginning in July 1, 2002. These legal and filing costs are invoiced to the Company through Penn and its patent attorneys.
Management has reviewed its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset might not be recoverable and its carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is based upon estimated undiscounted future cash flows. Net assets are recorded on the balance sheet for patents and licenses related to AXAL, ADXS-NEO, ADXS-HOT, ADXS-PSA and ADXS-HER2 and other products that are in development. However, if a competitor were to gain FDA approval for a treatment before us or if future clinical trials fail to meet the targeted endpoints, the Company would likely record an impairment related to these assets. In addition, if an application is rejected or fails to be issued, the Company would record an impairment of its estimated book value.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes.” Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of: (i) taxes payable or refundable for the current year and (ii) deferred tax consequences of temporary differences resulting from matters that have been recognized in an entity’s financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is provided to reduce the deferred tax assets reported if based on the weight of the available positive and negative evidence, it is more likely than not some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC Topic 740-10-30 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC Topic 740-10-40 provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. The Company will classify as income tax expense any interest and penalties. The Company has no material uncertain tax positions for any of the reporting periods presented. The Company files tax returns in U.S. federal and state jurisdictions, including New Jersey, and is subject to audit by tax authorities beginning with the fiscal year ended October 31, 2017.
Leases
Effective November 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”) using the modified retrospective transition approach by applying the new standard to all leases existing as of the date of initial application. Results and disclosure requirements for reporting periods beginning after November 1, 2019 are presented under ASC 842, while prior period amounts have not been adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with the previous guidance in ASC 840, Leases.
At the inception of an arrangement, the Company determines whether an arrangement is or contains a lease based on the facts and circumstances present in the arrangement. An arrangement is or contains a lease if the arrangement conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Most leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as operating lease right-of-use assets and current and long-term operating lease liabilities, as applicable. The Company has elected not to recognize on the balance sheet leases with terms of 12 months or less. The Company typically only includes the initial lease term in its assessment of a lease arrangement. Options to extend a lease are not included in the Company’s assessment unless there is reasonable certainty that the Company will renew.
Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. Certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items such as prepaid or accrued rent. The interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is typically not readily determinable. As a result, the Company utilizes its incremental borrowing rate, which reflects the fixed rate at which the Company could borrow on a collateralized basis the amount of the lease payments in the same currency, for a similar term, in a similar economic environment. In transition to ASC 842, the Company utilized the remaining lease term of its leases in determining the appropriate incremental borrowing rates.
New Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our financial statements that discusses new accounting standards.