Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Authentic Equity Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Item 1. Business, Item 1A. Risk Factors, and Item 15. Financial Statements and the accompanying notes and other data, all of which appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands company on September 29, 2020. We were formed for the purpose entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more target businesses (the “Business Combination”).
Our sponsor is Authentic Equity Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for the initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on January 14, 2021. On January 20, 2021, we consummated an Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13.3 million, of which approximately $8.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,600,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.8 million, in a private placement to the Sponsor and the sale of a certain rights to General Electric Pension Trust (“GEPT”) for gross proceeds of $824,500 which will allow GEPT to purchase up to $50.0 million of Forward Purchase Units (as defined in Note 5 to the accompanying financial statements included in Item 15 to this Form Annual Report on Form 10-K) immediately prior to the closing of an initial Business Combination.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $230.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
We will have until January 20, 2023, to complete our initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination by that date, it will trigger the Company’s automatic winding up, liquidation and dissolution and, upon notice from us, the trustee of the Trust Account will distribute the amount in the Trust Account to the Public Shareholders. Concurrently, we shall pay, or reserve for payment, from funds not held in Trust, its liabilities and obligations, although we cannot assure that there will be sufficient funds for such purpose. If there are insufficient funds held outside the Trust Account for such purpose, our Sponsor has agreed that it will be liable to ensure that the proceeds in the Trust Account are not reduced by the claims of target businesses or claims of vendors or other entities that are owed money by us for services rendered or contracted for or products sold to us and which have not executed a waiver agreement. However, we cannot assure that the liquidator will not determine that he or she requires additional time to evaluate creditors’ claims (particularly if there is uncertainty over the validity or extent of the claims of any creditors). We also cannot assure that a creditor or shareholder will not file a petition with the Cayman Islands Court which, if successful, may result in our company’s liquidation being subject to the supervision of that court. Such events might delay distribution of some or all of our assets to the Public Shareholders. The Initial Shareholders have agreed to waive their liquidation rights with respect to the Insider Shares and Private Placement Shares held by them if we fail to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. However, if the Initial Shareholders should acquire Public Shares in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such Public Shares if we fail to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. The underwriters have agreed to waive their rights to their deferred underwriting commission held in the Trust Account in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period and, in such event, such amounts will be included with the funds held in the Trust Account that will be available to fund the redemption of our Public Shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per ordinary share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be only $10.00 per ordinary share initially held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $103 in operating cash and working capital deficit of approximately $421,000.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from Sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares and a loan of $96,500 from our Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). The loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We repaid the Note in full on January 20, 2021. Subsequent to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs will be satisfied with the proceeds not held in the Trust Account from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, Private Placement and the sale of rights to purchase Forward Purchase Units. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statement does not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2020 was for our formation, preparation for our Initial Public Offering, and, since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, a search for business combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from September 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $34,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On October 1, 2020, our Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for issuance of 5,750,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001, (the “Founder Shares”). In December 2020, we effected a share capitalization with respect to the Class B ordinary shares resulting in an aggregate of 7,000,000 Founder Shares outstanding. The Sponsor subsequently transferred 25,000 Class B ordinary shares to each of the independent directors, which shares were not subject to forfeiture in the event the underwriters’ over-allotment option was not exercised. The Sponsor agreed to forfeit (a) up to 750,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters and (b) up to 1,250,000 Founder Shares depending on the number of units purchased under the Forward Purchase Agreement if such number is below 5,000,000. The forfeiture would be adjusted to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering plus the number of Class A ordinary shares that may be sold pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement. On January 20, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option; thus, 750,000 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The Sponsor, our directors and executive officers and GEPT agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (a) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (b) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share subdivisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 6,600,000 Private Placement Warrants for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.8 million, in a private placement to our Sponsor and the sale of certain rights to GEPT for the gross proceeds of $824,500 that allow them to purchase up to $50.0 million of Forward Purchase Units that closed simultaneously with the Initial Public Offering.
Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor, GEPT or their permitted transferees.
The Sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On September 30, 2020, the Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover for expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant the Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed $96,500 under the Note and fully repaid the Note on January 20, 2021.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the effective date of the prospectus, we agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders were entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provide that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement, we agreed to use reasonable best efforts to: (i) file within 30 days after the closing of the initial Business Combination a registration statement with the SEC for a secondary offering of the Forward Purchase Shares and the Forward Purchase Warrants (and underlying Class A ordinary shares); (ii) cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than sixty (60) days after the initial filing; (iii) maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which the Sponsor or its assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby, and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 of the Securities Act; and (iv), after such registration statement is declared effective, cause us to conduct firm commitment underwritten offerings, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the Forward Purchase Agreement provides for certain “piggy-back” registration rights to the holders of forward purchase securities to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the cost of registering these securities.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 20, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $4.6 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.