ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Ameren, headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri, is a public utility holding company whose primary assets are its equity interests in its subsidiaries. Ameren’s subsidiaries are separate, independent legal entities with separate businesses, assets, and liabilities. Dividends on Ameren’s common stock and the payment of expenses by Ameren depend on distributions made to it by its subsidiaries.
Below is a summary description of Ameren’s principal subsidiaries - Ameren Missouri, Ameren Illinois, and ATXI. Ameren also has other subsidiaries that conduct other activities, such as providing shared services. A more detailed description can be found in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
•Ameren Missouri operates a rate-regulated electric generation, transmission, and distribution business and a rate-regulated natural gas distribution business in Missouri.
•Ameren Illinois operates rate-regulated electric transmission, electric distribution, and natural gas distribution businesses in Illinois.
•ATXI operates a FERC rate-regulated electric transmission business in the MISO.
Ameren has four segments: Ameren Missouri, Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, and Ameren Transmission. The Ameren Missouri segment includes all of the operations of Ameren Missouri. Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution consists of the electric distribution business of Ameren Illinois. Ameren Illinois Natural Gas consists of the natural gas business of Ameren Illinois. Ameren Transmission primarily consists of the aggregated electric transmission businesses of Ameren Illinois and ATXI. See Note 16 - Segment Information under Part II, Item 8, of this report for further discussion of Ameren’s and Ameren Illinois’ segments.
Ameren’s financial statements are prepared on a consolidated basis and therefore include the accounts of its majority-owned subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions have been eliminated, except as disclosed in Note 13 - Related-party Transactions under Part II, Item 8, of this report. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois have no subsidiaries. All tabular and graphical dollar amounts are in millions, unless otherwise indicated.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements contained in this Form 10-K. We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements. The discussion also provides information about the financial results of our business segments to provide a better understanding of how those segments and their results affect the financial condition and results of operations of Ameren as a whole. Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, including comparisons with the year ended December 31, 2019, is included in Item 7 of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
In addition to presenting results of operations and earnings amounts in total, we present certain information in cents per share. These amounts reflect factors that directly affect Ameren’s earnings. We believe this per share information helps readers to understand the impact of these factors on Ameren’s earnings per share.
OVERVIEW
Our core strategy is driven by the following three pillars:
(a) Reflects year-end rate base except for Ameren Transmission, which is average rate base.
(b) Compound annual growth rate.
(c) As of January 2021.
(d) Allowed ROE applicable to electric service.
(e) Average residential electric prices. Source: Edison Electric Institute, “Typical Bills and Average Rates Report” for the 12 months ended June 30, 2020.
(f) Ameren management cautions that the stock price performance shown above should not be considered indicative of future stock price performance.
Key announcements, updates, and regulatory outcomes
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to be a constantly evolving situation. In 2020, we experienced a net decrease in our sales volumes, an increase in our accounts receivable balances that were past due or that were a part of a deferred payment arrangement, and a decline in our cash collections from customers. The continued effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity in subsequent periods will depend on its severity and longevity, future regulatory or legislative actions with respect thereto, and the resulting impact on business, economic, and capital market conditions. Shelter-in-place orders began taking effect in our service territories in mid-March 2020. These orders generally required individuals to remain at home and precluded or limited the operation of businesses that were deemed nonessential. In early 2020, Ameren began implementing its business continuity plans, and continues to take measures to mitigate the risk of COVID-19 transmission. Actions included restricting travel for employees, implementing work-from-home policies, securing and supplying personal protective equipment, and implementing work practices to protect the safety of our employees and customers. While our business operations were deemed essential and were not directly impacted by the shelter-in-place orders, approximately 65% of our workforce transitioned to remote working arrangements in mid-March 2020. In order to work more effectively in certain areas, a portion of our workforce returned to our work locations in early June 2020 under a phased approach, and, as of the date of this filing, approximately 50% of our workforce continues to work remotely. In mid-May 2020, shelter-in-place orders effective in our service territories began to be relaxed, with fewer restrictions on social activities and nonessential businesses beginning to reopen. However, certain
restrictions remain in place that limit individual activities and the operation of nonessential businesses. Additional restrictions may be imposed in the future. We continue to assess the impacts the pandemic is having on our businesses, including impacts on electric and natural gas sales volumes, liquidity, and bad debt expense, among other things. For further discussion of these and other matters, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report, and Results of Operations, Liquidity and Capital Resources, and Outlook sections below. In addition, for information regarding Ameren Missouri’s and Ameren Illinois’ suspensions and reinstatement of customer disconnection activities and late fee charges for nonpayment, see Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
In February 2020, the MoPSC issued an order approving a stipulation and agreement allowing Ameren Missouri to defer and amortize maintenance expenses related to scheduled refueling and maintenance outages at its Callaway Energy Center. Maintenance expenses associated with the fall 2020 refueling and maintenance outage were deferred as a regulatory asset. Amortization of those expenses began in January 2021, and will be amortized until the completion of the next refueling and maintenance outage. During its return to full power after the completion of the last refueling and maintenance outage in late December 2020, the Callaway Energy Center experienced a non-nuclear operating issue related to its generator. A thorough investigation of this matter was conducted. Work has begun to replace certain key components of the generator in order to return the energy center to service. Ameren Missouri expects generator repairs of $65 million, which are expected to be largely capital expenditures. Due to the long lead time for the manufacture, repair, and installation of the components, the energy center is expected to return to service in late June or early July 2021. See Note 9 - Callaway Energy Center under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information.
In March 2020, the MoPSC issued an order in Ameren Missouri’s July 2019 electric service regulatory rate review, approving nonunanimous stipulation and agreements. The order resulted in a decrease of $32 million to Ameren Missouri’s annual revenue requirement for electric retail service, which reflected infrastructure investments as of December 31, 2019. The order also provided for the continued use of the FAC and trackers for pension and postretirement benefits, uncertain income tax positions, and certain excess deferred income taxes that the MoPSC previously authorized in earlier electric rate orders. In addition, the order required Ameren Missouri to donate $8 million to low-income assistance programs, which was reflected in results of operations in the first quarter of 2020. The new rates became effective on April 1, 2020.
In August 2020, the MoPSC issued an order approving a unanimous stipulation and agreement with respect to the 2022 program year of Ameren Missouri’s six-year MEEIA 2019 program and related performance incentives. The order also approved Ameren Missouri’s energy savings results for the first year of the MEEIA 2019 program. As a result of this order and in accordance with revenue recognition guidance, Ameren Missouri recognized revenues of $6 million in the third quarter of 2020.
In September 2020, Ameren Missouri filed its 2020 IRP with the MoPSC. In connection with the 2020 IRP filing, Ameren established a goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. Ameren is also targeting a 50% CO2 emission reduction by 2030 and an 85% reduction by 2040 from the 2005 level. The plan, which is subject to review by the MoPSC for compliance with Missouri law, targets cleaner and more diverse sources of energy generation, including solar, wind, hydro, and nuclear power, and supports increased investment in new energy technologies. It also includes expanding renewable sources by adding 3,100 MWs of renewable generation by the end of 2030 and a total of 5,400 MWs of renewable generation by 2040. These amounts include the 700 MWs of wind generation projects discussed below, which will support Ameren Missouri’s compliance with the state of Missouri’s requirement of achieving 15% of native load sales from renewable energy sources beginning in 2021. The plan also includes advancing the retirement dates of the Sioux and Rush Island coal-fired energy centers to 2028 and 2039, respectively, which are subject to the approval of a change in the assets’ depreciable lives by the MoPSC in a future regulatory rate review, the continued implementation of customer energy-efficiency programs, and the expectation that Ameren Missouri will seek NRC approval for an extension of the operating license for the Callaway Energy Center beyond its current 2044 expiration date. Additionally, the plan includes retiring the Meramec and Labadie coal-fired energy centers at the end of their useful lives (by 2022 and 2042, respectively).
In October 2020, Ameren Missouri filed requests with the MoPSC for accounting authority orders related to its electric and natural gas services. If issued as requested, the orders would allow Ameren Missouri to accumulate certain costs incurred related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including bad debt write-offs, net of cost savings, as well as forgone customer late fee and reconnection fee revenues, for a specified time period, for potential recovery in future electric and natural gas service regulatory rate reviews. Costs incurred, net of savings, and forgone customer late fee and reconnection fee revenues related to the COVID-19 pandemic from March 2020 through December 2020 were immaterial. The MoPSC is under no deadline to issue orders, and Ameren Missouri cannot predict the ultimate outcome of these regulatory proceedings.
In December 2020, Ameren Missouri acquired a 400-MW wind generation project located in northeastern Missouri for approximately $615 million, and placed the assets in service as the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center. In January 2021, Ameren Missouri acquired an up-to 300-MW wind generation project located in northwestern Missouri. At the date of this filing, Ameren Missouri placed 120 MWs in service as the Atchison Renewable Energy Center, with a purchase price of approximately $200 million. There have been changes to the schedule
for this project, particularly as a result of component delivery delays. Ameren Missouri expects approximately 150 MWs of the up-to 300-MW project to be in service by the end of the first quarter of 2021, and the remaining portion to be in service later in 2021.
In February 2021, Ameren Missouri filed an update to its Smart Energy Plan with the MoPSC, which includes a five-year capital investment overview with a detailed one-year plan for 2021. The plan is designed to upgrade Ameren Missouri’s electric infrastructure and includes investments that will upgrade the grid and accommodate more renewable energy. Investments under the plan are expected to total approximately $8.4 billion over the five-year period from 2021 through 2025, with expenditures largely recoverable under the PISA and the RESRAM. The planned investments in 2024 and 2025 are based on the assumption that Ameren Missouri requests and receives MoPSC approval of an extension of the PISA through December 2028.
In December 2020, the ICC issued an order in Ameren Illinois’ annual update filing that approved a $49 million decrease in Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution service rates beginning in January 2021. This order reflected a decrease to the annual formula rate based on 2019 actual costs, a decrease to include the 2019 revenue requirement reconciliation adjustment, and a decrease for the conclusion of the 2018 revenue requirement reconciliation adjustment, which was fully collected from customers in 2020, consistent with the ICC’s December 2019 annual update filing order. It also reflected an increase based on expected net plant additions for 2020.
In January 2021, the ICC issued an order in Ameren Illinois’ February 2020 natural gas delivery service regulatory rate review, which resulted in an increase to its annual revenues for natural gas delivery service of $76 million, based on a 9.67% allowed ROE, a capital structure composed of 52% common equity, and a rate base of $2.1 billion. The new rates became effective in January 2021. As a result of this order, the rate base under the QIP was reset to zero. Ameren Illinois used a 2021 future test year in this proceeding.
In October 2020, Ameren’s board of directors increased the quarterly common stock dividend to 51.5 cents per share. In February 2021, the board increased the quarterly common stock dividend to 55 cents per share, resulting in an annualized equivalent dividend rate of $2.20 per share.
Earnings
Net income attributable to Ameren common shareholders was $871 million, or $3.50 per diluted share, for 2020, and $828 million, or $3.35 per diluted share, for 2019. Net income was favorably affected in 2020, compared with 2019, by the results of Ameren Missouri’s March 2020 electric rate order; infrastructure investments that drove higher earnings at Ameren Transmission, Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, and Ameren Illinois Natural Gas; and increased Ameren Transmission earnings resulting from the May 2020 FERC order addressing the allowed base ROE. Earnings in 2020, compared with 2019, were also favorably affected by lower other operations and maintenance expenses not subject to riders or trackers, primarily due to the absence in 2020 of expenses related to the Callaway Energy Center’s 2019 scheduled refueling and maintenance outage; and by lower electric system infrastructure maintenance expenses as a result of decreased system load, disciplined cost management, and the deferral of projects to future periods. Net income was unfavorably affected in 2020, compared with 2019, by decreased electric retail sales at Ameren Missouri largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and due to milder summer and warmer winter temperatures in 2020; higher net financing costs at Ameren Missouri and Ameren (parent); lower revenues due to reduced MEEIA performance incentives at Ameren Missouri; and a lower recognized ROE at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution.
Liquidity
At December 31, 2020, Ameren, on a consolidated basis, had available liquidity in the form of cash on hand and amounts available under the Credit Agreements of $1.9 billion.
Ameren remains focused on strategic capital allocation. The following chart presents 2020 capital expenditures by segment and the midpoint of projected cumulative capital expenditures for 2021 through 2025 by segment:
2020 Capital Expenditures by Segment
(Total Ameren - $3.2 billion)
(in billions)
Midpoint of 2021 - 2025 Projected Capital
Expenditures by Segment (Total Ameren - $17.1 billion)
(in billions)
(a)Ameren Missouri capital expenditures include $564 million for the acquisition of the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For 2021 through 2025, Ameren’s cumulative capital expenditures are projected to range from $16.4 billion to $17.8 billion. The following table presents the range of projected spending by segment:
(a)Amounts include 300 MWs of wind generation at the Atchison Renewable Energy Center, but exclude incremental renewable generation investment opportunities of 1,200 MWs by 2025, which are included in Ameren Missouri’s 2020 IRP.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our results of operations and financial position are affected by many factors. Economic conditions, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic discussed below, energy-efficiency investments by our customers and by us, technological advances, distributed generation, and the actions of key customers can significantly affect the demand for our services. Ameren and Ameren Missouri results are also affected by seasonal fluctuations in winter heating and summer cooling demands, as well as by energy center maintenance outages. Additionally, fluctuations in interest rates and conditions in the capital and credit markets affect our cost of borrowing, and our pension and postretirement benefits costs. Almost all of Ameren’s revenues are subject to state or federal regulation. This regulation has a material impact on the rates we charge customers for our services. Our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity are affected by our ability to align our overall spending, both operating and capital, with the frameworks established by our regulators. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information regarding Ameren Missouri’s, Ameren Illinois’, and ATXI’s regulatory frameworks.
We continue to assess the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our businesses, including impacts on electric and natural gas sales volumes, supply chain operations, and bad debt expense. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois suspended customer disconnections and late
fee charges for nonpayment in mid-March 2020 and began resuming these activities, with certain exceptions, in the third quarter of 2020. For additional information on Ameren Missouri’s and Ameren Illinois’ reinstatement of customer disconnection and late fee charges for non-payment, see Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report. With respect to uncollectible accounts receivable, Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution and natural gas distribution businesses have bad debt riders, which provide for recovery of bad debt write-offs, net of any subsequent recoveries. Pursuant to a June 2020 ICC order, Ameren Illinois’ electric bad debt rider provided for the recovery of bad debt expense in 2020, which reverted to the recovery of bad debt write-offs, net of any subsequent recoveries, in 2021. Ameren Missouri does not have a bad debt rider or tracker, and thus its earnings are exposed to increases in bad debt expense, absent regulatory relief. However, Ameren Missouri does not expect a material impact to earnings from increases in bad debt expense. In October 2020, Ameren Missouri filed requests with the MoPSC for accounting authority orders related to certain impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. If issued as requested, the orders would allow Ameren Missouri to accumulate certain costs incurred related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including bad debt write-offs, net of cost savings, as well as forgone customer late fee and reconnection fee revenues, for a specified time period, for potential recovery in future electric and natural gas service regulatory rate reviews. As of December 31, 2020, accounts receivable balances that were 30 days or greater past due or that were a part of a deferred payment arrangement represented 29%, 22%, and 35%, or $133 million, $40 million, and $93 million, of Ameren’s, Ameren Missouri’s, and Ameren Illinois’ customer trade receivables before allowance for doubtful accounts, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, these percentages were 18%, 18%, and 20%, or $75 million, $30 million, and $45 million, for Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois, respectively. Ameren Missouri’s electric sales volumes have been, and continue to be, affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020, compared to 2019, Ameren Missouri experienced a reduction in commercial and industrial electric sales volumes, partially offset by increased electric sales volumes to higher margin residential customers, excluding the estimated effects of weather and customer energy-efficiency programs. For 2021, Ameren Missouri expects gradual improvement in economic activities to result in increased electric sales volumes, excluding the estimated effects of weather and customer energy-efficiency programs. The table below provides the increases and (decreases) in Ameren Missouri electric sales volumes by customer class for 2020, compared to 2019, and the estimated increases and (decreases) for 2021, compared to 2020, excluding the estimated effects of weather and customer energy-efficiency programs:
Assuming a ratable change in Ameren Missouri’s electric sales volumes by month, a 1% change for the calendar year 2021 to residential, commercial, and industrial customers would affect earnings per diluted share by approximately 3 cents, 2 cents, and a half-cent, respectively. The actual change in earnings per diluted share will be affected by the timing of sales volume changes due to seasonal customer rates.
Ameren Missouri principally uses coal and enriched uranium for fuel in its electric operations and purchases natural gas for its customers. Ameren Illinois purchases power and natural gas for its customers. The prices for these commodities can fluctuate significantly because of the global economic and political environment, weather, supply, demand, and many other factors. We have natural gas cost recovery mechanisms for our Illinois and Missouri natural gas distribution businesses, a purchased power cost recovery mechanism for Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution business, and a FAC for Ameren Missouri’s electric business.
We employ various risk management strategies to reduce our exposure to commodity risk and other risks inherent in our business. The reliability of Ameren Missouri’s energy centers and our transmission and distribution systems and the level and timing of operations and maintenance costs and capital investment are key factors that we seek to manage in order to optimize our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity.
Earnings Summary
The following table presents a summary of Ameren’s earnings for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net income attributable to Ameren common shareholders in 2020 increased $43 million, or $0.15 per diluted share, from 2019. The increase was due to net income increases of $31 million, $15 million, and $10 million, at Ameren Transmission, Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, and Ameren Missouri, respectively. The increases in net income were partially offset by an increase in the net loss for activity not reported as part of a segment, primarily at Ameren (parent) of $10 million and a decrease in net income at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution of $3 million.
Earnings per share in 2020, compared with 2019, were favorably affected by:
•lower base level of expenses, partially offset by lower base rates, net of recovery for amounts associated with the reduction in sales volumes resulting from MEEIA programs and recoverable depreciation under the PISA, at Ameren Missouri pursuant to the March 2020 MoPSC electric rate order as discussed in Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report (23 cents per share);
•increased rate base investments, which increased earnings at Ameren Transmission and Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, including energy-efficiency investments at Ameren Illinois (14 cents per share);
•decreased Callaway Energy Center scheduled refueling and maintenance expenses, due to the treatment of the 2019 scheduled refueling and maintenance outage costs at the Callaway Energy Center, which were expensed as incurred, as compared with the deferral of expenses for the fall 2020 scheduled refueling and maintenance outage pursuant to the February 2020 MoPSC order, which decreased other operations and maintenance expenses (10 cents per share);
•decreased system load, disciplined cost management, the deferral of projects to future periods, and decreased other costs not recoverable under riders or trackers, excluding decreased costs associated with the Callaway Energy Center’s scheduled refueling and maintenance outage, which decreased other operations and maintenance expenses (10 cents per share);
•the result of the May 2020 FERC order addressing the allowed base ROE for FERC regulated transmission rate base under the MISO tariff, which increased Ameren Transmission earnings (4 cents per share); and
•increased investments in qualifying infrastructure recovered under the QIP, which increased earnings at Ameren Illinois Natural Gas (4 cents per share).
Earnings per share in 2020, compared with 2019, were unfavorably affected by:
•lower MEEIA performance incentives recognized at Ameren Missouri (9 cents per share);
•increased net financing costs at Ameren (parent) and Ameren Missouri, primarily due to higher long-term debt balances (9 cents per share);
•decreased electric retail sales, excluding the estimated effects of weather, at Ameren Missouri, largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which decreased sales volumes and demand charge revenue from commercial and industrial customers, partially offset by increased sales volumes to higher margin residential customers (8 cents per share);
•the impact of weather on electric retail sales at Ameren Missouri, primarily resulting from milder summer and warmer winter temperatures experienced in 2020 (estimated at 7 cents per share);
•a lower recognized ROE at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution under performance-based formula ratemaking driven by lower annual average monthly yields on 30-year United States Treasury bonds (7 cents per share);
•increased charitable donations, primarily at Ameren Missouri, which included an increase of 2 cents per share pursuant to its March 2020 electric rate order (4 cents per share);
•decreased electric margins from transmission services, and customer late fees and reconnection fees at Ameren Missouri, largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic (3 cents per share);
•decreased income tax benefits at Ameren (parent) related to stock-based compensation (3 cents per share);
•increased depreciation and amortization expenses not recoverable under riders or trackers at Ameren Missouri, primarily due to additional property, plant, and equipment investments (2 cents per share); and
•increased weighted-average basic common shares outstanding (2 cents per share).
The cents per share information presented is based on the weighted-average basic shares outstanding in 2019 and does not reflect any change in earnings per share resulting from dilution, unless otherwise noted. Amounts other than variances related to income taxes have been presented net of income taxes using Ameren’s 2020 statutory tax rate of 26%. For additional details regarding the Ameren Companies’ results of operations, including explanations of Electric and Natural Gas Margins, Other Operations and Maintenance Expenses, Depreciation and Amortization, Taxes Other Than Income Taxes, Other Income, Net, Interest Charges, and Income Taxes, see the major headings below.
Below is Ameren’s table of income statement components by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Below is Ameren Illinois’ table of income statement components by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Margins
Electric margins are defined as electric revenues less fuel and purchased power costs. Natural gas margins are defined as natural gas revenues less natural gas purchased for resale. We consider electric and natural gas margins useful measures to analyze the change in profitability of our electric and natural gas operations between periods. We have included the analysis below as a complement to the financial information we provide in accordance with GAAP. However, these margins may not be a presentation defined under GAAP, and they may not be comparable to other companies’ presentations or more useful than the GAAP information we provide elsewhere in this report.
Electric Margins
Total by Segment(a)
Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Increase of $18 Million)
(a)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $(29) million and $(29) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Natural Gas Margins
Total by Segment(a)
Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Increase of $13 Million)
(a)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $(2) million and $(2) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table presents the favorable (unfavorable) variations by segment for electric and natural gas margins in 2020, compared with 2019:
(a)Includes an increase in transmission electric margins of $41 million in 2020, compared with 2019, at Ameren Illinois.
(b)Represents the estimated variation resulting primarily from changes in cooling and heating degree days on electric and natural gas demand compared with the prior year; this variation is based on temperature readings from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration weather stations at local airports in our service territories.
(c)For Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution and Ameren Transmission, base rates include increases or decreases to operating revenues related to the revenue requirement reconciliation adjustment under formula rates. For Ameren Missouri, base rates exclude an increase of $43 million for the recovery of lost electric margins in 2020, compared with 2019, resulting from the MEEIA 2016 and 2019 customer energy-efficiency programs. This amount is included in the “sales volumes and changes in customer usage patterns (excluding the estimated effects of weather and MEEIA)” line item.
(d)Electric and natural gas revenue changes are offset by corresponding changes in “Fuel,” “Purchased power,” and “Natural gas purchased for resale” on the statement of income, resulting in no change to electric and natural gas margins.
(e)Offsetting expense increases or decreases are reflected in “Other operations and maintenance,” “Depreciation and amortization,” or in “Taxes other than income taxes,” within the “Operating Expenses” section of the statement of income. These items have no overall impact on earnings.
Ameren
Ameren’s electric margins increased $18 million, or less than 1%, in 2020, compared with 2019, primarily because of increased margins at Ameren Transmission and Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, partially offset by decreased margins at Ameren Missouri, as discussed
below. Ameren’s natural gas margins increased $13 million, or 2%, between years primarily because of increased margins at Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, as discussed below.
Ameren Transmission
Ameren Transmission’s electric margins increased $59 million, or 13%, in 2020, compared with 2019. Margins were favorably affected by increased capital investment, as evidenced by a 13% increase in the 13-month average rate base used to calculate the revenue requirement between years, and an increase in the allowed ROE resulting from the May 2020 FERC order. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information regarding the May 2020 FERC order.
Ameren Missouri
Ameren Missouri’s electric margins decreased $58 million, or 2%, in 2020, compared with 2019. Ameren Missouri’s natural gas margins were comparable between years.
The following items had an unfavorable effect on Ameren Missouri’s electric margins in 2020, compared with 2019:
•The aggregate effect of changes in customer usage, excluding the estimated effects of weather and the MEEIA customer energy-efficiency programs, decreased electric revenues an estimated $43 million. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in sales volumes (-$44 million) and decreased revenues from customer demand charges (-$7 million), both of which were unfavorably affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. An increase in the average retail price per kilowatthour due to changes in customer usage patterns partially offset the decreases by a favorable $8 million. While the MEEIA customer energy-efficiency programs reduced retail sales volumes, the recovery of lost electric margins under the MEEIA ensured that electric margins were not affected.
•The absence of revenues associated with MEEIA 2013 and 2016 performance incentives in 2020, partially offset by revenues from the MEEIA 2019 performance incentive, decreased revenues $31 million. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information regarding the MEEIA performance incentives.
•Summer temperatures were milder as cooling degree days decreased 7%, and winter temperatures were warmer as heating degree days decreased 9%. The aggregate effect of weather decreased margins by an estimated $22 million. The change in margins due to weather is the sum of the “Effect of weather (estimate)” on electric revenues (-$30 million) and the “Effect of weather (estimate)” on fuel and purchased power (+$8 million) in the table above.
•Additional investments made by other transmission entities contributed to increased transmission service charges of $3 million and lower system load contributed to decreased transmission service revenues of $3 million.
•In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, suspensions of customer late fees and reconnection fees resulted in a $4 million decrease in revenue. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information on the suspension of customer late fees and disconnections.
The following items had a favorable effect on Ameren Missouri’s electric margins in 2020, compared with 2019:
•The March 2020 MoPSC electric rate order, with new rates effective April 1, 2020, increased margins $34 million. The change in electric base rates is the sum of the “Change in base rates (estimate)” (-$58 million) and the “Effect of lower net energy costs included in base rates” (+$92 million) in the table above.
•Decreased sales volumes, which were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulted in lower net energy costs and increased margins $13 million. The change in net energy costs is the sum of the effect of the revenue change in “Off-system sales” (+$47 million) and the “Effect of the change in energy costs” (-$34 million) in the table above.
Ameren Illinois
Ameren Illinois’ electric margins increased $58 million, or 4%, in 2020, compared with 2019, driven by increased margins at Ameren Illinois Transmission (+$41 million) and Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution (+$17 million). Ameren Illinois Natural Gas’ margins increased $12 million, or 2%, between years.
Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution
Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution’s margins increased $17 million, or 2%, in 2020, compared with 2019. Revenues increased $12 million due to increased energy-efficiency program investments under performance-based formula ratemaking. Margins decreased due to a lower recognized ROE (-$17 million), as evidenced by a decrease of 102 basis points in the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds, partially offset by increased capital investment (+$8 million), as evidenced by a 6% increase in year-end rate base, and higher recoverable non-purchased power expenses (+$6 million). The sum of these base rate changes collectively decreased margins $3 million in 2020, compared with 2019.
Ameren Illinois Natural Gas
Ameren Illinois Natural Gas’ margins increased $12 million, or 2%, in 2020, compared with 2019. Revenues from increased QIP recoveries due to additional investment in qualified natural gas infrastructure increased margins $23 million. The absence of revenues from a software licensing agreement with Ameren Missouri decreased margins $5 million. See the Software Licensing Agreement section within Note 13 - Related-party Transactions under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information regarding this transaction.
Ameren Illinois Transmission
Ameren Illinois Transmission’s electric margins increased $41 million, or 14%, in 2020, compared with 2019. Margins were favorably affected by increased capital investment, as evidenced by a 19% increase in the 13-month average rate base between years, and an increase in the allowed ROE resulting from the May 2020 FERC order. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information regarding the May 2020 FERC order.
Other Operations and Maintenance Expenses
Total by Segment(a)
Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Decrease of $84 Million)
(a)Includes $57 million and $60 million at Ameren Transmission in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and other/intersegment eliminations of $(9) million and $(6) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Ameren
Other operations and maintenance expenses were $84 million lower in 2020, compared with 2019. In addition to changes by segments discussed below, other operations and maintenance expenses decreased $3 million in 2020 for activity not reported as part of a segment, as reflected in “Other/Intersegment Eliminations” above, primarily because of decreased costs for support services.
Ameren Transmission
Other operations and maintenance expenses were $3 million lower in 2020, compared with 2019, primarily due to a decrease in transmission expenditures at Ameren Illinois Transmission resulting from disciplined cost management.
Ameren Missouri
The $74 million decrease in other operations and maintenance expenses in 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to the following items:
•Callaway Energy Center refueling operations and maintenance costs decreased $34 million, due to the treatment of the 2019 scheduled refueling and maintenance outage costs at the Callaway Energy Center, which were expensed as incurred, as compared with the deferral of expenses for the fall 2020 scheduled refueling and maintenance outage pursuant to the February 2020 MoPSC order.
•Energy center maintenance costs, other than those associated with the Callaway refueling and maintenance outage, decreased $29 million, primarily because of lower electric system infrastructure maintenance expenses as a result of decreased system load, disciplined cost management, and the deferral of projects to future periods.
•Transmission and distribution expenditures decreased $15 million, primarily resulting from less maintenance due to recent capital improvements and disciplined cost management.
•Amortization of solar rebate costs incurred prior to the RESRAM decreased $13 million as a result of the March 2020 MoPSC electric rate order.
The following items partially offset the above decreases in other operations and maintenance expenses between years:
•Solar rebate costs recoverable under the RESRAM increased $9 million, primarily because of the amortization of previously-deferred rebates included in customer rates in 2020.
•Bad debt costs increased $7 million, primarily because of an increase in accounts receivable balances that were past due or that were a part of a deferred payment arrangement, which increased primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Technology-related expenditures increased $5 million, primarily because of costs associated with the implementation of cloud computing technology.
Ameren Illinois
Other operations and maintenance expenses were $7 million lower at Ameren Illinois in 2020, compared with 2019, as discussed below.
Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution
The $8 million increase in other operations and maintenance expenses in 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to the following items:
•Amortization of energy-efficiency program investments under performance-based formula ratemaking increased $8 million.
•Labor and benefit costs increased $8 million, primarily because of higher pension costs.
The following items partially offset the above increases in other operations and maintenance expenses between years:
•Meter reading costs decreased $4 million, as deployment of automated smart meters was substantially completed in 2019.
•Distribution expenditures decreased $3 million, primarily because of lower storm costs.
Ameren Illinois Natural Gas
The $12 million decrease in other operations and maintenance expenses in 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to a $4 million reduction in costs recovered through riders and a $4 million reduction in meter reading costs, as deployment of automated smart meters was substantially completed in 2019. Other operations and maintenance expenses also decreased because of a $4 million reduction in distribution expenditures due to disciplined cost management.
Ameren Illinois Transmission
The $3 million decrease in other operations and maintenance expenses in 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in transmission expenditures resulting from disciplined cost management.
Depreciation and Amortization
Total by Segment(a)
Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Increase of $80 Million)
(a)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $4 million and $4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The $80 million, $48 million, and $28 million increase in depreciation and amortization expenses in 2020, compared with 2019, at Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois, respectively, was primarily due to additional property, plant, and equipment across their respective segments. Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s depreciation and amortization expenses reflected a deferral to a regulatory asset of depreciation and amortization expenses pursuant to the PISA. The PISA deferral of depreciation and amortization expenses was $27 million and $24 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Taxes Other Than Income Taxes
Total by Segment(a)
Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Increase of $2 Million)
(a)Includes $8 million and $4 million at Ameren Transmission in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and other/intersegment eliminations of $10 million and $8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Taxes other than income taxes were comparable at Ameren between 2020 and 2019. Excise taxes decreased $8 million and $4 million at Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, respectively, because of reduced sales. These decreases were mostly offset by increases of $7 million and $4 million in property taxes at Ameren Missouri and Ameren Transmission, respectively, primarily due to higher assessed property values. See Excise Taxes in Note 15 - Supplemental Information under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information.
Other Income, Net
Total by Segment Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Increase of $21 Million)
Other income, net, increased $21 million at Ameren in 2020, compared with 2019. An increase of $28 million in the non-service cost components of net periodic benefit income at Ameren Missouri was partially offset by a $9 million increase in donations, primarily due to charitable donations made pursuant to the March 2020 MoPSC electric rate order. Additionally, other income, net, increased because of a $4 million increase in the equity portion of allowance for funds used during construction at Ameren Transmission. See Note 6 - Other Income, Net under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information regarding Ameren Missouri’s March 2020 electric rate order. See Note 10 - Retirement Benefits under Part II, Item 8, of this report for more information on the non-service cost components of net periodic benefit income.
Interest Charges
Total by Segment Increase (Decrease) by Segment
(Overall Ameren Increase of $38 Million)
Interest charges increased $38 million in 2020, compared with 2019, primarily because of a long-term debt issuance at Ameren (parent) in April 2020, which increased interest charges by $21 million, which was partially offset by a decrease associated with the reduction in average short-term debt outstanding, as proceeds from the long-term debt issuance were used to repay outstanding short-term debt. Interest charges also increased due to long-term debt issuances at Ameren Missouri in March 2020 and October 2020, partially offset by lower average interest rates applicable to long-term debt, which increased interest charges by $14 million. Interest charges at Ameren Missouri reflected a deferral to a regulatory asset of interest charges pursuant to PISA. The PISA deferral of interest charges was $12 million and $15 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income Taxes
The following table presents effective income tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
See Note 12 - Income Taxes under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information regarding reconciliations of effective income tax rates for Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information regarding reductions in revenues related to the lower federal statutory corporate income tax rate enacted under the TCJA and the return of excess deferred income taxes to customers.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Collections from our tariff-based revenues are our principal source of cash provided by operating activities. A diversified retail customer mix, primarily consisting of rate-regulated residential, commercial, and industrial customers, provides us with a reasonably predictable source of cash. In addition to using cash provided by operating activities, we use available cash, drawings under committed credit agreements, commercial paper issuances, and/or, in the case of Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, short-term affiliate borrowings to support normal operations and temporary capital requirements. We may reduce our short-term borrowings with cash provided by operations or, at our discretion, with long-term borrowings, or, in the case of Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, with capital contributions from Ameren (parent). We expect to make significant capital expenditures over the next five years as we invest in our electric and natural gas utility infrastructure to support overall system reliability, grid modernization, renewable energy targets requirements, environmental compliance, and other improvements. As part of its plan to fund these cash flow requirements, Ameren is using newly issued shares of common stock, rather than market-purchased shares, to satisfy requirements under the DRPlus and employee benefit plans and expects to continue to do so through at least 2025. Ameren expects these issuances to provide equity of about $100 million annually. In addition to the issuance of common shares in connection with the 2021 settlement of the remaining portion of the forward sale agreement, Ameren plans to issue incremental equity of about $150 million in 2021 and about $300 million each year from 2022 to 2025. Ameren expects its equity to total capitalization to be about 45% through December 31, 2025, with the long-term intent to support solid investment-grade credit ratings.
The use of cash provided by operating activities and short-term borrowings to fund capital expenditures and other long-term investments at the Ameren Companies frequently results in a working capital deficit, defined as current liabilities exceeding current assets, as was the case at December 31, 2020, for Ameren and Ameren Illinois. With the credit capacity available under the Credit Agreements, and cash and cash equivalents, Ameren (parent), Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois, collectively had net available liquidity of $1.9 billion at December 31, 2020. As a result of capital market volatility, due, in part, to the COVID-19 pandemic, and to increase net available liquidity, Ameren (parent) accelerated a debt issuance to April 2020, which had been planned for later in 2020, and used a portion of the proceeds to repay $350 million of senior unsecured notes held by Ameren (parent) in October 2020. Also, in August 2019, Ameren entered into a forward sale agreement with a counterparty relating to 7.5 million shares of common stock. In December 2020, Ameren partially settled the forward sale agreement by physically delivering 5.9 million shares of common stock for cash proceeds of $425 million. In February 2021, Ameren settled the remainder of the forward sale agreement by physically delivering 1.6 million shares of common stock for cash proceeds of $113 million. The proceeds were used to fund a portion of Ameren Missouri’s wind generation investments. See Credit Facility Borrowings and Liquidity and Long-term Debt and Equity below for additional information.
The following table presents net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash provided by operating activities is affected by fluctuations of trade accounts receivable, inventories, and accounts and wages payable, among other things, as well as the unique regulatory environment for each of our businesses. Substantially all expenditures related to fuel, purchased power, and natural gas purchased for resale are recovered from customers through riders, which may be adjusted without a traditional regulatory rate review, subject to prudence reviews. Similar regulatory mechanisms exist for certain operating expenses that can also affect the timing of cash provided by operating activities. The timing of cash payments for costs recoverable under our regulatory mechanisms differs from the recovery period of those costs. Additionally, the seasonality of our electric and natural gas businesses, primarily caused by seasonal customer rates and changes in customer demand due to weather, significantly affect the amount and timing of our cash provided by operating activities. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for more information about our regulatory frameworks.
Our customers’ payment for our services has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a decrease to our cash flow from operations. For information regarding Ameren Missouri’s and Ameren Illinois’ suspensions and reinstatement of customer disconnection activities and late fee charges for nonpayment, see Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report. In addition, see Results of Operations above for more information on Ameren’s, Ameren Missouri’s, and Ameren Illinois’ accounts receivable balances that were 30 days or greater past due or that were a part of a deferred payment arrangement.
Ameren
Ameren’s cash provided by operating activities decreased $443 million in 2020, compared with 2019. The following items contributed to the decrease:
•A $381 million decrease resulting from reduced customer collections, primarily resulting from a decrease in sales volumes and an increase in accounts receivable balances, which were primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a net decrease attributable to regulatory recovery mechanisms, partially offset by decreased fuel and purchased power costs at Ameren Missouri and decreased purchased power costs and volumes, and natural gas costs, at Ameren Illinois.
•A $38 million increase in payments to settle ARO liabilities, primarily related to Ameren Missouri’s CCR storage facilities.
•A $28 million increase in pension and postretirement benefit plan contributions.
•A $27 million decrease in net collateral activity with counterparties, primarily resulting from changes in the market prices of power and natural gas, changes in contracted commodity volumes, and decreases resulting from Ameren Illinois’ renewable energy contracts entered into pursuant to the FEJA.
•A $25 million decrease, primarily resulting from increases to materials and supplies to support operations as levels were increased in 2020 to mitigate against any potential supply disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
•A $16 million increase in interest payments, primarily due to an increase in the average outstanding debt at Ameren (parent) and Ameren Illinois.
•A $13 million increase in property tax payments at Ameren Missouri due to higher assessed property tax values.
•Refunds paid in 2020 of $13 million associated with the November 2013 FERC complaint case, as discussed in Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
The following items partially offset the decrease in Ameren’s cash from operating activities between periods:
•A $37 million decrease in payroll tax payments primarily due to the employer portion of Social Security taxes as a result of a payment deferral allowed under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. Half of this deferral will be paid at the end of 2021 and the remaining half will be paid at the end of 2022.
•A $35 million decrease in energy center maintenance costs, other than those associated with the Callaway refueling and maintenance outage, at Ameren Missouri, primarily due to lower electric system infrastructure maintenance expenses as a result of decreased system load, disciplined cost management, and the deferral of projects to future periods.
•An $11 million decrease in coal inventory at Ameren Missouri primarily as a result of decreased market prices and inventory reductions at the coal-fired energy centers.
Ameren Missouri
Ameren Missouri’s cash provided by operating activities decreased $156 million in 2020, compared with 2019. The following items contributed to the decrease:
•A $190 million decrease resulting from reduced customer collections, primarily resulting from a decrease in sales volumes and an increase in accounts receivable balances, which were primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a net decrease attributable to regulatory recovery mechanisms, partially offset by decreased fuel and purchased power costs.
•A $38 million increase in payments to settle ARO liabilities, primarily related to CCR storage facilities.
•A $17 million decrease in net collateral activity with counterparties, primarily resulting from changes in the market prices of power and natural gas and changes in contracted commodity volumes.
•A $14 million increase in pension and postretirement benefit plan contributions.
•A $13 million increase in property tax payments due to higher assessed property tax values.
•A $12 million decrease, primarily resulting from increases to materials and supplies to support operations as levels were increased in 2020 to mitigate against any potential supply disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following items partially offset the decrease in Ameren Missouri’s cash from operating activities between periods:
•A $76 million decrease in income tax payments to Ameren (parent) pursuant to the tax allocation agreement, primarily due to the timing of payments and lower taxable income in 2020.
•A $35 million decrease in energy center maintenance costs, other than those associated with the Callaway refueling and maintenance outage, primarily due to lower electric system infrastructure maintenance expenses as a result of decreased system load, disciplined cost management, and the deferral of projects to future periods.
•A $17 million decrease in payroll tax payments primarily due to the employer portion of Social Security taxes as a result of a payment deferral allowed under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. Half of this deferral will be paid at the end of 2021 and the remaining half will be paid at the end of 2022.
•An $11 million decrease in coal inventory primarily as a result of decreased market prices and inventory reductions at the coal-fired
energy centers.
Ameren Illinois
Ameren Illinois’ cash provided by operating activities decreased $283 million in 2020, compared with 2019. The following items contributed to the decrease:
•A $195 million decrease resulting from reduced customer collections, primarily resulting from a decrease in sales volumes and an increase in accounts receivable balances, which were primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a net decrease attributable to regulatory recovery mechanisms, partially offset by decreased purchased power costs and volumes, and natural gas costs.
•A $37 million increase in income tax payments to Ameren (parent) pursuant to the tax allocation agreement, primarily due to the timing of payments in 2020.
•A $13 million decrease, primarily resulting from increases to materials and supplies to support operations as levels were increased in 2020 to mitigate against any potential supply disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
•A $10 million increase in interest payments, primarily due to an increase in the average outstanding debt.
•A $10 million decrease in net collateral activity with counterparties, primarily resulting from changes in the market prices of power and natural gas, changes in contracted commodity volumes, and decreases resulting from renewable energy contracts entered into pursuant to the FEJA.
•Refunds paid in 2020 of $9 million associated with the November 2013 FERC complaint case, as discussed in Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
•A $8 million increase in pension and postretirement benefit plan contributions.
The decrease in Ameren Illinois’ cash from operating activities between periods was partially offset by a $14 million decrease in payroll tax payments primarily due to the employer portion of Social Security taxes as a result of a payment deferral allowed under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. Half of this deferral will be paid at the end of 2021 and the remaining half will be paid at the end of 2022.
Pension Plans
Ameren’s pension plans are funded in compliance with income tax regulations, federal funding requirements, and other regulatory requirements. As a result, Ameren expects to fund its pension plans at a level equal to the greater of the pension cost or the legally required minimum contribution. Based on Ameren’s assumptions at December 31, 2020, its investment performance in 2020, and its pension funding policy, Ameren expects to make aggregate contributions of $60 million over the next five years. We estimate that Ameren Missouri’s and Ameren Illinois’ portions of the future funding requirements will be approximately 30% and 60%, respectively. These estimates may change based on actual investment performance, changes in interest rates, changes in our assumptions, changes in government regulations, and any voluntary contributions. In 2020, Ameren contributed $52 million to its pension plans. See Note 10 - Retirement Benefits under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Ameren’s cash used in investing activities increased $894 million during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily as a result of a $564 million increase from the acquisition of the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center and a $258 million increase in capital expenditures. Cash used in investing activities also increased due to a $45 million increase in net investment activity in the nuclear decommissioning trust fund at Ameren Missouri and a $35 million increase due to the timing of nuclear fuel expenditures. In addition to the capital expenditure changes at Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois discussed below, Ameren’s capital expenditures were partially offset by a $43 million decrease in capital expenditures at ATXI and other electric transmission subsidiaries, primarily as a result of decreased Mark Twain transmission line expenditures, as it was placed in service in 2019. In 2020, ATXI placed the ninth and final line segment of the Illinois Rivers transmission line in service.
Ameren Missouri’s cash used in investing activities increased $809 million during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily as a result of $564 million in cash paid for the acquisition of the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center and a $139 million increase in net money pool advances. Cash used in investing activities also increased due to a $45 million increase in net investment activity in the nuclear decommissioning trust fund, a $35 million increase due to the timing of nuclear fuel expenditures, and a $26 million increase in capital expenditures, primarily related to electric delivery infrastructure upgrades and electric transmission system reliability projects.
Ameren Illinois’ cash used in investing activities increased $239 million during 2020, compared with 2019, due to an increase in capital expenditures, primarily related to electric transmission system reliability projects.
Capital Expenditures
The following charts present our capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
2020 - Total Ameren $3,233(a)
2019 - Total Ameren $2,411(a)
(a)Includes Other capital expenditures of $7 million and $(29) million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which includes amounts for the elimination of intercompany transfers.
(b)Ameren Missouri capital expenditures include $564 million for the acquisition of the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Ameren’s 2020 capital expenditures consisted of expenditures made by its subsidiaries, including ATXI and other electric transmission subsidiaries, which spent $113 million primarily on the Illinois Rivers transmission line. Of the $301 million in capital expenditures spent by Ameren Illinois Natural Gas during 2020, $189 million related to natural gas projects eligible for QIP recovery. In addition, Ameren Missouri expenditures included approximately $564 million for the acquisition of the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center. In both years, other capital expenditures were made principally to maintain, upgrade, and improve the reliability of the transmission and distribution systems of Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois by investing in substation upgrades, energy center projects, and smart-grid technology. Additionally, the Ameren Companies invested in various software projects.
Ameren’s 2019 capital expenditures consisted of expenditures made by its subsidiaries, including ATXI, which spent $156 million primarily on the Mark Twain and Illinois Rivers transmission lines. Of the $318 million in capital expenditures spent by Ameren Illinois Natural Gas during 2019, $203 million related to natural gas projects eligible for QIP recovery. Ameren Illinois exceeded the minimum capital spending levels required pursuant to IEIMA in 2019.
The following table presents Ameren’s estimate of capital expenditures that will be incurred from 2021 through 2025, including construction expenditures, allowance for funds used during construction, and expenditures for compliance with existing environmental regulations:
Ameren Missouri’s estimated capital expenditures include transmission, distribution, grid modernization, and generation-related investments, as well as expenditures for compliance with environmental regulations. In addition, Ameren Missouri’s estimated capital expenditures include approximately $500 million related to 300 MWs of wind generation at the Atchison Renewable Energy Center, but exclude incremental renewable generation investment opportunities of 1,200 MWs by 2025, which are included in Ameren Missouri’s 2020 IRP. As of the date of this filing, no contractual agreements have been entered into, and no regulatory approvals have been requested, related to these opportunities. Ameren Illinois’ estimated capital expenditures are primarily for electric and natural gas transmission and distribution-related investments, including capital expenditures to modernize its electric and gas distribution systems. These planned investments are based on the assumption of continued constructive regulatory frameworks, including an assumption that Ameren Missouri requests and receives MoPSC approval of an extension of the PISA through December 2028.
Ameren Missouri continually reviews its generation portfolio and expected power needs. As a result, Ameren Missouri could modify its plan for generation capacity, the type of generation asset technology that will be employed, and whether capacity or power may be purchased, among other changes. Additionally, we continually review the reliability of our transmission and distribution systems, expected capacity needs, and opportunities for transmission investments within and outside our service territories. The timing and amount of investments could vary because of changes in expected capacity, the condition of transmission and distribution systems, and our ability and willingness to pursue transmission investments, among other factors. Any changes in future generation, transmission, or distribution needs could result in significant changes in capital expenditures or losses, which could be material. Compliance with environmental regulations could also have significant impacts on the level of capital expenditures.
Environmental Capital Expenditures
Ameren Missouri will continue to incur costs to comply with federal and state regulations, including those requiring the reduction of SO2, NOx, and mercury emissions from its coal-fired energy centers. See Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies under Part II, Item 8, of this report for a discussion of existing and proposed environmental laws that affect, or may affect, our facilities and capital expenditures to comply with such laws.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by, or used in, financing activities is a result of our financing needs, which depend on the level of cash provided by operating activities, the level of cash used in investing activities, the level of dividends, and our long-term debt maturities, among other things. As a result of capital market volatility, due, in part, to the COVID-19 pandemic, and to increase net available liquidity, Ameren (parent) accelerated a debt issuance to April 2020, which had been planned for later in 2020.
Ameren’s cash provided by financing activities increased $1,393 million during 2020, compared with 2019. During 2020, Ameren utilized net proceeds of $2,183 million from the issuance of long-term debt for general corporate purposes, including to repay then-outstanding short-term debt, including short-term debt incurred in connection with the repayment at maturity of long-term debt, to partially finance the acquisition of two wind generation facilities, and to repay other long-term debt. In addition, Ameren received cash proceeds of $425 million from the partial settlement of a forward sale agreement of common stock that were used to fund a portion of Ameren Missouri’s wind generation investments. Collectively, in 2020, Ameren repaid long-term debt of $442 million, received $50 million from net commercial paper issuances, and used cash provided by financing activities to fund, in part, investing activities. In comparison, in 2019, Ameren utilized net proceeds of $1,527 million from the issuance of long-term debt to repay then-outstanding short-term debt, including short-term debt incurred in connection with the repayment at maturity of long-term debt, and to repay at maturity other long-term debt. Collectively, in 2019, Ameren repaid long-term debt of $580 million, repaid net short-term debt of $157 million, and used cash provided by financing activities to fund, in part, investing activities. During 2020, Ameren paid common stock dividends of $494 million, compared with $472 million, in dividend payments in 2019.
Ameren Missouri’s cash provided by financing activities increased $1,040 million during 2020, compared with 2019. During 2020, Ameren Missouri utilized net proceeds of $1,012 million from the issuance of long-term debt to repay then-outstanding short-term debt, including short-term debt incurred in connection with the repayment at maturity of long-term debt, and to partially finance the acquisition of two wind generation facilities. Collectively, in 2020, Ameren Missouri repaid long-term debt of $92 million, repaid net short-term debt of $234 million, and used cash provided by financing activities to fund, in part, investing activities. In comparison, in 2019, Ameren Missouri utilized net proceeds of $778 million from the issuance of long-term debt to repay then-outstanding short-term debt, including short-term debt incurred in connection with the repayment at maturity of long-term debt, and to repay at maturity other long-term debt. Collectively, in 2019, Ameren Missouri repaid long-term debt of $580 million, received $179 million from net commercial paper issuances, and used cash provided by financing activities to fund, in part, investing activities. During 2020, Ameren Missouri received $491 million in capital contributions from Ameren (parent), of which, $67 million was associated with the tax allocation agreement, compared with $124 million in capital contributions received in 2019. During 2020, Ameren Missouri paid common stock dividends of $66 million, compared with $430 million in dividend payments in 2019, due to an increase in investing cash needs, including the acquisition of wind generation facilities.
Ameren Illinois’ cash provided by financing activities increased $499 million during 2020, compared with 2019. During 2020, Ameren Illinois received $464 million in capital contributions from Ameren (parent), of which, $9 million was associated with the tax allocation agreement, compared with $15 million in capital contributions received in 2019. In addition, Ameren Illinois utilized net proceeds of $373 million from the issuance of long-term debt to repay then-outstanding short-term debt. Collectively, in 2020, Ameren Illinois repaid net short-term debt of $53 million, and used cash provided by financing activities to fund, in part, investing activities. In comparison, in 2019, Ameren Illinois utilized net proceeds of $299 million from the issuance of long-term debt to repay then-outstanding short-term debt. Collectively, in 2019 Ameren Illinois repaid net short-term debt of $19 million, and used cash provided by financing activities to fund, in part, investing activities. In addition, during 2020, Ameren Illinois borrowed $19 million from the money pool and paid common stock dividends of $9 million.
Credit Facility Borrowings and Liquidity
The liquidity needs of the Ameren Companies are typically supported through the use of available cash, drawings under committed credit agreements, commercial paper issuances, and/or, in the case of Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, short-term affiliate borrowings. See Note 4 - Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information on credit agreements, commercial paper issuances, Ameren’s money pool arrangements and related borrowings, and relevant interest rates.
The following table presents Ameren’s consolidated net available liquidity as of December 31, 2020:
(a) The maximum aggregate amount available to Ameren (parent) and Ameren Missouri under the Missouri Credit Agreement is $900 million and $850 million, respectively. See Note 4 - Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part II, Item 8, of this report for further discussion of the Credit Agreements.
(b) The maximum aggregate amount available to Ameren (parent) and Ameren Illinois under the Illinois Credit Agreement is $500 million and $800 million, respectively. See Note 4 - Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part II, Item 8, of this report for further discussion of the Credit Agreements.
The Credit Agreements, among other things, provide $2.3 billion of credit until maturity in December 2024. See Note 4 - Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information on the Credit Agreements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Ameren (parent), Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois each borrowed under the Credit Agreements and issued commercial paper. Borrowings under the Credit Agreements and commercial paper issuances are based upon available interest rates at that time of the borrowing or issuance. As a result of volatility in the capital markets, the Ameren Companies borrowed under the Credit Agreements in certain instances in the first quarter of 2020 rather than issuing commercial paper.
Ameren has a money pool agreement with and among its utility subsidiaries to coordinate and to provide for certain short-term cash and working capital requirements. As short-term capital needs arise, and based on availability of funding sources, Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois will access funds from the utility money pool, the Credit Agreements, or the commercial paper programs depending on which option has the lowest interest rates.
The issuance of short-term debt securities by Ameren’s utility subsidiaries is subject to FERC approval under the Federal Power Act. In 2020, the FERC issued orders authorizing Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois to each issue up to $1 billion of short-term debt securities through March 2022 and September 2022, respectively. In July 2019, the FERC issued an order authorizing ATXI to issue up to $300 million of short-term debt securities through July 2021.
The Ameren Companies continually evaluate the adequacy and appropriateness of their liquidity arrangements for changing business conditions. When business conditions warrant, changes may be made to existing credit agreements or to other short-term borrowing arrangements, or other arrangements may be made.
Long-term Debt and Equity
The following table presents Ameren’s issuances (net of any issuance premiums or discounts) of long-term debt and equity, as well as redemptions and maturities of long-term debt for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For additional information related to the terms and uses of these issuances and effective registration statements, and Ameren’s forward sale agreement relating to common stock, see Note 5 - Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of this report. For information on capital contributions received by Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois from Ameren (parent), see Note 13 - Related-party Transactions under Part II, Item 8, of this report. Additionally, Ameren Illinois will redeem all outstanding shares of its 6.625% and 7.75% series preferred stock in March 2021.
(a) Ameren issued a total of 0.7 million and 0.9 million shares of common stock under its DRPlus and 401(k) plan in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(b) Excludes 0.5 million and 0.8 million shares of common stock valued at $38 million and $54 million issued for no cash consideration in connection with stock-based compensation in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(c) Ameren issued 5.9 million shares of common stock pursuant to a partial settlement of a forward sale agreement in December 2020.
(d) Amount less than $1 million.
The Ameren Companies may sell securities registered under their effective registration statements if market conditions and capital requirements warrant such sales. Any offer and sale will be made only by means of a prospectus that meets the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 and the rules and regulations thereunder.
Indebtedness Provisions and Other Covenants
At December 31, 2020, the Ameren Companies were in compliance with the provisions and covenants contained within their credit agreements, indentures, and articles of incorporation, as applicable, and ATXI was in compliance with the provisions and covenants contained in its note purchase agreement. See Note 4 - Short-term Debt and Liquidity and Note 5 - Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of this report for a discussion of covenants and provisions (and applicable cross-default provisions) contained in our credit agreements, certain of the Ameren Companies’ indentures and articles of incorporation, and ATXI’s note purchase agreement.
We consider access to short-term and long-term capital markets to be a significant source of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by cash provided by our operating activities. Inability to raise capital on reasonable terms, particularly during times of uncertainty in the capital markets, could negatively affect our ability to maintain and expand our businesses. After assessing its current operating performance, liquidity, and credit ratings (see Credit Ratings below), Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois each believes that it will continue to have access to the capital markets on reasonable terms. However, events beyond Ameren’s, Ameren Missouri’s, and Ameren Illinois’ control may create uncertainty in the capital markets or make access to the capital markets uncertain or limited. Such events could increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets.
Dividends
Ameren paid to its shareholders common stock dividends totaling $494 million, or $2.00 per share, in 2020 and $472 million, or $1.92 per share, in 2019. The amount and timing of dividends payable on Ameren’s common stock are within the sole discretion of Ameren’s board of directors. Ameren’s board of directors has not set specific targets or payout parameters when declaring common stock dividends, but it considers various factors, including Ameren’s overall payout ratio, payout ratios of our peers, projected cash flow and potential future cash flow requirements, historical earnings and cash flow, projected earnings, impacts of regulatory orders or legislation, and other key business considerations. Ameren expects its dividend payout ratio to be between 55% and 70% of earnings over the next few years. On February 12, 2021, the board of directors of Ameren declared a quarterly dividend on Ameren’s common stock of 55 cents per share, payable on March 31, 2021, to shareholders of record on March 10, 2021.
Certain of our financial agreements and corporate organizational documents contain covenants and conditions that, among other things, restrict the Ameren Companies’ payment of dividends in certain circumstances.
Ameren Illinois’ articles of incorporation require its dividend payments on common stock to be based on ratios of common stock to total capitalization and other provisions with respect to certain operating expenses and accumulations of earned surplus. Additionally, Ameren has committed to the FERC to maintain a minimum of 30% equity in the capital structure at Ameren Illinois.
Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, as well as certain other nonregistrant Ameren subsidiaries, are subject to Section 305(a) of the Federal Power Act, which makes it unlawful for any officer or director of a public utility, as defined in the Federal Power Act, to participate in the making or paying of any dividend from any funds “properly included in capital account.” The FERC has consistently interpreted the provision to allow dividends to be paid as long as (1) the source of the dividends is clearly disclosed, (2) the dividends are not excessive, and (3) there is no self-dealing on the part of corporate officials. At a minimum, Ameren believes that dividends can be paid by its subsidiaries that are public utilities from net income and from retained earnings. In addition, under Illinois law, Ameren Illinois and ATXI may not pay any dividend on their respective stock unless, among other things, their respective earnings and earned surplus are sufficient to declare and pay a dividend after provisions are made for reasonable and proper reserves, or unless Ameren Illinois or ATXI has specific authorization from the ICC.
At December 31, 2020, the amount of restricted net assets of Ameren’s subsidiaries that may not be distributed to Ameren in the form of a loan or dividend was $3.3 billion.
The following table presents common stock dividends declared and paid by Ameren Corporation to its common shareholders and by Ameren subsidiaries to their parent, Ameren:
Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois each have issued preferred stock, which provides for cumulative preferred stock dividends. Each company’s board of directors considers the declaration of preferred stock dividends to shareholders of record on a certain date, stating the date on which the dividend is payable and the amount to be paid. See Note 5 - Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of this report for further detail concerning the preferred stock issuances.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. See Note 10 - Retirement Benefits under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information regarding expected minimum funding levels for our pension plans, which are not included in the table below. In addition, routine short-term purchase order commitments are not included.
(a)Excludes unamortized discount and premium and debt issuance costs of $12 million, $48 million, and $42 million at Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois, respectively. See Note 5 - Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8 of this report, for discussion of items included herein.
(b)See Other Obligations in Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies under Part II, Item 8 of this report, for discussion of items included herein.
Off-balance-sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, none of the Ameren Companies had any significant off-balance-sheet financing arrangements, other than the forward sale agreement relating to common stock, which was fully settled by mid-February 2021, and variable interest entities. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies under Part II, Item 8, of this report for further detail concerning variable interest entities. See Note 5 - Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of this report for further detail concerning the forward sale agreement relating to common stock.
Credit Ratings
Our credit ratings affect our liquidity, our access to the capital markets and credit markets, our cost of borrowing under our credit facilities and our commercial paper programs, and our collateral posting requirements under commodity contracts.
The following table presents the principal credit ratings of the Ameren Companies by Moody’s and S&P effective on the date of this report:
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities. It should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Ratings are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization.
Collateral Postings
Any weakening of our credit ratings may reduce access to capital and trigger additional collateral postings and prepayments. Such changes may also increase the cost of borrowing, resulting in an adverse effect on earnings. Cash collateral postings and prepayments made with external parties, including postings related to exchange-traded contracts, and cash collateral posted by external parties were immaterial at December 31, 2020. A sub-investment-grade issuer or senior unsecured debt rating (below “Baa3” from Moody’s or below “BBB-” from S&P) at December 31, 2020, could have resulted in Ameren, Ameren Missouri, or Ameren Illinois being required to post additional collateral or other assurances for certain trade obligations amounting to $119 million, $105 million, and $14 million, respectively.
Changes in commodity prices could trigger additional collateral postings and prepayments. Based on credit ratings at December 31, 2020, if market prices were 15% higher or lower than December 31, 2020 levels in the next 12 months and 20% higher or lower thereafter through the end of the term of the commodity contracts, then Ameren, Ameren Missouri, or Ameren Illinois could be required to post an immaterial amount, compared to each company’s liquidity, of collateral or provide other assurances for certain trade obligations.
OUTLOOK
Below are some key trends, events, and uncertainties that may reasonably affect our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity, as well as our ability to achieve strategic and financial objectives, for 2021 and beyond. The continued effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity in subsequent periods will depend on its severity and longevity, future regulatory or legislative actions with respect thereto, and the resulting impact on business, economic, and capital market conditions. We continue to assess the impacts the pandemic is having on our businesses, including but not limited to impacts on our liquidity; demand for residential, commercial, and industrial electric and natural gas services; changes in deferred payment arrangements for customers; the timing and extent to which recovery of incremental costs incurred, net of savings, and forgone customer late fee revenues at Ameren Missouri is allowed by the MoPSC; changes in our ability to disconnect customers for nonpayment; bad debt expense; supply chain operations; the availability of our employees and contractors; counterparty credit; capital construction; infrastructure operations and maintenance; energy-efficiency programs; and pension valuations. For additional information regarding recent rate orders, lawsuits, and pending requests filed with state and federal regulatory commissions, including those discussed below, see Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
Operations
•In 2020, we experienced a net decrease in our sales volumes, which have been, and continue to be, affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, among other things, but we expect gradual improvement in economic activities in 2021. Further, our customers’ payment for services has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to an increase in our accounts receivable balances that are past due or that are a part of a deferred payment arrangement. Because of their regulatory frameworks, Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s
revenues are largely decoupled from changes in sales volumes. Additionally, Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution and natural gas distribution businesses have bad debt riders, which provide for recovery of bad debt write-offs, net of any subsequent recoveries. Pursuant to a June 2020 ICC order, Ameren Illinois’ electric bad debt rider provided for the recovery of bad debt expense in 2020, which reverted to the recovery of bad debt write-offs, net of any subsequent recoveries, in 2021. Ameren Missouri does not have a bad debt rider or tracker, and thus its earnings are exposed to increases in bad debt expense, absent regulatory relief. However, Ameren Missouri does not expect a material impact to earnings from increases in bad debt expense. See the Results of Operations section above for additional information on our accounts receivable balances and changes in Ameren Missouri’s sales volumes in 2020, compared to 2019, and sales volumes expected in 2021, compared to 2020. Additionally, see Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information on Ameren Missouri’s and Ameren Illinois’ reinstatement of customer disconnection and late fee charges for non-payment, requests filed with the MoPSC for accounting authority orders related to Ameren Missouri’s electric and natural gas services to allow Ameren Missouri to accumulate certain costs incurred, net of savings, and forgone customer late fee revenues related to the COVID-19 pandemic for consideration of recovery in future regulatory rate reviews, and a June 2020 ICC order in a service disconnection moratorium proceeding, which required Ameren Illinois to implement more flexible credit and collection practices and allowed for recovery of costs incurred related to the COVID-19 pandemic and forgone late fees.
•In mid-February 2021, extremely cold weather in the central and southern United States, including in our service territories, caused a significant increase in customer demand for electricity and natural gas. These weather conditions resulted in industry natural gas supply disruptions and limitations, and operational issues at generation and transmission facilities throughout the regions. However, we did not experience significant generation or reliability issues. These events resulted in significant increases in power and natural gas prices in the energy markets. As a result of market purchases to serve incremental demand, Ameren Illinois and Ameren Missouri incurred additional natural gas costs of approximately $200 million and $50 million, respectively, for purchases made for resale between February 13, 2021, and February 17, 2021. These amounts are preliminary estimates and are subject to final settlement. The increase in our purchased power costs over the same time period was immaterial. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois have riders to recover natural gas and purchased power costs. We do not expect this event will have a significant impact on our financial results or liquidity.
•The PISA permits Ameren Missouri to defer and recover 85% of the depreciation expense and earn a return at the applicable WACC on investments in certain property, plant, and equipment placed in service, and not included in base rates. The regulatory asset for accumulated PISA deferrals also earns a return at the applicable WACC, with all approved PISA deferrals added to rate base prospectively and recovered over a period of 20 years following a regulatory rate review. Additionally, under the RESRAM, Ameren Missouri is permitted to recover the 15% of depreciation expense not recovered under the PISA, and earn a return at the applicable WACC for investments in renewable generation plant placed in service. Accumulated RESRAM deferrals earn carrying costs at short-term interest rates. The PISA and the RESRAM mitigate the effects of regulatory lag between regulatory rate reviews. Those investments not eligible for recovery under the PISA and the remaining 15% of certain property, plant, and equipment placed in service, unless eligible for recovery under the RESRAM, remain subject to regulatory lag. Ameren Missouri recognizes the cost of debt on PISA deferrals in revenue, instead of using the applicable WACC, with the difference recognized in revenues when recovery of such deferrals is reflected in customer rates. As a result of the PISA election, additional provisions of the law apply to Ameren Missouri, including limitations on electric customer rate increases. Ameren Missouri does not expect to exceed these rate increase limitations in 2021. Both the rate increase limitation and the PISA are effective through December 2023, unless Ameren Missouri requests and the MoPSC approves an extension through December 2028.
•In 2018, the MoPSC issued an order approving Ameren Missouri’s MEEIA 2019 plan. The plan includes a portfolio of customer energy-efficiency programs through December 2022 and low-income customer energy-efficiency programs through December 2024, along with a rider. Ameren Missouri intends to invest $290 million over the life of the plan, including $65 million in 2021 and $70 million in 2022. The plan includes the continued use of the MEEIA rider, which allows Ameren Missouri to collect from, or refund to, customers any difference in actual MEEIA program costs and related lost electric margins and the amounts collected from customers. In addition, the plan includes a performance incentive that provides Ameren Missouri an opportunity to earn additional revenues by achieving certain customer energy-efficiency goals. If the target goals are achieved for 2020, 2021, and 2022, additional revenues of $10 million, $13 million, and $11 million would be recognized in 2021, 2022, and 2022, respectively. Incremental additional revenues of $3 million, $3 million, and $1 million may be earned for 2020, 2021, and 2022, respectively, and would be recognized in the respective following year if Ameren Missouri exceeds its targeted goals. Ameren Missouri’s ability to achieve and/or exceed targeted goals could be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Ameren Missouri recognized $6 million, $37 million, $11 million, and $28 million in revenues related to MEEIA performance incentives in 2020, 2019, 2018, and 2016, respectively.
•In March 2020, the MoPSC issued an order in Ameren Missouri’s July 2019 electric service regulatory rate review, resulting in a decrease of $32 million to Ameren Missouri’s annual revenue requirement for electric retail service. The order reduced the annualized base level of net energy costs pursuant to the FAC by approximately $115 million from the base level established in the MoPSC’s March 2017 electric rate order. The order also changed the annualized regulatory asset and liability amortization amounts and the base level of expenses for trackers. On an annualized basis, these changes reflect approximately $20 million of increased revenues and approximate decreases in purchased power expenses of $15 million, other operating and maintenance expenses of $60 million, and income tax
expenses of $20 million. Additionally, the annual revenue requirement incorporated increases of approximately $50 million for the reduction in sales volumes resulting from MEEIA programs and approximately $50 million of depreciation and amortization expense for amounts previously deferred under PISA. The increase in the annual revenue requirement related to the MEEIA programs is seasonally weighted to the summer. One of the stipulation and agreements approved by the MoPSC’s March 2020 order states that the net impact of the revenue and expense changes noted above reflects a 9.4% to 9.8% ROE on an unspecified percent of common equity applicable to rate base. The new rates, base level of expenses, and amortizations became effective on April 1, 2020.
•Ameren Missouri expects to file for electric and natural gas service regulatory rate reviews by the end of March 2021. Ameren Missouri expects key drivers of the electric service regulatory rate review to include increased infrastructure investments and other costs of service.
•Ameren Illinois and ATXI use a forward-looking rate calculation with an annual revenue requirement reconciliation for each company’s electric transmission business. Based on expected rate base growth and the currently allowed 10.52% ROE, the revenue requirements included in 2021 rates for Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s electric transmission businesses are $380 million and $200 million, respectively. These revenue requirements represent an increase in Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s revenue requirements of $67 million and $8 million, respectively, from the revenue requirements reflected in 2020 rates, primarily due to the expected rate base growth. These rates will affect Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s cash receipts during 2021, but will not determine their respective electric transmission service operating revenues, which will instead be based on 2021 actual recoverable costs, rate base, and a return on rate base at the applicable WACC as calculated under the FERC formula ratemaking framework.
•The allowed base ROE for FERC-regulated transmission rates previously charged under the MISO tariff is the subject of an appeal filed with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Depending on the outcome of the appeal, the transmission rates charged during previous periods and the currently effective rates may be subject to change. A proposed rulemaking also has been issued by the FERC regarding the transmission incentives policy, including the basis points added for transmission owner participation in an RTO, and a separate notice of inquiry regarding the base ROE generally applicable to the industry. Ameren is unable to predict the ultimate impact of any changes to the FERC’s incentives policy, action on the notice of inquiry on ROE, or any further order on base ROE. A 50 basis point change in the FERC-allowed base ROE would affect Ameren’s and Ameren Illinois’ annual net income by an estimated $11 million and $7 million, respectively, based on each company’s 2021 projected rate base.
•Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution service performance-based formula ratemaking framework allows Ameren Illinois to reconcile electric distribution service rates to its actual revenue requirement on an annual basis. If a given year’s revenue requirement varies from the amount collected from customers, an adjustment is made to electric operating revenues with an offset to a regulatory asset or liability to reflect that year’s actual revenue requirement, independent of actual sales volumes. The regulatory balance is then collected from, or refunded to, customers within two years from the end of the year. Unless extended, the performance-based formula ratemaking framework expires at the end of 2022. If not extended, Ameren Illinois would be required to establish future rates through a traditional regulatory rate review, which would allow the use of a future test year, with the ICC. The decoupling provisions extend beyond the end of the formula ratemaking by law, which ensures that Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution revenues authorized in a regulatory rate review are not affected by changes in sales volumes. Ameren Illinois is actively pursuing constructive ratemaking, and filed a request with the ICC in April 2020, which, if approved, would allow Ameren Illinois to continue to reconcile electric distribution service rates to the last annual revenue requirement approved by the ICC under the performance-based formula ratemaking framework, for a period of up to two years after the framework expires or is no longer elected. Ameren Illinois expects a decision by the ICC in March 2021.
•In December 2020, the ICC issued an order in Ameren Illinois’ annual update filing that approved a $49 million decrease in Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution service rates beginning in January 2021. Illinois law provides for an annual reconciliation of the electric distribution revenue requirement as is necessary to reflect the actual costs incurred and a return at the applicable WACC on year-end rate base in a given year with the revenue requirement that was reflected in customer rates for that year. Consequently, Ameren Illinois’ 2021 electric distribution service revenues will be based on its 2021 actual recoverable costs, 2021 year-end rate base, and a return at the applicable WACC, with the ROE based on the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds plus 580 basis points. As of December 31, 2020, Ameren Illinois expects its 2021 year-end rate base to be $3.7 billion. With or without extension of the formula ratemaking framework, the 2021 revenue requirement reconciliation will be collected from, or refunded to, customers in 2023. A 50 basis point change in the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds would result in an estimated $10 million change in Ameren’s and Ameren Illinois’ annual net income, based on Ameren Illinois’ 2021 projected year-end rate base. Ameren Illinois’ allowed ROE for 2020 was based on an annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds of 1.56%.
•Ameren Illinois earns a return at the applicable WACC on its electric energy-efficiency program investments. Ameren Illinois’ electric energy-efficiency investments are deferred as a regulatory asset and earn a return at the applicable WACC, with the ROE based on the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds plus 580 basis points. The allowed ROE on electric energy-efficiency investments can be increased or decreased by up to 200 basis points, depending on the achievement of annual
energy savings goals. Ameren Illinois plans to invest up to approximately $100 million per year in electric energy-efficiency programs through 2025, and will earn a return on those investments. While the ICC has approved a plan consistent with this spending level through 2021, the ICC has the ability to reduce the amount of electric energy-efficiency savings goals in future plan program years if there are insufficient cost-effective programs available, which could reduce the investments in electric energy-efficiency programs. The electric energy-efficiency program investments and the return on those investments are collected from customers through a rider and are not included in the electric distribution service performance-based formula ratemaking framework.
•In January 2021, the ICC issued an order in Ameren Illinois’ February 2020 natural gas delivery service regulatory rate review, which resulted in an increase to its annual revenues for natural gas delivery service of $76 million. The new rates became effective in January 2021. As a result of this order, the rate base under the QIP was reset to zero. Ameren Illinois used a 2021 future test year in this proceeding.
•In February 2020, the MoPSC issued an order approving a stipulation and agreement allowing Ameren Missouri to defer and amortize maintenance expenses related to scheduled refueling and maintenance outages at its Callaway Energy Center. Maintenance expenses are amortized over the period between refueling and maintenance outages, which is approximately 18 months. During its return to full power after the completion of the last refueling and maintenance outage in late December 2020, the Callaway Energy Center experienced a non-nuclear operating issue related to its generator. A thorough investigation of this matter was conducted. Work has begun to replace certain key components of the generator in order to return the energy center to service. Ameren Missouri expects generator repairs of $65 million, which are expected to be largely capital expenditures. Due to the long lead time for the manufacture, repair, and installation of the components, the energy center is expected to return to service in late June or early July 2021. As of December 31, 2020, Ameren Missouri deferred, as a regulatory asset, $39 million in maintenance expenses related to its scheduled fall 2020 outage, which it began to amortize in January 2021. The regulatory asset will be amortized until the completion of the next refueling and maintenance outage. For the duration of the unplanned outage, Ameren Missouri expects an increase to its purchased power expense and a decrease to its off-system sales, with changes to both items recovered under the FAC. Ameren Missouri does not expect a significant increase to other operations and maintenance expense as a result of the unplanned outage. Prior to 2020, maintenance expenses for refueling and maintenance outages were expensed as incurred.
•Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois continue to make infrastructure investments and expect to seek increases to electric and natural gas rates to recover the cost of investments and earn an adequate return. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois will also seek new, or to maintain existing, legislative solutions to address regulatory lag and to support investment in their utility infrastructure for the benefit of their customers. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois continue to face cost recovery pressures, including limited economic growth in their service territories, economic impacts of COVID-19, customer conservation efforts, the impacts of additional customer energy-efficiency programs, and increased customer use of increasingly cost-effective technological advances, including private generation and energy storage. However, over the long-term, we expect the decreased demand to be partially offset by increased demand resulting from increased electrification of the economy for efficiencies and as a means to address economy-wide CO2 emission concerns. We expect that increased investments, including expected future investments for environmental compliance, system reliability improvements, and potential new generation sources, will result in rate base and revenue growth but also higher depreciation and financing costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Our customers’ payment for our services has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a decrease to our cash flow from operations. See the Results of Operations section above for additional information on our accounts receivable balances. Further, our liquidity and our capital expenditure plans could be adversely affected by other impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to potential impacts on our ability to access the capital markets on reasonable terms and when needed, Ameren Missouri’s expected wind generation additions remaining in 2021, and the timing of tax payments and the utilization of tax credits. We expect to make significant capital expenditures to improve our electric and natural gas utility infrastructure, however, disruptions to the capital markets and the ability of our suppliers and contractors to perform as required under their contracts could impact the execution of our capital investment strategy. For further discussion on the impacts to our ability to access the capital markets and Ameren Missouri’s expected wind generation additions remaining in 2021, see below.
•In February 2021, Ameren Missouri filed an update to its Smart Energy Plan with the MoPSC, which includes a five-year capital investment overview with a detailed one-year plan for 2021. The plan is designed to upgrade Ameren Missouri’s electric infrastructure and includes investments that will upgrade the grid and accommodate more renewable energy. Investments under the plan are expected to total approximately $8.4 billion over the five-year period from 2021 through 2025, with expenditures largely recoverable under the PISA and the RESRAM. The planned investments in 2024 and 2025 are based on the assumption that Ameren Missouri requests and receives MoPSC approval of an extension of the PISA through December 2028.
•In September 2020, Ameren Missouri filed its 2020 IRP with the MoPSC. In connection with the 2020 IRP filing, Ameren established a goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. Ameren is also targeting a 50% CO2 emission reduction by 2030 and an 85% reduction by 2040 from the 2005 level. The plan, which is subject to review by the MoPSC for compliance with Missouri law, targets cleaner and more diverse sources of energy generation, including solar, wind, hydro, and nuclear power, and supports increased investment in new energy technologies. It also includes expanding renewable sources by adding 3,100 MWs of renewable generation by the end of 2030 and a total of 5,400 MWs of renewable generation by 2040. These amounts include the 700 MWs of wind generation projects discussed below, which will support Ameren Missouri’s compliance with the state of Missouri’s requirement of achieving 15% of native load sales from renewable energy sources beginning in 2021. The plan also includes advancing the retirement dates of the Sioux and Rush Island coal-fired energy centers to 2028 and 2039, respectively, which are subject to the approval of a change in the assets’ depreciable lives by the MoPSC in a future regulatory rate review, the continued implementation of customer energy-efficiency programs, and the expectation that Ameren Missouri will seek NRC approval for an extension of the operating license for the Callaway Energy Center beyond its current 2044 expiration date. Additionally, the plan includes retiring the Meramec and Labadie coal-fired energy centers at the end of their useful lives (by 2022 and 2042, respectively). Ameren Missouri’s plan could be affected by, among other factors: Ameren Missouri’s ability to obtain a certificate of convenience and necessity from the MoPSC, and any other required approvals for the addition of renewable resources, retirement of energy centers, and new or continued customer energy-efficiency programs; the ability of developers to meet contractual commitments and timely complete projects, which is dependent upon the availability of necessary materials and equipment, including those that are affected by the disruptions in the global supply chain caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, among other things; the availability of federal production and investment tax credits related to renewable energy and Ameren Missouri’s ability to use such credits; the cost of wind, solar, and other renewable generation and storage technologies; changes in environmental laws or requirements, including those related to carbon emissions; energy prices and demand; and Ameren Missouri’s ability to obtain timely interconnection agreements with the MISO or other RTOs at an acceptable cost. The next integrated resource plan is expected to be filed in September 2023.
•In December 2020, Ameren Missouri acquired a 400-MW wind generation project located in northeastern Missouri for approximately $615 million, and placed the assets in service as the High Prairie Renewable Energy Center. In January 2021, Ameren Missouri acquired an up-to 300-MW wind generation project located in northwestern Missouri. At the date of this filing, Ameren Missouri placed 120 MWs in service as the Atchison Renewable Energy Center, with a purchase price of approximately $200 million. There have been changes to the schedule for this project, particularly as a result of component delivery delays. Ameren Missouri expects approximately 150 MWs of the up-to 300-MW project to be in service by the end of the first quarter of 2021, and the remaining portion to be in service later in 2021. See discussion below related to production tax credits.
•Through 2025, we expect to make significant capital expenditures to improve our electric and natural gas utility infrastructure, with a major portion directed to our transmission and distribution systems. We estimate that we will invest up to $17.8 billion (Ameren Missouri - up to $9.3 billion; Ameren Illinois - up to $8.2 billion; ATXI - up to $0.2 billion) of capital expenditures during the period from 2021 through 2025. Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s estimates include 300 MWs of wind generation at the Atchison Renewable Energy Center, but exclude incremental renewable generation investment opportunities of 1,200 MWs by 2025, which are included in Ameren Missouri’s 2020 IRP. As of the date of this filing, no contractual agreements have been entered into, and no regulatory approvals have been requested, related to these opportunities. These planned investments are based on the assumption of continued constructive regulatory frameworks, including an assumption that Ameren Missouri requests and receives MoPSC approval of an extension of the PISA through December 2028.
•Environmental regulations, including those related to CO2 emissions, or other actions taken by the EPA, or requirements that may result from the NSR and Clean Air Act Litigation discussed in Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies under Part II, Item 8, of this report, could result in significant increases in capital expenditures and operating costs. Regulations enacted by a prior federal administration and under legal challenge can be reviewed or recommended for repeal by the EPA, and new replacement or alternative regulations can be proposed, or adopted by the current federal administration, the EPA and state regulators. The ultimate implementation of any of these regulations, as well as the timing of any such implementation, is uncertain. However, the individual or combined effects of existing and new environmental regulations could result in significant capital expenditures, increased operating costs, or the closure or alteration of some of Ameren Missouri’s coal-fired energy centers. Ameren Missouri’s capital expenditures are subject to MoPSC prudence reviews, which could result in cost disallowances as well as regulatory lag. The cost of Ameren Illinois’ purchased power and natural gas purchased for resale could increase. However, Ameren Illinois expects that these costs would be recovered from customers with no material adverse effect on its results of operations, financial position, or liquidity. Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s earnings could benefit from increased investment to comply with environmental regulations if those investments are reflected and recovered on a timely basis in customer rates.
•The Ameren Companies have multiyear credit agreements that cumulatively provide $2.3 billion of credit through December 2024, subject to a 364-day repayment term for Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, with the option to seek incremental commitments to increase the cumulative credit provided to $2.7 billion. See Note 4 - Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information regarding the Credit Agreements. The Ameren Companies have no material maturities of long-term debt until
2022. With the recently completed Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois debt issuances and availability under the Credit Agreements, as well as the proceeds from the recent settlement of the forward sale agreement, Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois believe that their liquidity is adequate given their expected operating cash flows, capital expenditures, including expected wind generation additions remaining in 2021, and financing plans. The Ameren Companies continue to monitor the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on their liquidity, including as a result of decreased sales and increased customer nonpayment. To date, the Ameren Companies have been able to access the capital markets on reasonable terms when needed. However, there can be no assurance that significant changes in economic conditions, disruptions in the capital and credit markets, or other unforeseen events will not materially affect their ability to execute their expected operating, capital, or financing plans.
•Ameren expects its cash used for currently planned capital expenditures and dividends to exceed cash provided by operating activities over the next several years. As part of its plan to fund these cash flow requirements, Ameren is using newly issued shares of common stock, rather than market-purchased shares, to satisfy requirements under the DRPlus and employee benefit plans and expects to continue to do so through at least 2025. Ameren expects these issuances to provide equity of about $100 million annually. In addition to the issuance of common shares in connection with the 2021 settlement of the remaining portion of the forward sale agreement, Ameren plans to issue incremental equity of about $150 million in 2021 and about $300 million each year from 2022 to 2025. Ameren expects its equity to total capitalization to be about 45% through December 31, 2025, with the long-term intent to support solid investment-grade credit ratings. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois expect to fund cash flow needs through debt issuances, adjustments of dividends to Ameren (parent), and/or capital contributions from Ameren (parent).
•As of December 31, 2020, Ameren had $90 million in tax benefits related to federal and state income tax credit carryforwards and $7 million in tax benefits from state net operating loss carryforwards, which will be utilized in future periods. Ameren expects federal income tax payments at the required minimum levels from 2021 to 2025 resulting from the anticipated use of production tax credits that will be generated by Ameren Missouri’s High Prairie and Atchison renewable energy centers and existing tax credit carryforwards.
The above items could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity. Additionally, in the ordinary course of business, we evaluate strategies to enhance our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity. These strategies may include acquisitions, divestitures, opportunities to reduce costs or increase revenues, and other strategic initiatives to increase Ameren’s shareholder value. We are unable to predict which, if any, of these initiatives will be executed. The execution of these initiatives may have a material impact on our future results of operations, financial position, or liquidity.
REGULATORY MATTERS
See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
ACCOUNTING MATTERS
Critical Accounting Estimates
Preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in compliance with GAAP requires the application of appropriate technical accounting rules and guidance, as well as the use of estimates. These estimates involve judgments regarding many factors that in and of themselves could materially affect the financial statements and disclosures. We have outlined below the critical accounting estimates that we believe are the most difficult, subjective, or complex. Any change in the assumptions or judgments applied in determining the following matters, among others, could have a material impact on future financial results.
Accounting Estimate
Uncertainties Affecting Application
Regulatory Mechanisms and Cost Recovery
We defer costs and recognize revenues that we intend to collect in future rates. •Regulatory environment and external regulatory decisions and requirements
•Anticipated future regulatory decisions and our assessment of their impact
•The impact of prudence reviews, complaint cases, limitations on electric rate increases in Missouri, and opposition during the ratemaking process that may limit our ability to timely recover costs and earn a fair return on our investments
•Ameren Illinois’ assessment of and ability to estimate the current year’s electric distribution service costs to be reflected in revenues and recovered from customers in a subsequent year under performance-based formula ratemaking framework
•Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s assessment of and ability to estimate the current year’s electric transmission service costs to be reflected in revenues and recovered from customers in a subsequent year under the FERC ratemaking frameworks
•Ameren Missouri’s estimate of revenue recovery under the MEEIA plans
Basis for Judgment
The application of accounting guidance for rate-regulated businesses results in recording regulatory assets and liabilities. Regulatory assets represent the deferral of incurred costs that are probable of future recovery in customer rates. Regulatory assets are amortized as the incurred costs are recovered through customer rates. In some cases, we record regulatory assets before approval for recovery has been received from the applicable regulatory commission. We must use judgment to conclude that costs deferred as regulatory assets are probable of future recovery. We base our conclusion on certain factors including, but not limited to, orders issued by our regulatory commissions, legislation, or historical experience, as well as discussions with legal counsel. If facts and circumstances lead us to conclude that a recorded regulatory asset is no longer probable of recovery or that plant assets are probable of disallowance, we record a charge to earnings, which could be material. Regulatory liabilities represent revenues received from customers to fund expected costs that have not yet been incurred or that are probable of future refunds to customers. We also recognize revenues for alternative revenue programs authorized by our regulators that allow for an automatic rate adjustment, are probable of recovery, and are collected within 24 months following the end of the annual period in which they are recognized. Under performance-based formula ratemaking, which expires at the end of 2022 unless extended, Ameren Illinois estimates its annual electric distribution revenue requirement for interim periods by using internal forecasted rate base and published forecasted data regarding the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds. Ameren Illinois estimates its annual revenue requirement as of December 31 of each year using that year’s actual operating results and assesses the probability of recovery from or refund to customers that the ICC will order at the end of the following year. Variations in investments made or orders by the ICC or courts can result in a subsequent change in Ameren Illinois’ estimate. Ameren Illinois and ATXI follow a similar process for their FERC rate-regulated electric transmission businesses. Ameren Missouri estimates lost electric margins resulting from its MEEIA customer energy-efficiency programs, which are subsequently recovered through the MEEIA rider. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for a description of our regulatory mechanisms and quantification of these assets or liabilities for each of the Ameren Companies.
Accounting Estimate
Uncertainties Affecting Application
Benefit Plan Accounting
Based on actuarial calculations, we accrue costs of providing future employee benefits for the benefit plans we offer our employees. See Note 10 - Retirement Benefits under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
•Valuation inputs and assumptions used in the fair value measurements of plan assets, excluding those inputs that are readily observable
•Discount rate
•Cash balance plan interest crediting rate on certain plans
•Future compensation increase assumption
•Health care cost trend rates
•Assumptions on the timing of employee retirements, terminations, benefit payments, and mortality
•Ability to recover certain benefit plan costs from our customers
•Changing market conditions that may affect investment and interest rate environments
•Future rate of return on pension and other plan assets
Basis for Judgment
Ameren has defined benefit pension plans covering substantially all of its employees and has postretirement benefit plans covering non-union employees hired before October 2015 and union employees hired before January 2020. Our ultimate selection of the discount rate, health care trend rate, and expected rate of return on pension and other postretirement benefit plan assets is based on our consistent application of assumption-setting methodologies and our review of available historical, current, and projected rates, as applicable. We also make mortality assumptions to estimate our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. See Note 10 - Retirement Benefits under Part II, Item 8, of this report for these assumptions and the sensitivity of Ameren’s benefit plans to potential changes in these assumptions.
Accounting Estimate
Uncertainties Affecting Application
Accounting for Contingencies
We make judgments and estimates in the recording and the disclosing of liabilities for claims, litigation, environmental remediation, the actions of various regulatory agencies, or other matters that occur in the normal course of business. We record a loss contingency when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and that the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. •Estimating financial impact of events
•Estimating likelihood of various potential outcomes
•Regulatory and political environments and requirements
•Outcome of legal proceedings, settlements, or other factors
•Changes in regulation, expected scope of work, technology, or timing of environmental remediation
Basis for Judgment
The determination of a loss contingency requires significant judgment as to the expected outcome of the contingency in future periods. In making the determination as to the amount of potential loss and the probability of loss, we consider the nature of the litigation, the claim or assessment, opinions or views of legal counsel, and the expected outcome of potential litigation, among other things. If no estimate is better than another within our range of estimates, we record as our best estimate of a loss the minimum value of our estimated range of outcomes. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to the contingency and revise our estimates. The amount recorded for any contingency may differ from actual costs incurred when the contingency is resolved. Contingencies are normally resolved over long periods of time. In our evaluation of legal matters, management consults with legal counsel and relies on analysis of relevant case law and legal precedents. See Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters, Note 9 - Callaway Energy Center, and Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies under Part II, Item 8, of this report for information on the Ameren Companies’ contingencies.
Accounting Estimate
Uncertainties Affecting Application
Accounting for Income Taxes
We record a provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets, if any. See Note 12 - Income Taxes under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
•Changes in business, industry, laws, technology, or economic and market conditions affecting forecasted financial condition and/or results of operations
•Estimates of the amount and character of future taxable income and forecasted use of our tax credit carryforwards
•Enacted tax rates applicable to taxable income in years in which temporary differences are recovered or settled
•Effectiveness of implementing tax planning strategies
•Changes in income tax laws, including amounts subject to income tax, and the regulatory treatment of any tax reform changes
•Results of audits and examinations by taxing authorities
Basis for Judgment
The reporting of tax-related assets and liabilities requires the use of estimates and significant management judgment. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded to represent future effects on income taxes for temporary differences between the basis of assets for financial reporting and tax purposes. Although management believes that current estimates for deferred tax assets and liabilities are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates for a variety of reasons, including: a change in forecasted financial condition and/or results of operations; changes in income tax laws, enacted tax rates or amounts subject to income tax; the form, structure, and timing of asset or stock sales or dispositions; changes in the regulatory treatment of any tax reform benefits; and changes resulting from audits and examinations by taxing authorities. Valuation allowances against deferred tax assets are recorded when management concludes it is more likely than not such asset will not be realized in future periods. Accounting for income taxes also requires that only tax benefits for positions taken or expected to be taken on tax returns that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold can be recognized or continue to be recognized. Management evaluates each position solely on the technical merits and facts and circumstances of the position, assuming that the position will be examined by a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Significant judgment is required to determine recognition thresholds and the related amount of tax benefits to be recognized. At each period end, and as new developments occur, management reevaluates its tax positions. See Note 12 - Income Taxes under Part II, Item 8, of this report for the amount of deferred income taxes recorded at December 31, 2020.
Accounting Estimate
Uncertainties Affecting Application
Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations
We record the estimated fair value of legal obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
•Discount rates
•Cost escalation rates
•Changes in regulation, expected scope of work, technology, or timing of environmental remediation
•Estimates as to the probability, timing, or amount of cash expenditures associated with AROs
Basis for Judgment
We record the estimated fair value of legal obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets in the period in which the liabilities are incurred and capitalize a corresponding amount as part of the book value of the related long-lived asset. In subsequent periods, we adjust AROs for accretion and changes in the estimated fair values of the obligations, with a corresponding increase or decrease in the asset book value for the fair value changes. We estimate the fair value of our AROs using present value techniques, in which we make various assumptions about discount rates and cost escalation rates. In addition, these estimates include assumptions of the probability, timing, and amount of cash expenditures to settle the ARO, and are based on currently available technology. Ameren and Ameren Missouri have recorded AROs for retirement costs associated with the decommissioning of Ameren Missouri’s Callaway and High Prairie Renewable energy centers, CCR facilities, and river structures. Also, Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois have recorded AROs for retirement costs associated with asbestos removal and the disposal of certain transformers. An increase of 0.25% in the assumed escalation rates would increase Ameren’s AROs at December 31, 2020, by $78 million. See Note 15 - Supplemental Information under Part II, Item 8, of this report for the amount of AROs recorded at December 31, 2020.
Impact of New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies under Part II, Item 8, of this report.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
Ameren’s rates for retail electric and natural gas utility service are regulated by the MoPSC and the ICC. Nonretail electric rates are regulated by the FERC. Rate regulation is generally based on the recovery of historical or projected costs. As a result, revenue increases could lag changing prices. The current replacement cost of our utility plant substantially exceeds our recorded historical cost. Under existing regulatory practice, the historical cost of plant is recoverable from customers. As a result, customer rates designed to provide recovery of historical costs through depreciation might not be adequate to replace plant in future years.
Ameren Illinois participates in performance-based formula ratemaking for its electric distribution business and its electric energy-efficiency investments. Within those ratemaking frameworks, the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds are the basis for Ameren Illinois’ allowed ROE. Therefore, there is a direct correlation between the yield of United States Treasury bonds, which are affected by inflation, and the allowed ROE applicable to Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution business and electric energy-efficiency investments. Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s electric transmission rates are determined pursuant to formula ratemaking. Additionally, Ameren Illinois and ATXI use a company-specific, forward-looking formula ratemaking framework in setting their transmission rates. These forward-looking rates are updated each January with forecasted information. A reconciliation during the year, which adjusts for the actual revenue requirement and for actual sales volumes, is used to adjust billing rates in a subsequent year.
Ameren Missouri recovers the cost of fuel for electric generation and the cost of purchased power by adjusting rates as allowed through the FAC. However, the FAC excludes substantially all transmission revenues and charges. Ameren Missouri is therefore exposed to transmission charges to the extent that they exceed transmission revenues. Ameren Illinois is required to purchase all of its expected power supply through procurement processes administered by the IPA. The cost of procured power can be affected by inflation. Ameren Illinois recovers power supply costs from electric customers by adjusting rates through a rider mechanism to accommodate changes in power prices.
In our Missouri and Illinois retail natural gas utility jurisdictions, changes in natural gas costs are generally reflected in billings to natural gas customers through PGA clauses.
See Part I, Item 1, and Note 2 - Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of this report for additional information on our recovery mechanisms.