ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Summary
In 2020, AES delivered on or exceeded all strategic and financial objectives. We completed construction of 2.3 GW of new projects and signed long-term PPAs for 3 GW of renewable capacity. Fluence, our joint venture with Siemens, maintained its leading global market share with 1 GW of projects delivered or awarded in 2020. Finally, following our efforts to reduce recourse debt, our Parent Company's credit rating was upgraded to investment grade by S&P. See Overview of our Strategy included in Item 1.-Business of this Form 10-K for further information.
Compared with last year, diluted earnings per share from continuing operations decreased $0.39, from $0.45 to $0.06. This decrease reflects higher impairments and losses on sales in the current period, lower contributions from DP&L primarily driven by lower regulated rates as a result of the changes in the ESP, lower demand at IPL and DP&L due to milder weather, lower contributions from Colombia due to drier hydrology and lower generation due to a life extension project at Chivor, and prior year net insurance recoveries; partially offset by lower income tax expense, and higher contributions from Chile due to net gains from early contract terminations at Angamos and a positive impact due to incremental capitalized interest, from Brazil due to a favorable revision to the GSF liability, from Panama due to higher availability and improved hydrology, and in the U.S. due to commencement of operations of the Southland Energy CCGTs and a gain on sale of land.
Adjusted EPS, a non-GAAP measure, increased $0.08, from $1.36 to $1.44, mainly due to higher availability and improved hydrology in Panama, commencement of operations of the Southland Energy CCGTs and a gain on sale of land in the U.S., a favorable revision to the GSF liability in Brazil, a lower adjusted tax rate, and a positive impact in Chile due to incremental capitalized interest; partially offset by lower contributions from our utilities in the U.S. primarily driven by lower regulated rates as a result of the changes in DP&L's ESP and lower demand due to milder weather, lower contributions from Colombia due to drier hydrology and lower generation due to a life extension project at Chivor, and prior year net insurance recoveries.
79 | 2020 Annual Report
Review of Consolidated Results of Operations
Components of Revenue, Cost of Sales and Operating Margin - Revenue includes revenue earned from the sale of energy from our utilities and the production and sale of energy from our generation plants, which are classified as regulated and non-regulated, respectively, on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Revenue also includes the gains or losses on derivatives associated with the sale of electricity.
Cost of sales includes costs incurred directly by the businesses in the ordinary course of business. Examples include electricity and fuel purchases, operations and maintenance costs, depreciation and amortization expenses, bad debt expense and recoveries, and general administrative and support costs (including employee-related costs directly associated with the operations of the business). Cost of sales also includes the gains or losses on derivatives (including embedded derivatives other than foreign currency embedded derivatives) associated with the purchase of electricity or fuel.
Operating margin is defined as revenue less cost of sales.
80 | 2020 Annual Report
Consolidated Revenue and Operating Margin
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
(in millions)
Consolidated Revenue - Revenue decreased $529 million, or 5%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the unfavorable FX impact of $182 million, primarily in South America, this decrease was driven by:
•$229 million in Eurasia driven by the sale of the Northern Ireland businesses in June 2019 and lower generation in Vietnam;
•$140 million in US and Utilities mainly driven by a decrease in energy pass-through rates and lower demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic in El Salvador, lower regulated rates as a result of the changes in DP&L's ESP, lower retail sales demand at IPL and DPL primarily due to milder weather and COVID-19 pandemic impacts, and decreased capacity sales, at Southland due to unit retirements, and at DPL due to the sale and closure of generation facilities. These decreases were partially offset by increased capacity sales at Southland Energy due to the commencement of the PPAs; and
•$88 million in MCAC mainly driven by lower generation and volume pass-through fuel revenue in Mexico, the disconnection of the Estrella del Mar I power barge from the grid in Panama, and lower market prices, spot sales and demand in both the Dominican Republic and at the Colon combined cycle facility in Panama. These decreases were partially offset by higher LNG sales in the Dominican Republic, driven by the Eastern Pipeline COD in 2020.
These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by an increase of $115 million in South America driven by revenue recognized at Angamos for the early termination of contracts with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence and recovery of previously expensed payments from customers in Chile, partially offset by drier hydrology and lower generation in Colombia due to a life extension project being performed at the Chivor hydro plant, lower pass-through coal prices, spot prices, and lower generation in Chile, and lower energy and capacity prices (Resolution 31/2020) in Argentina.
81 | 2020 Annual Report
Operating Margin
(in millions)
Consolidated Operating Margin - Operating margin increased $344 million, or 15%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the unfavorable impact of FX of $50 million, primarily in South America, this increase was driven by:
•$423 million in South America primarily due to the drivers discussed above, as well as a $184 million favorable revision to the GSF liability at Tietê related to the passage of a regulation providing concession extensions to hydro plants as compensation for prior period non-hydrological risk charges incorrectly assessed by the regulator; and
•$72 million in MCAC mostly due to higher availability at Changuinola due to the tunnel lining upgrade in 2019, improved hydrology in Panama, and higher LNG sales in the Dominican Republic, partially offset by prior year insurance recoveries associated with the lightning incident at the Andres facility in 2018, current year outage due to Andres steam turbine failure, and the disconnection of the Estrella del Mar I power barge from the grid in Panama.
These favorable impacts were partially offset by a decrease of $116 million in US and Utilities mostly due to lower regulated rates as a result of the changes in DP&L's ESP, lower retail sales demand at DPL and IPL primarily due to milder weather and COVID-19 pandemic impacts, lower capacity sales due to the retirement of units at Southland, a favorable revision to the ARO at DPL, and cost recoveries from DPL's joint owners of Stuart and Killen in 2019, partially offset by increased capacity sales at Southland Energy due to the commencement of the PPAs, and lower depreciation expense at Southland due to the extension of the water board permits.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue
(in millions)
Consolidated Revenue - Revenue decreased $547 million, or 5%, in 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the unfavorable FX impact of $133 million, primarily in South America, this decrease was driven by:
•$229 million in South America primarily driven by lower generation and prices in Argentina and lower contract sales and generation in Chile;
82 | 2020 Annual Report
•$173 million in Eurasia primarily due to the sales of the Masinloc power plant in March 2018 and the Northern Ireland businesses in June 2019; and
•$172 million in US and Utilities primarily driven by the closure of generation facilities at DPL in the first half of 2018 and Shady Point in May 2019, and lower energy prices and sales due to higher temperatures and other favorable market conditions present in 2018 as compared to 2019 at Southland, partially offset by price increases due to the 2018 rate orders at IPL and DPL and an increase in energy pass-through costs in El Salvador.
These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by an increase of $156 million in MCAC driven by the commencement of operations at the Colon combined cycle facility in Panama in September 2018.
Operating Margin
(in millions)
Consolidated Operating Margin - Operating margin decreased $224 million, or 9%, in 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the unfavorable impact of FX of $46 million, primarily in South America, this decrease was driven by:
•$107 million in South America primarily due to the drivers discussed above;
•$46 million in MCAC due to the outage at Changuinola as a result of upgrading the tunnel lining and lower hydrology in Panama as compared to the prior year, partially offset by the business interruption insurance recoveries at the Andres facility in Dominican Republic, higher contract sales at Panama, and the commencement of operations at the Colon combined cycle facility in Panama; and
•$31 million in Eurasia primarily due to the drivers discussed above, partially offset by lower depreciation at the Jordan plants due to their classification as held-for-sale.
These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by a $21 million increase in US and Utilities mostly driven by the 2018 rate orders at IPL and DPL, partially offset by the lost margin from the sale and closure of generation facilities at Shady Point and DPL, and increased rock ash disposal at Puerto Rico.
See Item 7.-Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-SBU Performance Analysis of this Form 10-K for additional discussion and analysis of operating results for each SBU.
Consolidated Results of Operations - Other
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses include expenses related to corporate staff functions and initiatives, executive management, finance, legal, human resources, and information systems, as well as global development costs.
General and administrative expenses decreased $31 million, or 16%, to $165 million for 2020 compared to $196 million for 2019, primarily due to a higher reallocation of information technology costs to the SBUs and lower professional fees, partially offset by higher development costs.
General and administrative expenses increased $4 million, or 2%, to $196 million for 2019 compared to $192 million for 2018, with no material drivers.
83 | 2020 Annual Report
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $12 million, or 1%, to $1,038 million for 2020, compared to $1,050 million for 2019 primarily due to incremental capitalized interest in Chile and lower interest rates due to refinancing at the Parent Company, partially offset by lower capitalized interest due to the commencement of operations at the Alamitos and Huntington Beach facilities in February 2020.
Interest expense decreased $6 million, or 1%, to $1,050 million for 2019, compared to $1,056 million for 2018 primarily due to the debt refinancing at the Parent Company and DPL, and favorable foreign currency translation at AES Brasil, partially offset by lower capitalized interest due to the commencement of operations at Colon in September 2018, a decrease in AFUDC for the Eagle Valley CCGT project at IPL, and the loss of hedge accounting at Alto Maipo in 2018, which resulted in favorable unrealized mark-to-market adjustments recognized within interest expense.
Interest income
Interest income decreased $50 million, or 16%, to $268 million for 2020, compared to $318 million for 2019 primarily to the decrease of the LIBOR rate on receivables in Argentina, a lower loan receivable balance at Mong Duong, and a lower average interest rate at AES Brasil.
Interest income increased $8 million, or 3%, to $318 million for 2019, compared to $310 million for 2018 primarily in South America driven by a higher average interest rate on CAMMESA receivables.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt increased $17 million, or 10%, to $186 million for 2020, compared to $169 million for 2019. This increase was primarily due to losses of $145 million and $34 million at the Parent Company and DPL, respectively, resulting from the redemption of senior notes and a $16 million loss resulting from the Panama refinancing in 2020. These increases were partially offset by losses of $45 million at DPL, $31 million at Mong Duong, $29 million at Gener, $28 million at Colon, and $24 million at Cochrane in 2019 resulting from the redemption or refinancing of senior notes.
Loss on extinguishment of debt decreased $19 million, or 10% to $169 million for 2019, compared to $188 million for 2018. This decrease was primarily due to losses of $171 million at the Parent Company resulting from the redemption of senior notes in 2018 compared to the 2019 losses discussed above.
See Note 11-Debt included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Other income
Other income decreased $70 million, or 48%, to $75 million for 2020, compared to $145 million for 2019 primarily due to the prior year gains on insurance recoveries associated with property damage at the Andres facility and upgrading the tunnel lining at Changuinola, partially offset by the current year gain on sale of Redondo Beach land at Southland.
Other income increased $73 million to $145 million for 2019, compared to $72 million for 2018 primarily due to gains on insurance recoveries associated with property damage at the Andres facility and upgrading the tunnel lining at Changuinola. These increases were partially offset by a gain on remeasurement of contingent liabilities for projects in Hawaii in 2018.
Other expense
Other expense decreased $27 million, or 34%, to $53 million for 2020, compared to $80 million for 2019 primarily due to prior year losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases at Distributed Energy, the prior year loss on disposal of assets at Changuinola associated with upgrading the tunnel lining, and lower defined benefit plan costs at IPL in 2020, partially offset by a loss on sale of Stabilization Fund receivables in Chile and compliance with an arbitration decision in 2020.
Other expense increased $22 million, or 38% to $80 million for 2019, compared to $58 million for 2018 primarily due to losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases at Distributed Energy and the loss on disposal of assets at Changuinola associated with upgrading the tunnel lining in 2019. This was partially offset by
84 | 2020 Annual Report
the loss on disposal of assets resulting from damage associated with a lightning incident at the Andres facility in the Dominican Republic in 2018.
See Note 21-Other Income and Expense included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Gain (loss) on disposal and sale of business interests
Loss on disposal and sale of business interests was $95 million for 2020, primarily due to the loss on sale of Uruguaiana and the loss on the settlement of the arbitration related to the sale of Kazakhstan HPPs, partially offset by the gain on sale of OPGC; as compared to a gain of $28 million for 2019 primarily due to the gain on sale of a portion of our interest in sPower's operating assets, the gain on the merger of Simple Energy to form Uplight, and the gain on transfer of Stuart and Killen, partially offset by the loss on sale of Kilroot and Ballylumford.
Gain on disposal and sale of business interests decreased to $28 million for 2019 as compared to $984 million for 2018, primarily due to the 2018 gains on sale of Masinloc of $772 million, CTNG of $126 million, and Electrica Santiago of $70 million.
See Note 25-Held-For-Sale and Dispositions and Note 8-Investments in and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Asset impairment expense
Asset impairment expense increased $679 million to $864 million for 2020, compared to $185 million for 2019. This increase was primarily driven by a $781 million impairment related to certain coal-fired plants at AES Gener and a $30 million impairment of the Estrella del Mar I power barge in Panama, compared to a $115 million prior year impairment at Kilroot and Ballylumford upon meeting the held-for-sale criteria in 2019.
Asset impairment expense decreased $23 million, or 11%, to $185 million for 2019, compared to $208 million for 2018. This decrease was primarily driven by $115 million as a result of an impairment analysis performed at Kilroot and Ballylumford upon meeting the held-for-sale criteria in 2019 and $60 million at Hawaii due to a decrease in the economic useful life of the coal-fired asset, compared to 2018 impairments of $157 million at Shady Point due to an unfavorable economic outlook creating uncertainty around future cash flows and $37 million at Nejapa due to the landfill owner's failure to perform improvements necessary to continue extracting gas.
See Note 22-Asset Impairment Expense included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses)
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) in millions were as follows:
_____________________________
(1) Primarily associated with the peso-denominated energy receivable indexed to the USD through the FONINVEMEM agreement which is considered a foreign currency derivative. See Note 7-Financing Receivables included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
(2) Includes gains of $57 million, losses of $31 million, and gains of $23 million on foreign currency derivative contracts for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The Company recognized net foreign currency transaction gains of $55 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by realized and unrealized gains on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina and unrealized gains at the Parent Company resulting from the appreciation of intercompany receivables denominated in Euro.
The Company recognized net foreign currency transaction losses of $67 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina and unrealized losses associated with the devaluation of long-term receivables denominated in the Argentine peso.
85 | 2020 Annual Report
The Company recognized net foreign currency transaction losses of $72 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to the devaluation of long-term receivables denominated in Argentine pesos, partially offset by gains at the Parent Company related to foreign currency derivatives.
Other non-operating expense
Other non-operating expense was $202 million and $92 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to the other-than-temporary impairment of the OPGC equity method investment. In December 2019, an other-than-temporary impairment of $92 million was identified at OPGC primarily due to the estimated market value of the Company's investment and other negative developments impacting future expected cash flows at the investee. In March 2020, the Company recognized an additional $43 million other-than-temporary impairment due to the economic slowdown. In June 2020, the Company agreed to sell its entire stake in the OPGC investment, resulting in an other-than-temporary impairment of $158 million.
Other non-operating expense was $147 million in 2018 primarily due to the $144 million other-than-temporary impairment of the Guacolda equity method investment as a result of increased renewable generation in Chile lowering energy prices and impacting the ability of Guacolda to re-contract its existing PPAs after they expire.
See Note 8-Investments in and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense decreased $136 million to $216 million in 2020 as compared to $352 million for 2019. The Company's effective tax rates were 44% and 35% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The net increase in the 2020 effective tax rate was primarily due to the 2020 impacts of the other-than-temporary impairment of the OPGC equity method investment and the loss on sale of the Company’s entire interest in AES Uruguaiana, partially offset by the recognition of a federal ITC for the Na Pua Makani wind facility in Hawaii. Further, the 2019 rate was impacted by the items described below. See Note 25-Held-for-Sale and Dispositions included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for details of the sales.
Income tax expense decreased $356 million to $352 million in 2019 as compared to $708 million for 2018. The Company's effective tax rate was 35% for both years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The 2019 effective tax rate was impacted by the nondeductible losses on the sale of the Company's entire 100% interest in the Kilroot coal and oil-fired plant and energy storage facility and the Ballylumford gas-fired plant in the United Kingdom and associated asset impairments. Further impacting the 2019 effective tax rate were the effects of the Argentine peso devaluation to tax expense, as well as to pretax income for nondeductible unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina. The 2018 effective tax rate was impacted by the increase in the Staff Accounting Bulletin No.118 ("SAB 118") adjustment with respect to the estimate of the one-time transition tax and deferred tax remeasurement under the TCJA. This impact was partially offset by the impact of the sale of the Company’s entire 51% equity interest in Masinloc. See Note 25-Held-for-Sale and Dispositions included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for details of the sales.
Our effective tax rate reflects the tax effect of significant operations outside the U.S., which are generally taxed at rates different than the U.S. statutory rate. Foreign earnings may be taxed at rates higher than the U.S. corporate rate of 21% and are also subject to current U.S. taxation under the GILTI rules introduced by the TCJA. A future proportionate change in the composition of income before income taxes from foreign and domestic tax jurisdictions could impact our periodic effective tax rate. The Company also benefits from reduced tax rates in certain countries as a result of satisfying specific commitments regarding employment and capital investment. See Note 23-Income Taxes included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for addition information regarding these reduced rates.
Net equity in earnings (losses) of affiliates
Net equity in losses of affiliates decreased $49 million, or 28%, to $123 million in 2020, compared to $172 million in 2019. This was primarily driven by a $31 million increase in earnings due to lower long-lived asset impairments at Guacolda, Gener's 50%-owned equity affiliate, during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Net equity in earnings of affiliates decreased $211 million to losses of $172 million in 2019, compared to earnings of $39 million in 2018. This was primarily driven by a $158 million decrease in earnings due to a long-lived
86 | 2020 Annual Report
asset impairment at Guacolda, a $19 million decrease in earnings at OPGC due to a contract termination charge, and a $20 million decrease in earnings at sPower due to the impairment of certain development projects.
See Note 8-Investments In and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Net income from discontinued operations
Net income from discontinued operations was $3 million and $1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with no material drivers.
Net income from discontinued operations was $216 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to the after-tax gain on sale of Eletropaulo of $199 million recognized in the second quarter of 2018 and the recognition of a $26 million deferred gain upon liquidation of Borsod in October 2018.
See Note 24-Discontinued Operations included in Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and redeemable stock of subsidiaries
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and redeemable stock of subsidiaries decreased $69 million, or 39%, to $106 million in 2020, compared to $175 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Lower earnings in Chile due to long-lived asset impairments at Gener, partially offset by net gains from early contract terminations at Angamos and lower interest expense due to incremental capitalized interest;
•Lower earnings in Colombia due to drier hydrology and a life extension project at the Chivor hydroelectric plant;
•Prior year insurance recoveries net of outages at Andres; and
•HLBV allocation of losses to noncontrolling interests at Distributed Energy.
These increases were partially offset by:
•Higher earnings in Brazil due to the favorable revision of the GSF liability; and
•Prior year losses on extinguishment of debt at Mong Duong and Colon.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and redeemable stock of subsidiaries decreased $187 million, or 52%, to $175 million in 2019, compared to $362 million in 2018. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Gains on sales of Electrica Santiago and CTNG in Chile in 2018;
•Lower earnings in Chile in 2019 primarily due to long-lived asset impairment at Guacolda, losses on extinguishment of debt, and lower contracted energy sales and prices;
•HLBV allocation of losses to noncontrolling interests at Distributed Energy as a result of renewable projects reaching COD in 2019; and
•Lower earnings in Panama in 2019 primarily due to lower hydrology and the outage at Changuinola as a result of upgrading the tunnel lining.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Other-than-temporary impairment of Guacolda in 2018.
Net income attributable to The AES Corporation
Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $257 million, or 85%, to $46 million in 2020, compared to $303 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Long-lived asset impairments at Gener and Panama;
•Net impact of current and prior year other-than-temporary impairments of OPGC;
•Higher losses on extinguishment of debt in the current year, primarily due to major refinancings at the Parent Company;
•Lower margins at our US and Utilities SBU;
87 | 2020 Annual Report
•Losses on sale of Uruguaiana and the Kazakhstan HPPs as a result of the final arbitration decision; and
•Prior year net insurance recoveries at Andres.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Prior year long-lived asset impairments at Kilroot and Ballylumford;
•Net impact of current and prior year long-lived asset impairments at Guacolda;
•Prior year unrealized losses on foreign currency derivatives related to government receivables in Argentina;
•Higher margins at our South America and MCAC SBUs;
•Lower income tax expense;
•Lower interest expense due to incremental capitalized interest in Chile; and
•Gain on sale of land held by AES Redondo Beach at Southland.
Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $900 million, or 75% to $303 million in 2019, compared to $1,203 million in 2018. This decrease was primarily due to:
•Gains on the sales of Masinloc, Eletropaulo (reflected within discontinued operations), CTNG and Electrica Santiago in 2018, net of tax;
•Long-lived asset impairments at Guacolda, Hawaii, Kilroot and Ballylumford, and other-than-temporary impairment at OPGC in 2019;
•Loss on sale at Kilroot and Ballylumford in 2019;
•Losses on extinguishment of debt at DPL, AES Gener, Mong Duong, and Colon in 2019;
•Losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases at Distributed Energy in 2019;
•The impact of sold businesses in our Eurasia SBU;
•Lower margins at Argentina and Chile in 2019, primarily due to lower generation; and
•Lower margins at Changuinola in 2019, driven by the outage as a result of upgrading the tunnel lining and lower hydrology in Panama.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•Income tax expense in 2018 to finalize the initial impact of U.S. tax reform enacted in December 2017;
•Loss on extinguishment of debt at the Parent Company in 2018;
•Long-lived asset impairments at Shady Point and Nejapa, and other-than-temporary impairment at Guacolda in 2018;
•Gains on insurance proceeds in 2019, associated with the lightning incident at the Andres facility in 2018 and the Changuinola tunnel leak;
•Gain on sale of a portion of our interest in sPower’s operating assets and gain on disposal of Stuart and Killen at DPL in 2019; and
•Higher earnings at our US and Utilities SBU in 2019, primarily as a result of renewable projects that came online.
SBU Performance Analysis
Segments
We are organized into four market-oriented SBUs: US and Utilities (United States, Puerto Rico and El Salvador); South America (Chile, Colombia, Argentina and Brazil); MCAC (Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean); and Eurasia (Europe and Asia).
Non-GAAP Measures
Adjusted Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC and Adjusted EPS are non-GAAP supplemental measures that are used by management and external users of our Consolidated Financial Statements such as investors, industry analysts and lenders.
88 | 2020 Annual Report
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company changed the definitions of Adjusted Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC and Adjusted EPS to exclude net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence. We believe the inclusion of the effects of this non-recurring transaction would result in a lack of comparability in our results of operations and would distort the metrics that our investors use to measure us.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company changed the definitions of Adjusted PTC and Adjusted EPS to exclude gains and losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases. We believe these transactions are economically similar to sales of business interests and excluding these gains or losses better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company.
Adjusted Operating Margin
We define Adjusted Operating Margin as Operating Margin, adjusted for the impact of NCI, excluding (a) unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions; (b) benefits and costs associated with dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, including early plant closures; (c) costs directly associated with a major restructuring program, including, but not limited to, workforce reduction efforts, relocations, and office consolidation; and (d) net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence. The allocation of HLBV earnings to noncontrolling interests is not adjusted out of Adjusted Operating Margin. See Review of Consolidated Results of Operations for definitions of Operating Margin and cost of sales.
The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted Operating Margin is Operating Margin. We believe that Adjusted Operating Margin better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company. Factors in this determination include the impact of NCI, where AES consolidates the results of a subsidiary that is not wholly owned by the Company, as well as the variability due to unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions and strategic decisions to dispose of or acquire business interests. Adjusted Operating Margin should not be construed as an alternative to Operating Margin, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
_____________________________
(1)The allocation of HLBV earnings to noncontrolling interests is not adjusted out of Adjusted Operating Margin.
(2)In February 2018, the Company announced a reorganization as a part of its ongoing strategy to simplify its portfolio, optimize its cost structure and reduce its carbon intensity.
89 | 2020 Annual Report
Adjusted PTC
We define Adjusted PTC as pre-tax income from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation excluding gains or losses of the consolidated entity due to (a) unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions and equity securities; (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses; (c) gains, losses, benefits and costs associated with dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, including early plant closures, and gains and losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases; (d) losses due to impairments; (e) gains, losses and costs due to the early retirement of debt; (f) costs directly associated with a major restructuring program, including, but not limited to, workforce reduction efforts, relocations, and office consolidation; and (g) net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence. Adjusted PTC also includes net equity in earnings of affiliates on an after-tax basis adjusted for the same gains or losses excluded from consolidated entities.
Adjusted PTC reflects the impact of NCI and excludes the items specified in the definition above. In addition to the revenue and cost of sales reflected in Operating Margin, Adjusted PTC includes the other components of our Consolidated Statement of Operations, such as general and administrative expenses in the Corporate segment, as well as business development costs, interest expense and interest income, other expense and other income, realized foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and net equity in earnings of affiliates.
The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted PTC is income from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation. We believe that Adjusted PTC better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is the most relevant measure considered in the Company's internal evaluation of the financial performance of its segments. Factors in this determination include the variability due to unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions or equity securities remeasurement, unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments, strategic decisions to dispose of or acquire business interests, retire debt or implement restructuring initiatives, and the non-recurring nature of the impact of the early contract terminations at Angamos, which affect results in a given period or periods. In addition, Adjusted PTC represents the business performance of the Company before the application of statutory income tax rates and tax adjustments, including the effects of tax planning, corresponding to the various jurisdictions in which the Company operates. Given its large number of businesses and complexity, the Company concluded that Adjusted PTC is a more transparent measure that better assists investors in determining which businesses have the greatest impact on the Company's results.
Adjusted PTC should not be construed as an alternative to income from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
90 | 2020 Annual Report
Adjusted EPS
We define Adjusted EPS as diluted earnings per share from continuing operations excluding gains or losses of both consolidated entities and entities accounted for under the equity method due to (a) unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions and equity securities; (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses; (c) gains, losses, benefits and costs associated with dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, including early plant closures, the tax impact from the repatriation of sales proceeds, and gains and losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases; (d) losses due to impairments; (e) gains, losses and costs due to the early retirement of debt; (f) costs directly associated with a major restructuring program, including, but not limited to, workforce reduction efforts, relocations and office consolidation; (g) net gains at Angamos, one of our businesses in the South America SBU, associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence; and (h) tax benefit or expense related to the enactment effects of 2017 U.S. tax law reform and related regulations and any subsequent period adjustments related to enactment effects.
The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted EPS is diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. We believe that Adjusted EPS better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is considered in the Company's internal evaluation of financial performance. Factors in this determination include the variability due to unrealized gains or losses related to derivative transactions or equity securities remeasurement, unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments, strategic decisions to dispose of or acquire business interests, retire debt or implement restructuring initiatives, the one-time impact of the 2017 U.S. tax law reform and subsequent period adjustments related to enactment effects, and the non-recurring nature of the impact of the early contract terminations at Angamos, which affect results in a given period or periods. Adjusted EPS should not be construed as an alternative to diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
91 | 2020 Annual Report
_____________________________
(1)Amount primarily relates to unrealized derivative losses in Argentina of $89 million, or $0.13 per share, mainly associated with foreign currency derivatives on government receivables.
(2)Amount primarily relates to unrealized FX losses in Argentina of $25 million, or $0.04 per share, mainly associated with the devaluation of long-term receivables denominated in Argentine pesos, and unrealized FX losses at the Parent Company of $12 million, or $0.02 per share, mainly associated with intercompany receivables denominated in Euro.
(3)Amount primarily relates to unrealized FX losses of $22 million, or $0.03 per share, associated with the devaluation of long-term receivables denominated in Argentine pesos, and unrealized FX losses of $14 million, or $0.02 per share, on intercompany receivables denominated in Euro and British pounds at the Parent Company.
(4)Amount primarily relates to loss on sale of Uruguaiana of $85 million, or $0.13 per share, loss on sale of the Kazakhstan HPPs of $30 million, or $0.05 per share, as a result of the final arbitration decision, and advisor fees associated with the successful acquisition of additional ownership interest in AES Brasil of $9 million, or $0.01 per share; partially offset by gain on sale of OPGC of $23 million, or $0.03 per share.
(5)Amount primarily relates to losses recognized at commencement of sales-type leases at Distributed Energy of $36 million, or $0.05 per share, and loss on sale of Kilroot and Ballylumford of $31 million, or $0.05 per share; partially offset by gain on sale of a portion of our interest in sPower’s operating assets of $28 million, or $0.04 per share, gain on disposal of Stuart and Killen at DPL of $20 million, or $0.03 per share, and gain on sale of ownership interest in Simple Energy as part of the Uplight merger of $12 million, or $0.02 per share.
(6)Amount primarily relates to gain on sale of Masinloc of $772 million, or $1.16 per share, gain on sale of CTNG of $86 million, or $0.13 per share, gain on sale of Electrica Santiago of $36 million, or $0.05 per share, gain on remeasurement of contingent consideration at AES Oahu of $32 million, or $0.05 per share, gain on sale related to the Company's contribution of AES Advancion energy storage to the Fluence joint venture of $23 million, or $0.03 per share, and realized derivative gains associated with the sale of Eletropaulo of $21 million, or $0.03 per share; partially offset by loss on disposal of the Beckjord facility and additional shutdown costs related to Stuart and Killen at DPL of $21 million, or $0.03 per share.
(7)Amount primarily relates to asset impairments at Gener of $527 million, or $0.79 per share, other-than-temporary impairment of OPGC of $201 million, or $0.30 per share, impairments at our Guacolda and sPower equity affiliates, impacting equity earnings by $85 million, or $0.13 per share, and $57 million, or $0.09 per share, respectively; impairment at Hawaii of $38 million, or $0.06 per share, and impairment at Panama of $15 million, or $0.02 per share.
(8)Amount primarily relates to asset impairments at Kilroot and Ballylumford of $115 million, or $0.17 per share, and Hawaii of $60 million, or $0.09 per share; impairments at our Guacolda and sPower equity affiliates, impacting equity earnings by $105 million, or $0.16 per share, and $21 million, or $0.03 per share, respectively; and other-than-temporary impairment of OPGC of $92 million, or $0.14 per share.
(9)Amount primarily relates to asset impairments at Shady Point of $157 million, or $0.24 per share, and Nejapa of $37 million, or $0.06 per share, and other-than-temporary impairment of Guacolda of $96 million, or $0.14 per share.
(10)Amount primarily relates to losses on early retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $146 million, or $0.22 per share, DPL of $32 million, or $0.05 per share, Angamos of $17 million, or $0.02 per share, and Panama of $11 million, or $0.02 per share.
(11)Amount primarily relates to losses on early retirement of debt at DPL of $45 million, or $0.07 per share, AES Gener of $35 million, or $0.05 per share, Mong Duong of $17 million, or $0.03 per share, and Colon of $14 million, or $0.02 per share.
(12)Amount primarily relates to loss on early retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $171 million, or $0.26 per share.
(13)Amount relates to net gains at Angamos associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence of $182 million, or $0.27 per share.
(14)Amount represents adjustment to tax law reform remeasurement due to incremental deferred taxes related to DPL of $16 million, or $0.02 per share.
(15)Amount relates to a SAB 118 charge to finalize the provisional estimate of one-time transition tax on foreign earnings of $194 million, or $0.29 per share, partially offset by a SAB 118 income tax benefit to finalize the provisional estimate of remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities to the lower corporate tax rate of $77 million, or $0.11 per share.
(16)Amount primarily relates to income tax benefits associated with the impairments at Gener and Guacolda of $164 million, or $0.25 per share, and income tax benefits associated with losses on early retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $31 million, or $0.05 per share; partially offset by income tax expense related to net gains at Angamos associated with the early contract terminations with Minera Escondida and Minera Spence of $49 million, or $0.07 per share.
(17)Amount primarily relates to the income tax benefits associated with the impairments at OPGC of $23 million, or $0.03 per share, Guacolda of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, Hawaii of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, and Kilroot and Ballylumford of $11 million, or $0.02 per share, and income tax benefits associated with losses on early retirement of debt of $24 million, or $0.04 per share; partially offset by an adjustment to income tax expense related to 2018 gains on sales of business interests, primarily Masinloc, of $25 million, or $0.04 per share.
(18)Amount primarily relates to the income tax expense under the GILTI provision associated with the gains on sales of business interests, primarily Masinloc, of $97 million, or $0.15 per share, and income tax expense associated with gains on sale of CTNG of $36 million, or $0.05 per share, and Electrica Santiago of $13 million, or $0.02 per share; partially offset by income tax benefits associated with the loss on early retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $36 million, or $0.05 per share, and income tax benefits associated with the impairment at Shady Point of $33 million, or $0.05 per share.
92 | 2020 Annual Report
US and Utilities SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses.
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin decreased $116 million, or 15%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $82 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI and excluding unrealized gains and losses on derivatives and costs associated with dispositions of business interests.
Adjusted PTC decreased $64 million, primarily driven by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above and increased interest expense primarily at Southland Energy due to lower capitalized interest following completion of the CCGT units and new debt issuances, partially offset by a gain on sale of land held by AES Redondo Beach at Southland, lower pension expense at IPL, and an increase in allocation of earnings from equity affiliates driven by renewable projects that came online in 2020 at sPower.
Fiscal year 2019 versus 2018
Operating Margin increased $21 million, or 3%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $19 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI and excluding unrealized gains and losses on derivatives and costs and benefits associated with early plant closures.
Adjusted PTC increased $58 million, primarily driven by an increase in earnings attributable to AES as a result of contributions from new renewable projects and lower interest expense at DPL, partially offset by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above and a decrease in AFUDC for the Eagle Valley CCGT project at IPL.
93 | 2020 Annual Report
South America SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses. In addition, AES owned 24.35% of AES Brasil until August 2020 when ownership increased to 42.85%, and increased again to 44.13% in December 2020 due to acquisition of additional shares in the company.
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin increased $370 million, or 42%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $51 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI and the net gains on early contract terminations at Angamos.
Adjusted PTC increased $30 million, mainly driven by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above, as well as lower interest expense due to incremental capitalized interest at Alto Maipo. These positive impacts were partially offset by realized FX losses and lower interest income primarily driven by lower interest rates on CAMMESA receivables in Argentina, and higher interest expense in Brazil due to higher inflation rates.
Fiscal year 2019 versus 2018
Operating Margin decreased $144 million, or 14%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $113 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC decreased $15 million, mainly driven by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above, partially offset by realized FX gains in Argentina and Chile in 2019 as compared to losses in 2018, and higher equity earnings in 2019 related to better operating results at Guacolda.
94 | 2020 Annual Report
MCAC SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses.
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin increased $72 million, or 15%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin increased $42 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC decreased $80 million, mainly driven by insurance recoveries associated with property damage at Andres and Changuinola in 2019, partially offset by the increase in Adjusted Operating Margin described above.
Fiscal year 2019 versus 2018
Operating Margin decreased $47 million, or 9%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $39 million primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC increased $67 million, mainly driven by the insurance recoveries associated with property damage at Andres and Changuinola, partially offset by a decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above.
95 | 2020 Annual Report
Eurasia SBU
The following table summarizes Operating Margin, Adjusted Operating Margin and Adjusted PTC (in millions) for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1) A non-GAAP financial measure, adjusted for the impact of NCI. See SBU Performance Analysis-Non-GAAP Measures for definition and Item 1.-Business for the respective ownership interest for key businesses.
Fiscal year 2020 versus 2019
Operating Margin decreased $2 million, or 1%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $6 million due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC increased $18 million, mainly driven by lower interest expense due to regular debt repayments in Bulgaria and a positive variance in OPGC equity earnings, partially offset by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin described above.
Fiscal year 2019 versus 2018
Operating Margin decreased $39 million, or 17%, which was driven primarily by the following (in millions):
Adjusted Operating Margin decreased $46 million, primarily due to the drivers above, adjusted for NCI.
Adjusted PTC decreased $63 million, primarily driven by the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin discussed above, as well as a decrease in earnings at OPGC and the sale of Elsta, our equity affiliate in the Netherlands.
Key Trends and Uncertainties
During 2021 and beyond, we expect to face the following challenges at certain of our businesses. Management expects that improved operating performance at certain businesses, growth from new businesses, and global cost reduction initiatives may lessen or offset their impact. If these favorable effects do not occur, or if the challenges described below and elsewhere in this section impact us more significantly than we currently anticipate, or if volatile foreign currencies and commodities move more unfavorably, then these adverse factors (or other adverse factors unknown to us) may have a material impact on our operating margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation and cash flows. We continue to monitor our operations and address challenges as they arise. For the risk factors related to our business, see Item 1.-Business and Item 1A.-Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted global economic activity, including electricity and energy consumption, and caused significant volatility in financial markets. The following discussion highlights our assessment of the impacts of the pandemic on our current financial and operating status, and our financial and operational outlook based on information known as of this filing. Also see Item 1A.-Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic we have conducted our essential operations without significant disruption. We derive approximately 85% of our total revenues from our regulated utilities and long-term sales and
96 | 2020 Annual Report
supply contracts or PPAs at our generation businesses, which contributes to a relatively stable revenue and cost structure at most of our businesses. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the energy market materialized in our operational locations in the second quarter and was generally better than our revised expectations for the second half of 2020. Across our global portfolio, our utilities businesses experienced a low single digit percentage decline in the fourth quarter. Our business model outside of utilities is primarily based on take-or-pay contracts or tolling agreements, with limited exposure to demand. Any uncontracted portion of our generation business is exposed to increased price risk resulting from lower demand associated with the pandemic. We are also experiencing a decline in electricity spot prices in some of our markets due to lower system demand. While we cannot predict the length and magnitude of the pandemic or how it could impact global economic conditions, a delayed recovery with respect to demand may adversely impact our financial results for 2021.
We continue to monitor and manage our credit exposures in a prudent manner. Our credit exposures have continued in-line with historical levels and within the customary 45-60 day grace period. These impacts are expected to be partially offset by recoveries through U.S. regulatory rate-making mechanisms and a combination of the securitization of customer payment moratorium receivables and agreements with the generating companies in El Salvador. We have not experienced material credit-related impacts from our PPA offtakers due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our supply chain management has remained robust during this challenging time and we continue to closely manage and monitor developments. We continue to experience certain minor delays in some of our development projects, primarily in permitting processes and the implementation of interconnections, due to governments and other authorities having limited capacity to perform their functions.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was passed by the U.S. Congress and signed into law on March 27, 2020. While we currently expect a limited impact from this legislation on our business, certain elements such as changes in the deductibility of interest may provide some cash benefits in the near term.
Additionally, the Company continues to monitor the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results and operations, which may result in the need to record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in the jurisdictions where we operate.
Macroeconomic and Political
The macroeconomic and political environments in some countries where our subsidiaries conduct business have changed during 2020. This could result in significant impacts to tax laws and environmental and energy policies. Additionally, we operate in multiple countries and as such are subject to volatility in exchange rates at the subsidiary level. See