ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 16, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
Proposed Business Combination
On November 2, 2020, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Sub and Aeva, pursuant to which Merger Sub will be merged with and into Aeva, with Aeva surviving the Merger as a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of InterPrivate. The Business Combination Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, covenants, closing conditions, termination fee provisions and other terms relating to the Proposed Business Combination and the transactions contemplated thereby.
At the effective time of the Merger, by virtue of the Merger, all shares of Aeva common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger will be canceled and converted into the right to receive shares of our common stock, all outstanding Aeva options will be converted into options to purchase our common stock and all outstanding Aeva restricted stock units will be converted into InterPrivate restricted stock units. The aggregate number of shares of Company common stock to be issued in the Proposed Business Combination will be equal to $1.7 billion plus the exercise price of all outstanding Aeva options, divided by $10.00.
The Closing is subject to certain conditions, including but not limited to the approval of our stockholders and Aeva’s stockholders of the Business Combination Agreement. The Business Combination Agreement may also be terminated by either party under certain circumstances including if the Proposed Business Combination has not occurred by March 31, 2021. Aeva has agreed to customary “no shop” obligations subject to a customary “fiduciary out,” and Aeva would be required to pay a termination fee in the amount of $68 million if the Business Combination Agreement is terminated under certain circumstances.
See “Item 1. Business-Proposed Business Combination” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of certain ancillary agreements we have or will enter into in connection with the Proposed Business Combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 16, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $932,821, which consists of operating costs of $2,523,015 and a provision for income taxes of $199,765 offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,789,959.
For the period from August 16, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net loss of $1,000, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $1,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 6, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 21,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $210,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 555,000 Private Units to our Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital, generating gross proceeds of $5,550,000.
On February 10, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,150,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $31,500,000. In addition, we also consummated the sale of an additional 63,000 Private Units at $10.00 per Private Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $32,130,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $241,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $5,310,386 in IPO related costs, including $4,830,000 of underwriting fees and $480,386 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $243,129,959 (including approximately $1,630,000 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we have withdrawn $160,000 of interest earned on the Trust Account for the payment of franchise and income taxes.
For the year end December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,408,976. Net loss of $923,821 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,789,959 and changes in operating assets and liabilities which provided $1,313,804 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $694. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Units.
In December 2020, an affiliate of the Sponsor advanced the company an aggregate amount of $353,994. On January 29, 2021 the Company subsequently entered into a convertible promissory note with this affiliate (the “Noteholder”), pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “Convertible Promissory Note”), including the aggregate advance of $353,994 at December 31, 2020. The Convertible Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and due on the date on which the Company consummates its initial business combination. If the Company does not consummate an initial business combination, the Company may use a portion of any funds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Convertible Promissory Note; however, no proceeds from the Trust Account may be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of the principal amount of the Convertible Promissory Note may be converted into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Units. Subsequent to January 29, 2021, the Company drew down the remaining amount available for borrowing under the Convertible Promissory Note. The Noteholder intends to convert such amount into 150,000 units of the Company at the closing of the Business Combination. Such units will have terms identical to the terms of the Company’s Private Units.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern through November 6, 2021, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of one of our executive officers a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on February 3, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
We entered into an agreement whereby, commencing on February 3, 2020, through the earlier of the Company’s consummation of a business combination and the liquidation of the Trust Account, we will pay our Vice President a $10,000 per month fee for assisting us in negotiating and consummating an initial business combination.
Additionally, we have engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with a business combination to assist us in holding meetings with its shareholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a business combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the business combination and assist us with its press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a business combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 33% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other third parties who are investment banks or financial advisory firms not participating in the IPO that assist us in identifying and consummating a business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.