Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated historical financial statements and the notes to those statements that appear elsewhere in this report. Certain statements in the discussion contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors.
General
The Company reports its financial performance based on two external reporting segments: Wireless and Telecommunications. These reportable segments are described below.
Wireless Infrastructure Services (“Wireless”)
The Company's Wireless Segment, which consists entirely of the assets of Fulton, provides turn-key wireless infrastructure services for the four major U.S. wireless carriers, communication tower companies, national integrators, and original equipment manufacturers that support these wireless carriers. These services primarily consist of the installation and upgrade of technology on cell sites and the construction of new small cells for 5G.
Telecommunications (“Telco”)
The Company’s Telco segment sells new and refurbished telecommunications networking equipment, including both central office and customer premise equipment, to its customer base of telecommunications providers, enterprise customers and resellers located primarily in North America. This segment also offers its customers repair and testing services for telecommunications networking equipment. In addition, this segment offers its customers decommissioning services for surplus and obsolete equipment, which it in turn processes through its recycling program.
Recent Business Developments
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the current outbreak of COVID-19 to be a global pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency. In response to these declarations and the rapid spread of COVID-19, federal, state and local governments have imposed varying degrees of restrictions on business and social activities to contain COVID-19, including quarantine and “stay-at-home” or “shelter-in-place” orders in markets where we operate. Despite these “stay-at-home” or “shelter-in-place” orders, we are classified as an essential business due to the services and products we provide to the telecommunications industry. Therefore, we continue to operate in the markets we serve while these orders were in place. Most of our back-office and administrative personnel worked from home while these orders were in place, these personnel began working in the office as restrictions were relaxed or lifted. Although we can continue to operate our businesses, our revenues have slowed, especially in our Wireless segment, due to the carriers slowing down various wireless tower projects. We have not experienced a material disruption in our supply chain to date.
With the partial reopening of the economy the economic effects of the pandemic and resulting societal changes remain unpredictable. Although we experienced increased revenues in the last two quarters compared to recent quarters since the pandemic began last year, there are a number of uncertainties that could impact our future results of operations, including the efficacy and widespread distribution of a vaccine, the return of major outdoor events during the summer and fall months, and the impact of COVID-19 on the operating results and capital budgets of our customers.
Wireless Segment Operating Results
During 2021, Fulton achieved revenues of $20.7 million. Fulton has maintained a strong employee base, and we continue to successfully recruit strong industry talent throughout the business to help us implement operational improvements with a focus on improving our quality and project margins. We are expecting increased activity in the industry as wireless carriers roll out 5G and the required densification of their networks. Our goal is to solidify our processes and project oversight to successfully and profitably take advantage of new growth opportunities as the 5G expansion becomes essential.
Telco Segment
The Telco segment achieved revenues of $41.5 million during 2021. We continue to focus our core team on sales and procurement. Our Triton team has strong experience in online marketing.
At Triton, our facility is designed to streamline our processes, including inventory management, shipping and receiving and the refurbishment operations. We have developed the internal systems necessary to expand our refurbishment capabilities and new equipment sales by adding additional product lines and manufacturers. We have also increased our focus on the brokerage business and internet sales by expanding our sales channels. We believe that Triton is poised to expand, capture additional market share and develop new customers.
Our Nave business experienced significant upside during the year related to the global chip shortage as well as growth from our enterprise fiber network customers as they experienced significant network growth.
Results of Operations
Year Ended September 30, 2021, compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020 (all references are to fiscal years)
Consolidated
Consolidated sales increased $12.0 million, or 24%, to $62.2 million for 2021 from $50.2 million for 2020. The increase in sales was related to an increase of $12.7 million in the Telco segment, mainly attributable to increased demand for refurbished network equipment resulting from the global chip shortage. Sales for the Wireless segment decreased $0.7 million.
Consolidated gross profit increased $4.4 million, or 38%, to $16.1 million for 2021 from $11.7 million for 2020. Telco gross profit increased $4.7 million, partially offset by an decrease in gross profit in our Wireless segment of $0.3 million.
Operating expenses increased $1.1 million to $9.3 million for the twelve months ended September 30, 2021 compared with $8.2 million for the same period last year. The increase in operating expenses was due primarily to our investment in our regional growth strategy to meet the demand of our customers in the Wireless segment.
Consolidated selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses include overhead costs, which primarily consist of personnel costs, insurance, professional services, and communication, among other less significant cost categories. SG&A increased $3.7 million or 32% to $14.9 million in 2021 compared to $11.2 million in 2020. Increased selling expenses resulted from higher sales compensation and commissions to support growth in the Telco segment. Increased general and administrative expenses during 2021 were related to expanded operational support and infrastructure in anticipation of future 5G expansion.
In 2020 the Company recorded impairment charges of $8.7 million on intangibles including goodwill and $0.7 million on its right-of-use asset Telco Segment. See Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 8 - Leases in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of impairments.
The Company applied for and has been granted forgiveness by the Small Business Administration ("SBA") of $2.9 million in eligible expenditures for payroll, other expenses, and accrued interest described in the CARES Act, resulting in a gain on extinguishment of debt of $3.0 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
The income tax benefit was $0.1 million for 2021 and $1.2 million for 2020, or an effective tax benefit rate of 0.8% and 6.7% respectively. The income tax benefit in fiscal 2021 was the result of an increase in the valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, offset by certain refundable credits generated in the current fiscal year. The benefit in 2020 was a result of the CARES Act, where the Company took advantage of a provision to carry back net operating losses generated in 2018 through 2020 for a period of five years. As a result, the Company’s effective tax rate included an income tax benefit recognized during the year ended September 30, 2020 related to tax losses generated during the fiscal year up to the amount that the Company estimates is realizable based upon taxable income in the carry back periods. Therefore, as of September 30, 2020, the Company recorded a $1.2 million income tax receivable and recorded a current benefit for income taxes. The Company continues to provide a valuation allowance of $8.5 million for net deferred assets where the Company believes it is more likely than not that those deferred taxes will not be realized.
Segment results
Wireless
Revenues for the Wireless segment were $20.7 million and $21.4 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of 3%. Our operations were impacted by customer delays in building out 5G infrastructure.
Gross profit decreased $0.3 million year over year, and gross margins were 30% and 31% for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to lower revenues for the segment.
Loss from operations was $6.9 million and $4.4 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is mainly attributable to investment in our regional growth strategy associated with anticipated 5G infrastructure build outs.
Telco
Revenues for the Telco segment were $41.5 million and $28.8 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $12.7 million, or 44%. The increase in sales for Triton was driven by the economic
recovery from the COVID pandemic as workers returned to offices and customers resumed purchasing our products. Nave's growth was attributable to the global circuit chip supply shortage which impacted new OEM products and increased the demand for the refurbished equipment that Nave provides.
Gross profit increased $4.7 million, or 93%, to $9.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $5.1 million for the same period last year. Gross margin was 24% and 18% for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross margin increased primarily due to the increase in revenue and a $1.4 million decrease in inventory obsolescence versus the prior year.
Loss from operations was $2.4 million and $14.2 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental, non-GAAP financial measure. EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA as presented also excludes stock compensation expense, gain on extinguishment of debt, impairment of intangibles and right of use assets, other income, other expense, interest income and income from equity method investment. Adjusted EBITDA is presented below because this metric is used by the financial community as a method of measuring our financial performance and of evaluating the market value of companies considered to be in similar businesses. Since Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP, it should not be considered in isolation of, or as a substitute for, net earnings as an indicator of operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily a measure of our ability to fund our cash needs.
A reconciliation by segment of loss from operations to Adjusted EBITDA follows, in thousands:
(a)The Telco segment includes an inventory obsolescence charge of $0.4 million and $1.8 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, the Telco segment includes a lower of cost or net realizable value charge of $0.1 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020.
(b)The Company allocates its corporate general and administrative expenses to the reportable segments. See Note 14 - Segment Reporting in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of segments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At September 30, 2021 we had cash and equivalents and restricted cash on hand of $2.9 million and availability under our bank line of credit of $1.9 million, for a total liquidity of $4.8 million. We were not in compliance with a covenant on our bank line of credit at September 30, 2021. We notified our primary financial lender of the covenant violation, and on December 22, 2021 the primary lender granted a waiver of the covenant violation. On December 14, 2021, the Company signed an agreement with its primary financial lender to extend the expiration date of its revolving line of credit to January 17, 2022. We are in the process of completing an annual extension which we expect will be completed by the new expiration date. We entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Northland Securities, Inc., as agent (“Northland”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Northland, shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $13.9 million ("Shares"). The offer and sale of the Shares will be made pursuant to a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 and the related prospectus filed by us with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") on March 3, 2020, as amended on March 23, 2020, and declared effective by the SEC on
April 1, 2020. We currently have approximately $10.8 million available to us to fund our working capital needs under the Sales Agreement. Based on our availability under our bank line of credit and our Sales Agreement, we believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to cover our operating losses and our additional working capital and debt payment needs.
We continue to evaluate opportunities to expand our business through selective acquisitions and internal growth initiatives. Our capital investment decisions are determined by an analysis of the projected return on capital employed of each of those alternatives, which is substantially driven by the cost to acquire existing assets from a third party, the capital required to invest in new equipment and the point in the 5G densification cycle. Based on these factors, we make capital investment decisions that we believe will support our long-term growth strategy. Depending on the timing and scope of these opportunities, we may need to seek additional funding to finance the necessary working capital for such opportunities.
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
The Company has invested in its operations over the past two fiscal years with the anticipation that the Company will provide operating cash flows to fund its ongoing operations and cash flow needs. During 2021, cash used in operations was $7.5 million. We currently have cash of $2.9 million and availability under our bank line of credit of $1.9 million, for a total liquidity of $4.8 million. Cash used in operations during the year ended September 30, 2020 was $3.8 million.
Cash Flows Provided by Investing Activities
Capital expenditures and proceeds from asset sales are the main components of our investing activities. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended September 30, 2021 was $3.5 million which included final proceeds of $3.8 million on the note receivable related to the 2019 sale of the Cable Segment. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended September 30, 2020 was $2.4 million, including payments of $2.6 million on the note receivable.
Cash Flows (Used in) Provided by Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during the year ended September 30, 2021 was $1.4 million, related to repayments under the note payable and bank line of credit, offset by the proceeds from the sale of common stock. The Company has $10.8 million in stock offering price available to provide cash flow under its Equity Distribution Agreement for the sale of the Company's common stock. See Note 10 - Equity Distribution Agreement and Sale of Common Stock in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended September 30, 2020 was $8.2 million, related to borrowing under the note payable, bank line of credit, proceeds from share issuances, and borrowings under the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP," "PPP loan").
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for fiscal year 2021 includes a summary of the significant accounting policies or methods used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. Some of those significant accounting policies or methods require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported by us. We believe the following items require the most significant judgments and often involve complex estimates.
General
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current market conditions, and various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant estimates and assumptions are discussed below.
Inventory Valuation
For our Telco segment, our position in the telecommunications industry requires us to carry relatively large inventory quantities relative to annual sales, but it also allows us to realize high overall gross profit margins on our sales. We market our products primarily to telecommunication providers, telecommunication resellers, and other users of telecommunication equipment who are seeking products for which manufacturers have discontinued production or cannot ship new equipment on a same-day basis as well as providing used products as an alternative to new products from the manufacturer. Carrying these large inventory quantities represents our largest risk.
We are required to make judgments as to future demand requirements from our customers. We regularly review the value of our inventory in detail with consideration given to rapidly changing technology which can significantly affect future customer demand. For individual inventory items, we may carry inventory quantities that are excessive relative to market potential, or we may not be able to recover our acquisition costs for sales that we do make. In order to address the risks associated with our investment in inventory, we review inventory quantities on hand and reduce the carrying value when the loss of usefulness of an item or other factors, such as obsolete and excess inventories, indicate that cost will not be recovered when an item is sold.
Our inventories are all carried in the Telco segment and consist of new and used electronic components for the telecommunications industry. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined using the weighted-average method. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. At September 30, 2021, we had total inventory, before the reserve for excess and obsolete inventories, of $9.4 million, consisting of $1.3 million in new products and $8.1 million in used or refurbished products.
We identified certain inventory that more than likely will not be sold or that the cost will not be recovered when it is processed through our recycling program. Therefore, we have an obsolete and excess inventory reserve of $3.5 million at September 30, 2021. In 2021, we increased the reserve by $0.4 million. We also reviewed the cost of inventories against estimated market value and recorded a lower of cost or net realizable value write-off of $0.1 million for inventories that have a cost in excess of estimated net realizable value. If actual market conditions differ from those projected by management, this could have a material impact on our gross margin and inventory balances based on additional write-downs to net realizable value or a benefit from inventories previously written down.
Inbound freight charges are included in cost of sales. Purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, warehousing costs, internal transfer costs and other inventory expenditures are included in operating expenses, since the amounts involved are not considered a material component of cost of sales.
Accounts Receivable Valuation
Management judgments and estimates are made in connection with establishing the allowance for doubtful accounts. Specifically, we analyze the aging of accounts receivable balances, historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit-worthiness, current economic trends and changes in our customer payment terms. Significant changes in customer concentration or payment terms, deterioration of customer credit-worthiness, or weakening in economic trends could have a significant impact on the collectability of receivables and our operating results. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, an additional provision to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. The reserve for bad debts was $0.3 million as of September 30, 2021 and 2020. At September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020, accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, were $7.0 million and $4.0 million, respectively.
Intangibles
Intangible assets that have finite useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives ranging from 3 to 10 years. Intangible assets are also tested for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Due to our continued operating losses and the uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic on the overall economy and the resulting impact on our Company, we determined that there were indicators for us to test our intangible assets for impairment at March 31, 2020. It was determined that we needed to perform a specific fair value assessment for each of the intangible assets at both Nave and Triton as their individual undiscounted forecasted cash flows did not exceed their respective carrying values. We then performed a fair value assessment of each of the intangible assets and compared them to the individual carrying value amounts at March 31, 2020. As a result of this assessment, we recorded an impairment charge of $3.9 million related to the customer relationship intangibles in the Telco segment as of March 31, 2020. As of September 30, 2021, there were no further indicators of impairment.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. The Company conducts its long-lived asset impairment analyses in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 360-10-15, “Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.” ASC 360-10-15 requires the Company to group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and evaluate the asset group against the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows. If the undiscounted cash flows do not indicate the carrying amount of the asset is recoverable, an impairment charge is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value based on discounted cash flow analysis or appraisals. The Company recorded a $0.7 million impairment of a right-of-use asset in the Telco segment as of September 30, 2020, related to vacating and partially subleasing a leased facility. As of September 30, 2021, there were no further indicators of impairment.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Our consideration of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.