Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
INDEX TO MD&A
Page Page
General
Results of Operations
Overview
General
Critical Accounting Policies
Results of Operations - Fourth Quarter
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Segmented Statement of Earnings
Ratios
Property and Casualty Insurance
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flows
Annuity
Parent and Subsidiary Liquidity
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated
Condensed Parent Only Cash Flows
Results of Operations - Full Year
Contractual Obligations
Segmented Statement of Earnings
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Property and Casualty Insurance
Investments
Annuity
Uncertainties
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated
Managed Investment Entities
Recent and Pending Accounting Standards
GENERAL
Following is a discussion and analysis of the financial statements and other statistical data that management believes will enhance the understanding of AFG’s financial condition and results of operations. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements beginning on page.
OVERVIEW
Financial Condition
AFG is organized as a holding company with almost all of its operations being conducted by subsidiaries. AFG, however, has continuing cash needs for administrative expenses, the payment of principal and interest on borrowings, shareholder dividends, and taxes. Therefore, certain analyses are most meaningfully presented on a parent only basis while others are best done on a total enterprise basis. In addition, because most of its businesses are financial in nature, AFG does not prepare its consolidated financial statements using a current-noncurrent format. Consequently, certain traditional ratios and financial analysis tests are not meaningful.
At December 31, 2020, AFG (parent) held approximately $215 million in cash and securities and had $500 million available under a bank line of credit, which expires in December 2025.
Pending Sale of the Annuity Business
On January 27, 2021, AFG announced that it entered into a definitive agreement to sell its annuity business to Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company (“MassMutual”) for $3.5 billion in cash, subject to final closing adjustments. Under the terms of the agreement, which is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, MassMutual will acquire AFG’s wholly-owned annuity subsidiary, Great American Life Insurance Company (“GALIC”) and GALIC’s two insurance subsidiaries, Annuity Investors Life Insurance Company and Manhattan National Life Insurance Company. At December 31, 2020, GALIC and its subsidiaries had approximately $40 billion of traditional fixed and indexed annuity reserves. AFG expects to recognize an after-tax gain on the sale of $620 million to $690 million ($7.10 to $7.90 per AFG share) upon closing. Prior to the completion of the transaction, AFG will acquire approximately $500 million in real estate-related partnerships and directly owned real estate from GALIC. Beginning with the first quarter of 2021, AFG will report the results of the Annuity business as discontinued operations, in accordance with GAAP, which includes adjusting prior period results to reflect these operations as discontinued.
Annuity Block Reinsurance Agreement
GALIC entered into a reinsurance agreement with Commonwealth Annuity and Life Insurance Company (“Commonwealth”), a subsidiary of Global Atlantic Financial Group Limited in October 2020. Under the terms of the
agreement, GALIC ceded approximately $5.96 billion of in force traditional fixed and indexed annuities, representing approximately 15% of its in force business, and transferred related investments to Commonwealth. The agreement requires Commonwealth to maintain collateral in a trust in excess of amounts owed to GALIC.
Results of Operations
Through the operations of its subsidiaries, AFG is engaged primarily in property and casualty insurance, focusing on specialized commercial products for businesses, and in the sale of traditional fixed and indexed annuities in the retail, financial institutions, broker-dealer and registered investment advisor markets.
AFG reported fourth quarter 2020 net earnings attributable to shareholders of $692 million ($7.93 per share, diluted) compared to $211 million ($2.31 per share, diluted) in the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting:
•higher net realized gains on securities in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting the disposal of investments in the annuity block reinsurance transaction,
•higher underwriting profit in the property and casualty insurance segment,
•lower earnings in the annuity segment, and
•higher interest charges on borrowed money.
Full year 2020 net earnings attributable to AFG’s shareholders were $732 million ($8.20 per share, diluted) compared to $897 million ($9.85 per share, diluted) in 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic has had widespread financial and economic impacts and adversely impacted returns on AFG’s $3.81 billion of investments that are accounted for using the equity method or carried at fair value through net earnings. AFG’s results reflect:
•higher underwriting profit in the property and casualty insurance segment,
•lower net investment income in the property and casualty insurance segment,
•lower earnings in the annuity segment, and
•higher interest charges on borrowed money.
Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic began to have a significant impact on global, social and economic activity during the first quarter of 2020. AFG has taken actions under its business continuity plan to minimize risk to the Company’s employees and to prevent any significant disruption to AFG’s business, agents or policyholders.
Management believes that AFG’s strong financial position and current liquidity and capital at its subsidiaries will give AFG the flexibility to continue to effectively address and respond to the ongoing uncertainties presented by the pandemic. Even with management’s expectation that the impacts of the pandemic will continue into 2021, AFG’s insurance subsidiaries have capital at or in excess of the levels required by ratings agencies in order to maintain their current ratings, and the parent company does not have any near-term debt maturities.
As a result of the contracted economy, exposures in many of AFG’s property and casualty businesses have changed due to workforce reduction, fewer miles driven and reduced revenue. This has and may continue to lead to lower frequency in certain lines while there has and may continue to be COVID-19 related increases in claim frequency in other lines of business.
There is also uncertainty as to potential government decree or legislation that could alter the coverage landscape, such as the imposition of retroactive business interruption insurance. Like most of the insurance industry, AFG’s business interruption coverages require direct physical damage to covered property for business interruption coverage to apply and the vast majority of AFG’s property policies also contain virus exclusions. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Significant accounting policies are summarized in Note A - “Accounting Policies” to the financial statements. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that can have a significant effect on amounts reported in the financial statements. As more information becomes known, these estimates and assumptions change and, thus, impact amounts reported in the future. The areas where management believes the degree of judgment required to determine amounts recorded in the financial statements is most significant are as follows:
•the establishment of insurance reserves, especially asbestos and environmental-related reserves,
•the recoverability of reinsurance,
•the amortization of annuity deferred policy acquisition costs,
•the measurement of the derivatives embedded in indexed annuity liabilities,
•the establishment of asbestos and environmental reserves of former railroad and manufacturing operations, and
•the valuation of investments, including the determination of impairment allowances.
See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Uncertainties” for a discussion of insurance reserves, recoverables from reinsurers, indexed annuity embedded derivatives and contingencies related to American Premier’s former operations and “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Investments” for a discussion of impairments on investments. Deferred policy acquisition costs (“DPAC”) and certain liabilities related to annuities are amortized in relation to the present value of expected gross profits on the policies. Assumptions considered in determining expected gross profits involve significant judgment and include management’s estimates of interest rates and investment spreads, surrenders, annuitizations, renewal premiums and mortality. Should actual experience require management to change its assumptions (commonly referred to as “unlocking”), a charge or credit would be recorded to adjust DPAC or annuity liabilities to the levels they would have been if the new assumptions had been used from the inception date of each policy.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Ratios
AFG’s debt to total capital ratio on a consolidated basis is shown below (dollars in millions). Management intends to maintain the ratio of debt to capital at or below 25% and intends to maintain the capital of its significant insurance subsidiaries at or above levels currently indicated by rating agencies as appropriate for the current ratings.
(*) The adjusted information above is shown “as if” the transaction to sell AFG’s annuity business to MassMutual closed on December 31, 2020, and assumes an after-tax gain on the sale of the annuity business of $655 million (midpoint of the estimated range).
The ratio of debt to total capital is a non-GAAP measure that management believes is useful for investors, analysts and ratings agencies to evaluate AFG’s financial strength and liquidity and to provide insight into how AFG finances its operations. In addition, maintaining a ratio of debt, excluding subordinated debt and debt secured by real estate (if any), to total capital of 35% or lower is a financial covenant in AFG’s bank credit facility. The ratio is calculated by dividing the principal amount of AFG’s long-term debt by its total capital, which includes long-term debt, noncontrolling interests and shareholders’ equity (excluding unrealized gains (losses) related to fixed maturity investments).
Fixed charges are computed on a “total enterprise” basis. For purposes of calculating the ratios, “earnings” have been computed by adding to pretax earnings the fixed charges and the noncontrolling interests in earnings of subsidiaries having fixed charges and the undistributed equity in earnings or losses of investees. Fixed charges include interest (including annuity benefits as indicated), amortization of debt premium/discount and expense, preferred dividend and distribution requirements of subsidiaries and a portion of rental expense deemed to be representative of the interest factor. The ratio of core earnings to fixed charges excluding annuity benefits and the ratio of earnings to fixed charges excluding and including annuity benefits are shown in the table below:
Although the ratio of earnings to fixed charges excluding annuity benefits is not required or encouraged to be disclosed under Securities and Exchange Commission rules, some investors and lenders may not consider interest credited to annuity policyholders’ accounts a borrowing cost for an insurance company, and accordingly, believe this ratio is meaningful.
The NAIC’s model law for risk-based capital (“RBC”) applies to both life and property and casualty companies. RBC formulas determine the amount of capital that an insurance company needs so that it has an acceptable expectation of not becoming financially impaired. At December 31, 2020, the capital ratios of all AFG insurance companies exceeded the RBC requirements.
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flows
AFG’s principal sources of cash include insurance premiums, income from its investment portfolio and proceeds from the maturities, redemptions and sales of investments. Insurance premiums in excess of acquisition expenses and operating costs are invested until they are needed to meet policyholder obligations or made available to the parent company through dividends to cover debt obligations and corporate expenses, and to provide returns to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends. Cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities as detailed in AFG’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows are shown below (in millions):
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations typically produce positive net operating cash flows as premiums collected and investment income exceed policy acquisition costs, claims payments and operating expenses. AFG’s net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by the level and timing of property and casualty premiums, claim and expense payments and recoveries from reinsurers. AFG’s annuity operations typically produce positive net operating cash flows as investment income exceeds acquisition costs and operating expenses. Interest credited on annuity policyholder funds is a non-cash increase in AFG’s annuity benefits accumulated liability and annuity premiums, benefits and withdrawals are considered financing activities due to the deposit-type nature of annuities. Cash flows provided by operating activities also include the activity of AFG’s managed investment entities (collateralized loan obligations) other than those activities included in investing or financing activities. The changes in the assets and liabilities of the managed investment entities included in operating activities increased cash flows from operating activities by $25 million in 2020, $23 million in 2019 and $148 million in 2018, accounting for a $2 million increase in cash flows from operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 and a $125 million decrease in cash flows from operating activities in 2019 compared to 2018. As discussed in Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements, AFG has no right to use the CLO assets and no obligation to pay the CLO liabilities and such assets and liabilities are shown separately in AFG’s Balance Sheet. Excluding the impact of the managed investment entities, net cash provided by operating activities was $2.16 billion, $2.43 billion and $1.94 billion in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities AFG’s investing activities consist primarily of the investment of funds provided by its property and casualty and annuity businesses. Net cash used in investing activities was $1.56 billion in 2020 compared to $3.07 billion in 2019, a decrease of $1.51 billion. As discussed below (under net cash provided by financing activities), AFG’s annuity segment had net cash flows from annuity policyholders of $351 million in 2020 and $1.66 billion in 2019. Settlements of equity index call options exceeded purchases by $322 million in 2020 compared to $64 million in 2019, accounting for a $258 million decrease in cash used in investing activities. On December 31, 2020, AFG completed the sale of GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon. The assets sold included $425 million in cash and cash equivalents, resulting in an increase in cash used in investing activities in 2020. In addition to the investment of funds provided by the insurance operations, investing activities also include the purchase and disposal of managed investment entity investments, which are presented separately in AFG’s Balance Sheet. Net investment activity in the managed investment entities was a $281 million use of cash in 2020 compared to an $11 million source of cash in 2019, accounting for a $292 million increase in net cash used in investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019. See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” and Note H - “Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements.
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.07 billion in 2019 compared to $5.35 billion in 2018, a decrease of $2.28 billion. As discussed below (under net cash provided by financing activities), AFG’s annuity segment had net cash flows from annuity policyholders of $1.66 billion in 2019 and $2.76 billion in 2018. In addition, AFG’s cash on hand increased by $799 million during 2019 as AFG held more cash due to fewer investment opportunities in 2019 compared to 2018 when AFG invested a large portion of its cash on hand at the beginning of the year. Net investment activity in the managed investment entities was an $11 million source of cash in 2019 compared to a $169 million use of cash in 2018, accounting for a $180 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities in 2019 compared to 2018.
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities AFG’s financing activities consist primarily of transactions with annuity policyholders, issuances and retirements of long-term debt, issuances and repurchases of common stock, and dividend payments. Net cash used in financing activities was $123 million in 2020 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $1.41 billion in 2019, a decrease in net cash provided by financing activities of $1.53 billion. Net annuity receipts exceeded annuity surrenders, benefits, withdrawals and transfers by $351 million in 2020 compared to $1.66 billion in 2019, resulting in a $1.31 billion decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, GALIC transferred $554 million of cash as part of its reinsurance agreement with Commonwealth to cede in force traditional fixed and indexed annuities. In 2020, AFG issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due in 2030, $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures due in 2060 and $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures due in 2060. The net proceeds of these offerings contributed $634 million to net cash provided by financing activities in 2020. The November 2020 redemption of AFG’s 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 was a $150 million use of cash in 2020. In 2019, AFG issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures due in 2059 and $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures due in 2059, the net proceeds of which contributed $315 million to net cash provided by financing activities in 2019. The December 2019 redemption of AFG’s 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures was a $150 million use of cash in 2019. During 2020, AFG repurchased $313 million of its Common Stock compared to no share repurchases in 2019. In addition to its regular quarterly cash dividends, AFG paid special cash dividends of $2.00 per share in 2020 and $3.30 per share in 2019, which resulted in total cash dividends of $334 million in 2020 compared to $444 million in 2019. Financing activities also include issuances and retirements of managed investment entity liabilities, which are nonrecourse to AFG and presented separately in AFG’s Balance Sheet. Issuances of managed investment entity liabilities exceeded retirements by $221 million in 2020 compared to retirements of managed investment entity liabilities exceeding issuances by $11 million in 2019, accounting for an $232 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019. See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” and Note H - “Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.41 billion in 2019 compared to $2.44 billion in 2018, a decrease of $1.03 billion. Annuity receipts exceeded annuity surrenders, benefits, withdrawals and transfers by $1.66 billion in 2019 compared to $2.76 billion in 2018, resulting in a $1.10 billion decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 compared to 2018. In 2019, AFG issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures due in 2059 and $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures due in 2059, the net proceeds of which contributed $315 million to net cash provided by financing activities in 2019. The December redemption of AFG’s 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures was a $150 million use of cash in 2019. During 2018, AFG had no additional long-term debt borrowings or repayments. In addition to its regular quarterly cash dividends, AFG paid special cash dividends of $3.30 per share and $3.00 per share in 2019 and 2018, respectively, which resulted in total cash dividends of $444 million in 2019 compared to $394 million in 2018. Retirements of managed investment entity liabilities exceeded issuances by $11 million in 2019 compared to issuances of managed investment entity liabilities exceeding retirements by $48 million in 2018, accounting for a $59 million decrease in net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 compared to 2018.
Parent and Subsidiary Liquidity
Parent Holding Company Liquidity Management believes AFG has sufficient resources to meet its liquidity requirements. If funds generated from operations, including dividends, tax payments and borrowings from subsidiaries, are insufficient to meet fixed charges in any period, AFG would be required to utilize parent company cash and marketable securities or to generate cash through borrowings, sales of other assets, or similar transactions.
As discussed above, in January 2021, AFG reached a definitive agreement to sell its annuity business to MassMutual for $3.5 billion in cash, subject to final closing adjustments. AFG’s capital and liquidity will be significantly enhanced as a result of the transaction. With a strong balance sheet and substantial excess capital, management will continue to evaluate opportunities for deploying AFG’s excess capital, including the potential for healthy, profitable organic growth, expansion of the Specialty property & casualty niche businesses through acquisitions and start-ups that meet target return thresholds, as well as share repurchases and special dividends.
In December 2020, AFG replaced its existing credit facility with a new five-year, $500 million revolving credit facility which expires in December 2025. Amounts borrowed under this agreement bear interest at rates ranging from 1.00% to 1.875%
(currently 1.375%) over LIBOR based on AFG’s credit rating. The credit facility also includes provisions relating to the replacement of LIBOR with different floating rates in the event of the discontinuance of LIBOR. There were no borrowings under this agreement, or under any other parent company short-term borrowing arrangements, during 2020.
In 2020, AFG repurchased 4,531,394 shares of its Common Stock for $313 million and paid a special cash dividend of $2.00 per share of AFG Common Stock in December totaling approximately $173 million.
In 2020, AFG issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due in April 2030, $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures due in June 2060 and $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures due in September 2060 to increase liquidity and provide flexibility at the parent holding company in its response to the uncertainties of the economic environment. The net proceeds from the offerings were used for general corporate purposes, which included repurchases of outstanding common shares and the November 2020 redemption of AFG’s $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6% Subordinated Debentures due in November 2055 at par value.
In 2019, AFG paid special cash dividends of $3.30 per share of AFG Common Stock ($1.50 per share in May and $1.80 per share in November) totaling approximately $297 million.
In December 2019, AFG issued $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures due in December 2059. A portion of the net proceeds of the offering were used to redeem AFG’s $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures due in September 2054, at par value, with the remainder used for general corporate purposes.
In March 2019, AFG issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures due in March 2059. The net proceeds of the offering were used for general corporate purposes.
In 2018, AFG paid special cash dividends of $3.00 per share of AFG Common Stock ($1.50 per share in May and November) totaling approximately $267 million and repurchased 65,589 shares of its Common Stock for $6 million.
All debentures and notes issued by AFG are rated investment grade by two nationally recognized rating agencies. Under a currently effective shelf registration statement, AFG can offer additional equity or debt securities. The shelf registration provides AFG with flexibility to access the capital markets from time to time as market and other conditions permit.
Under a tax allocation agreement with AFG, its 80%-owned U.S. subsidiaries generally pay taxes to (or recover taxes from) AFG based on each subsidiary’s contribution to amounts due under AFG’s consolidated tax return.
Subsidiary Liquidity GALIC, which is expected to be sold in the second quarter of 2021, is a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati (“FHLB”). The FHLB makes advances and provides other banking services to member institutions, which provides the annuity operations with an additional source of liquidity. At December 31, 2020, GALIC had $1.13 billion in outstanding advances from the FHLB (included in annuity benefits accumulated), bearing interest at rates ranging from 0.31% to 1.35% (average rate of 0.53% at December 31, 2020). While these advances must be repaid between 2021 and 2025 ($931 million in 2021 and $200 million in 2025), GALIC has the option to prepay all or a portion on the majority of the advances. GALIC has invested the proceeds from the advances in fixed maturity securities with similar expected lives as the advances for the purpose of earning a spread over the interest payments due to the FHLB. At December 31, 2020, GALIC estimated that it had additional borrowing capacity of approximately $600 million from the FHLB.
In February 2020, GALIC entered into a flow reinsurance agreement with Commonwealth under which GALIC cedes certain newly issued traditional fixed and indexed annuities on a quota share coinsurance basis with such quota share percentages being up to 50%. That agreement was effective for policies issued after May 6, 2020. Under accounting guidance, the reinsurance transaction will be accounted for using the deposit method.
As discussed above, in the fourth quarter of 2020, GALIC entered into a reinsurance agreement with Commonwealth. Under the terms of the agreement, GALIC ceded approximately $5.96 billion of traditional fixed and indexed annuities, representing approximately 15% of its in force business, and transferred a similar amount of investments to Commonwealth. The assets transferred were primarily available for sale fixed maturity securities, the disposal of which resulted in the recognition of approximately $292 million (net of DPAC and tax) in net realized gains on securities. Under reinsurance accounting guidance, the transaction will be accounted for using the deposit method and the loss on the transaction will be deferred and recognized over the expected life of the underlying annuity contracts (7-10 years). Under both the flow and the block reinsurance agreements, Commonwealth is required to maintain collateral in trusts in excess of amounts owed to GALIC.
In the fourth quarter of 2018, GALIC entered into a reinsurance treaty with Hannover Life Reassurance Company of America that transfers the risk of certain surrender activity in GALIC’s fixed-indexed annuity business. This treaty meets the statutory risk transfer rules and resulted in increases in statutory surplus (through an after-tax reserve credit) of $139 million at December 31, 2020 and $124 million at December 31, 2019. The treaty reduces statutory capital and surplus volatility related to GALIC’s fixed-indexed annuity policies from stock market fluctuations, which could impact GALIC’s risk-based capital and the amount of dividends available in future periods. Under GAAP, this transaction does not meet the GAAP insurance risk transfer criteria and did not have a material impact on AFG’s financial statements.
The liquidity requirements of AFG’s insurance subsidiaries relate primarily to the liabilities associated with their products as well as operating costs and expenses, payments of dividends and taxes to AFG and contributions of capital to their subsidiaries. Historically, cash flows from premiums and investment income have generally provided more than sufficient funds to meet these requirements. Funds received in excess of cash requirements are generally invested in additional marketable securities. In addition, the insurance subsidiaries generally hold a significant amount of highly liquid, short-term investments.
The excess cash flow of AFG’s property and casualty group allows it to extend the duration of its investment portfolio somewhat beyond that of its claim reserves. Due to the anticipated slowdown in cash collections from the state mandated increases in grace periods for premium payments, AFG’s property and casualty insurance subsidiaries have maintained higher than typical cash balances since March 2020. AFG has not experienced a material increase in uncollectable premiums receivable as policyholders continue to make payments in accordance with the agreed upon terms.
For statutory accounting purposes, equity securities of non-affiliates and equity call and put options used in the fixed-indexed and variable-indexed annuity business are generally carried at fair value. At December 31, 2020, AFG’s insurance companies owned publicly traded equity securities with a fair value of $1.59 billion and equity index call and put options with a net fair value of $820 million. Decreases in market prices could adversely affect the insurance group’s capital, potentially impacting the amount of dividends available or necessitating a capital contribution. Conversely, increases in market prices could have a favorable impact on the group’s dividend-paying capability.
AFG believes its insurance subsidiaries maintain sufficient liquidity to pay claims and benefits and operating expenses. In addition, these subsidiaries have sufficient capital to meet commitments in the event of unforeseen events such as reserve deficiencies, inadequate premium rates or reinsurer insolvencies. Even in the current uncertain COVID-19 environment, management believes that the capital levels in AFG’s insurance subsidiaries are adequate to maintain its business and rating agency ratings. Should the current adverse financial conditions continue into 2021, AFG’s insurance subsidiaries will reduce dividend payments to AFG parent as needed to maintain sufficient capital at the insurance companies. Nonetheless, changes in statutory accounting rules, significant declines in the fair value of the insurance subsidiaries’ investment portfolios or significant ratings downgrades on these investments, could create a need for additional capital.
Condensed Parent Only Cash Flows
AFG’s parent holding company only condensed cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities are shown below (in millions):
Parent Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Parent holding company cash flows from operating activities consist primarily of dividends and tax payments received from AFG’s insurance subsidiaries, reduced by tax payments to the IRS and holding company interest and other expenses. Parent holding company net cash provided by operating activities was $483 million in 2020 compared to $306 million in 2019 and $215 million in 2018. The $177 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 was due primarily to higher dividends received from subsidiaries in 2020 as compared to 2019. The $91 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 as compared to 2018 was due primarily to higher dividends received from subsidiaries.
Parent Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities Parent holding company investing activities consist of capital contributions to and returns of capital from subsidiaries and, to a much lesser extent, parent company investment activity. Parent holding company net cash used in investing activities was $294 million in 2020 compared to
$56 million in 2019 and net cash provided by investing activities of $10 million in 2018. The $56 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2019 and the $10 million in net cash provided by investing activities in 2018 are significantly lower than the $294 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2020 due primarily to higher capital contributions to AFG’s property and casualty subsidiaries in 2020.
Parent Net Cash Used in Financing Activities Parent company financing activities consist primarily of the issuance and retirement of long-term debt, dividends to shareholders, and, to a lesser extent, proceeds from employee stock option exercises and repurchases of AFG Common Stock. Significant long-term debt and common stock transactions are discussed above under “Parent Holding Company Liquidity.” Parent holding company net cash used in financing activities was $140 million in 2020 compared to $242 million in 2019 and $366 million in 2018. The $102 million decrease in net cash used in financing activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 reflects the net issuances of long-term debt in 2020 and lower dividends (due primarily to special dividends of $2.00 per share in 2020 compared to special dividends of $3.30 per share in 2019), partially offset by $313 million in repurchases of outstanding common shares in 2020 compared to no repurchases in 2019. The $124 million decrease in net cash used in financing activities in 2019 as compared to 2018 reflects the net issuances of long-term debt in 2019, partially offset by higher dividends (due primarily to special dividends of $3.30 per share in 2019 compared to $3.00 per share in 2018).
Contractual Obligations
The following table shows an estimate (based on historical patterns and expected trends) of payments to be made for insurance reserve liabilities, as well as scheduled payments for major contractual obligations (in millions).
(a)Amounts presented in the table represent estimated cash payments under such contracts, based on significant assumptions related to mortality, morbidity, lapse, renewal, retirement and annuitization. These assumptions also include interest and index crediting consistent with assumptions used to amortize DPAC and assess loss recognition. All estimated cash payments are undiscounted for the time value of money. As a result, total outflows for all years exceed the corresponding liabilities of $42.57 billion for annuity benefits accumulated and $607 million for life, accident and health reserves included in AFG’s Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. Based on the same assumptions, AFG projects reinsurance recoveries related to annuity benefits accumulated totaling $7.25 billion as follows: Within 1 year - $876 million; 2-3 years - $1.73 billion; 4-5 years - $2.05 billion; and thereafter - $2.59 billion and reinsurance recoveries related to life, accident and health reserves totaling $577 million as follows: Within 1 year - $58 million; 2-3 years - $91 million; 4-5 years - $74 million; and thereafter - $354 million. Actual payments and their timing could differ significantly from these estimates. Both the annuities and life, accident and health liabilities are part of the pending sale of annuity business, which is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021.
(b)Dollar amounts and time periods are estimates based on historical net payment patterns applied to the gross reserves and do not represent actual contractual obligations. Based on the same assumptions, AFG projects reinsurance recoveries related to these reserves totaling $3.12 billion as follows: Within 1 year - $848 million; 2-3 years - $829 million; 4-5 years - $352 million; and thereafter - $1.09 billion. Actual payments and their timing could differ significantly from these estimates.
(c)Amounts presented in the table represent lease component payments, including short-term lease payments, and exclude non-lease component payments of building leases (primarily common area maintenance and property tax payments). Estimated non-lease component payments totaling $89 million are as follows: Within 1 year - $18 million; 2-3 years - $30 million; 4-5 years - $25 million; and thereafter - $16 million.
AFG has no material contractual purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities at December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
See Note Q - “Additional Information - Financial Instruments - Unfunded Commitments” to the financial statements.
Investments
AFG attempts to optimize investment income while building the value of its portfolio, placing emphasis upon total long-term performance.
AFG’s investment portfolio at December 31, 2020, contained $43.21 billion (79% in the annuity subsidiaries to be sold) in fixed maturity securities classified as available for sale and carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income and $66 million (64% in the annuity subsidiaries to be sold) in fixed maturities classified as trading with holding gains and losses included in net investment income. In addition, AFG’s investment portfolio includes $1.25 billion (46% in the annuity subsidiaries to be sold) in equity securities carried at fair value with holding gains and losses included in realized gains (losses) on securities and $413 million (50% in the annuity subsidiaries to be sold) in equity securities carried at fair value with holding gains and losses included in net investment income.
As detailed in Note E - “Investments - Net Unrealized Gain on Marketable Securities” to the financial statements, unrealized gains and losses on AFG’s fixed maturity securities are included in shareholders’ equity after adjustments for related changes in DPAC and certain liabilities related to annuity, long-term care and life businesses and deferred income taxes. DPAC and certain other balance sheet amounts applicable to annuity, long-term care and life businesses are adjusted for the impact of unrealized gains or losses on investments as if these gains or losses had been realized, with corresponding increases or decreases (net of tax) included in accumulated other comprehensive income in AFG’s Balance Sheet.
Fixed income investment funds are generally invested in securities with intermediate-term maturities with an objective of optimizing total return while allowing flexibility to react to changes in market conditions. At December 31, 2020, the average life of AFG’s fixed maturities was about 5-1/2 years.
Fair values for AFG’s portfolio are determined by AFG’s internal investment professionals using data from nationally recognized pricing services as well as non-binding broker quotes. Fair values of equity securities are generally based on published closing prices. For AFG’s fixed maturity portfolio, approximately 87% was priced using pricing services at December 31, 2020 and the balance was priced primarily by using non-binding broker quotes. When prices obtained for the same security vary, AFG’s internal investment professionals select the price they believe is most indicative of an exit price.
The pricing services use a variety of observable inputs to estimate fair value of fixed maturities that do not trade on a daily basis. Based upon information provided by the pricing services, these inputs include, but are not limited to, recent reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids or offers, reference data, and measures of volatility. Included in the pricing of mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”) are estimates of the rate of future prepayments and defaults of principal over the remaining life of the underlying collateral. Due to the lack of transparency in the process that brokers use to develop prices, valuations that are based on brokers’ prices are classified as Level 3 in the GAAP hierarchy unless the price can be corroborated, for example, by comparison to similar securities priced using observable inputs.
Valuation techniques utilized by pricing services and prices obtained from external sources are reviewed by AFG’s internal investment professionals who are familiar with the securities being priced and the markets in which they trade to ensure the fair value determination is representative of an exit price. To validate the appropriateness of the prices obtained, these investment managers consider widely published indices (as benchmarks), recent trades, changes in interest rates, general economic conditions and the credit quality of the specific issuers. In addition, AFG communicates directly with pricing services regarding the methods and assumptions used in pricing, including verifying, on a test basis, the inputs used by the services to value specific securities.
In general, the fair value of AFG’s fixed maturity investments is inversely correlated to changes in interest rates. The following table demonstrates the sensitivity of such fair values to reasonably likely changes in interest rates by illustrating the estimated effect on AFG’s fixed maturity portfolio and accumulated other comprehensive income that an immediate increase of 100 basis points in the interest rate yield curve would have at December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions). Effects of increases or decreases from the 100 basis points illustrated would be approximately proportional.
At December 31, 2020 the fair value of the fixed maturity portfolio in AFG’s property and casualty group was $9.10 billion. The pretax impact on the fair value upon a 100 basis point increase in interest rates would have been a decline of approximately $273 million in fair value ($216 million after tax) at December 31, 2020.
Approximately 88% of the fixed maturities held by AFG at December 31, 2020, were rated “investment grade” (credit rating of AAA to BBB) by nationally recognized rating agencies. Investment grade securities generally bear lower yields and lower degrees of risk than those that are unrated and non-investment grade. Management believes that the high-quality investment portfolio should generate a stable and predictable investment return.
MBS are subject to significant prepayment risk because, in periods of declining interest rates, mortgages may be repaid more rapidly than scheduled as borrowers refinance higher rate mortgages to take advantage of lower rates.
Summarized information for AFG’s MBS (including those classified as trading) at December 31, 2020, is shown in the table below (dollars in millions). Agency-backed securities are those issued by a U.S. government-backed agency; Alt-A mortgages are those with risk profiles between prime and subprime. The average life of the residential and commercial MBS is approximately 3-1/2 years and 3 years, respectively. Approximately 75% of AFG’s MBS are owned in the annuity businesses expected to be sold.
(*)Amortized cost, net of allowance for expected credit losses.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (“NAIC”) assigns creditworthiness designations on a scale of 1 to 6 with 1 being the highest quality and 6 being the lowest quality. The NAIC retains third-party investment management firms to assist in the determination of appropriate NAIC designations for MBS based not only on the probability of loss (which is the primary basis of ratings by the major ratings firms), but also on the severity of loss and statutory carrying value. At December 31, 2020, 96% (based on statutory carrying value of $3.52 billion) of AFG’s MBS had an NAIC designation of 1.
Municipal bonds represented approximately 13% of AFG’s fixed maturity portfolio at December 31, 2020. AFG’s municipal bond portfolio is high quality, with 99% of the securities rated investment grade at that date. The portfolio is well diversified across the states of issuance and individual issuers. At December 31, 2020, approximately 79% of the municipal bond portfolio was held in revenue bonds, with the remaining 21% held in general obligation bonds.
Summarized information for the unrealized gains and losses recorded in AFG’s Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020, is shown in the following table (dollars in millions). Approximately $2.47 billion of available for sale fixed maturity securities had no unrealized gains or losses at December 31, 2020.
The table below sets forth the scheduled maturities of AFG’s available for sale fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2020, based on their fair values. Securities with sinking funds are reported at average maturity. Actual maturities may differ from contractual maturities because certain securities may be called or prepaid by the issuers.
The table below (dollars in millions) summarizes the unrealized gains and losses on fixed maturity securities by dollar amount:
The following table (dollars in millions) summarizes the unrealized losses for all securities with unrealized losses by issuer quality and the length of time those securities have been in an unrealized loss position:
When a decline in the value of a specific investment is considered to be other-than-temporary, an allowance for credit losses (impairment) is charged to earnings (accounted for as a realized loss). The determination of whether unrealized losses are other-than-temporary requires judgment based on subjective as well as objective factors. Factors considered and resources used by management include:
a)whether the unrealized loss is credit-driven or a result of changes in market interest rates,
b)the extent to which fair value is less than cost basis,
c)cash flow projections received from independent sources,
d)historical operating, balance sheet and cash flow data contained in issuer SEC filings and news releases,
e)near-term prospects for improvement in the issuer and/or its industry,
f)third-party research and communications with industry specialists,
g)financial models and forecasts,
h)the continuity of interest payments, maintenance of investment grade ratings and hybrid nature of certain investments,
i)discussions with issuer management, and
j)ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for anticipated recovery in fair value.
Based on its analysis of the factors listed above, management believes AFG will recover its cost basis (net of any allowance) in the fixed maturity securities with unrealized losses and that AFG has the ability to hold the securities until they recover in value and had no intent to sell them at December 31, 2020. Although AFG has the ability to continue holding its fixed maturity investments with unrealized losses, its intent to hold them may change due to deterioration in the issuers’ creditworthiness, decisions to lessen exposure to a particular issuer or industry, asset/liability management decisions, market movements, changes in views about appropriate asset allocation or the desire to offset taxable realized gains. Should AFG’s ability or intent change regarding a particular security, a charge for impairment would likely be required. While it is not possible to accurately predict if or when a specific security will become impaired, increases in the allowance for credit losses could be material to results of operations in future periods. Significant declines in the fair value of AFG’s investment portfolio could have a significant adverse effect on AFG’s liquidity. For information on AFG’s realized gains (losses) on securities, see “Results of Operations - Consolidated Realized Gains (Losses) on Securities.”
Uncertainties
As more fully explained in the following paragraphs, management believes that the areas posing the greatest risk of material loss are the adequacy of its insurance reserves and contingencies arising out of its former railroad and manufacturing operations.
Property and Casualty Insurance Reserves Estimating the liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) is inherently judgmental and is influenced by factors that are subject to significant variation. Determining the liability is a complex process incorporating input from many areas of the Company including actuarial, underwriting, pricing, claims and operations management.
The estimates of liabilities for unpaid claims and for expenses of investigation and adjustment of unpaid claims are based upon: (i) the accumulation of case estimates for losses reported prior to the close of the accounting periods on direct business written (“case reserves”); (ii) estimates received from ceding reinsurers and insurance pools and associations; (iii) estimates of claims incurred but not reported or “IBNR” (including possible development on known claims);
(iv) estimates (based on experience) of expense for investigating and adjusting claims; and (v) the current state of law and coverage litigation.
The process used to determine the total reserve for liabilities involves estimating the ultimate incurred losses and LAE, adjusted for amounts already paid on the claims. The IBNR reserve is derived by first estimating the ultimate unpaid reserve liability and subtracting case reserves for loss and LAE. See Note P - “Insurance - Property and Casualty Insurance Reserves” to the financial statements for a discussion of the factors considered and actuarial methods used in determining management’s best estimate of the ultimate liability for unpaid losses and LAE.
The following table shows (in millions) the breakdown of AFG’s property and casualty insurance reserves between case reserves, IBNR reserves and LAE reserves (estimated amounts required to adjust, record and settle claims, other than the claim payments themselves) at December 31, 2020 and gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020.
While current factors and reasonably likely changes in variable factors are considered in estimating the liability for unpaid losses and LAE, there is no method or system that can eliminate the risk of actual ultimate results differing from such estimates.
Following is a discussion of certain critical variables affecting the estimation of loss reserves of the more significant long-tail lines of business (asbestos and environmental liabilities are separately discussed below). Many other variables may also impact ultimate claim costs.
An important assumption underlying reserve estimates is that the cost trends implicitly built into development patterns will continue into the future. However, future results could vary due to an unexpected change in the underlying cost trends. This unexpected change could arise from a variety of sources including a general increase in economic inflation, inflation from social programs, new medical technologies, or other factors such as those listed below in connection with AFG’s largest lines of business. It is not possible to isolate and measure the potential impact of just one of these variables, and future cost trends could be partially impacted by several such variables. However, it is reasonable to address the sensitivity of the reserves to potential impact from changes in these variables by measuring the effect of a possible overall 1% change in future cost trends that may be caused by one or more variables. Utilizing the effect of a 1% change in overall cost trends enables changes greater than 1% to be estimated by extrapolation. Each additional 1% change in the cost trend would increase the effect on net earnings by an amount slightly (about 5%) greater than the effect of the previous 1%. For example, if a 1% change in cost trends in a line of business would change net earnings by $20 million, a 2% change would change net earnings by approximately $41 million.
The estimated cumulative impact that a 1% change in cost trends in AFG’s more significant lines of property and casualty business (exceeding 5% of total reserves) would have on net earnings is shown below (in millions).
The judgments and uncertainties surrounding management’s reserve estimation process and the potential for reasonably possible variability in management’s most recent reserve estimates may also be viewed by looking at how recent historical estimates of reserves have developed. The following table shows (dollars in millions) what the impact on AFG’s net earnings would be on the more significant lines of business if the December 31, 2020, reserves (net of reinsurance) developed at the same rate as the average development of the most recent five years.
(a)Adverse (favorable), net of tax effect.
(b)Excludes asbestos and environmental liabilities.
The following discussion describes key assumptions and important variables that affect the estimate of the reserve for loss and LAE of the more significant lines of business and explains what caused them to change from assumptions used in the preceding period.
Other Liability - Occurrence
This long-tail line of business consists of coverages protecting the insured against legal liability resulting from negligence, carelessness, or a failure to act causing property damage or personal injury to others. Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for other liability - occurrence include:
•Litigious climate
•Unpredictability of judicial decisions regarding coverage issues
•Magnitude of jury awards
•Outside counsel costs
•Timing of claims reporting
AFG recorded adverse prior year reserve development of $99 million in 2020 and $143 million in 2019 related to its other liability - occurrence coverage due primarily to continued claim severity increases in excess and umbrella liability coverages. AFG recorded adverse prior year reserve development of $48 million in 2018 due to claim severity increases in excess and umbrella liability coverages as well as late emergence of excess workers’ compensation and Texas non-subscribers workers’ injury claims.
While management applies the actuarial methods mentioned above, more judgment is involved in arriving at the final reserve to be held. For recent accident years, more weight is given to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method.
Workers’ Compensation
This long-tail line of business provides coverage to employees who may be injured in the course of employment. Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for workers’ compensation include:
•Legislative actions and regulatory and legal interpretations
•Future medical cost inflation
•Economic conditions
•Frequency of reopening claims previously closed
•Advances in medical equipment and processes
•Pace and intensity of employee rehabilitation
•Changes in the use of pharmaceutical drugs
•Changes in longevity trends for permanently injured workers
Approximately 28% and 23% of AFG’s workers’ compensation reserves at December 31, 2020 relate to policies written in Florida and California, respectively. The Castellanos v. Next Door Company decision in Florida and the implementation of Senate Bill 863 in California are two examples of changes that impacted the workers’ compensation operating environment and added difficulty and uncertainty to the estimation of related liabilities.
AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $178 million in 2020 due to lower than anticipated medical claim severity and improving claim closure rates, particularly in the southeastern United States and California. AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $180 million in 2019 related to its workers’ compensation coverage due to lower than anticipated frequency of lost-time claims and medical severity. AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $127 million in 2018 due to lower than anticipated claim severity in the southeastern United States and improving claim closure rates in California.
Other Liability - Claims Made
This long-tail line of business consists mostly of directors’ and officers’ liability (“D&O”). Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for other liability - claims made include:
•Litigious climate
•Economic conditions
•Variability of stock prices
•Magnitude of jury awards
The general state of the economy and the variability of the stock price of the insured can affect the frequency and severity of shareholder class action suits and other situations that trigger coverage under D&O policies. For example, from 2008 to 2010, economic conditions led to higher frequency of claims, particularly in the D&O policies for small account and not-for-profit organizations. Since then, claim frequency has decreased from its peak in 2010 and has stabilized to near pre-2008 levels.
AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $8 million in 2020, $4 million in 2019 and $9 million in 2018 on its D&O business as claim frequency and severity was less than expected across several prior accident years.
Commercial Auto/Truck Liability/Medical
This line of business is a mix of coverage protecting the insured against legal liability for property damage or personal injury to others arising from the operation of commercial motor vehicles. The property damage liability exposure is usually short-tail with relatively quick reporting and settlement of claims. The bodily injury and medical payments exposures are longer-tailed; although the claim reporting is relatively quick, the final settlement can take longer to achieve. Some of the important variables affecting estimation of loss reserves for commercial auto/truck liability/medical are similar to other liability - occurrence and include:
•Magnitude of jury awards
•Unpredictability of judicial decisions regarding coverage issues
•Litigious climate and trends
•Change in frequency of severe accidents
•Health care costs and utilization of medical services by injured parties
AFG recorded favorable prior year reserve development of $16 million in 2020, $15 million in 2019 and $26 million in 2018. Although severity trends for this line of business continue to be elevated, the severity has been lower than initially projected in each period.
Recoverables from Reinsurers and Availability of Reinsurance AFG is subject to credit risk with respect to its reinsurers, as reinsurance contracts do not relieve AFG of its liability to policyholders. To mitigate this risk, substantially all reinsurance is ceded to companies rated “A” or better by S&P or is secured by “funds withheld” or other collateral.
The availability and cost of reinsurance are subject to prevailing market conditions, which are beyond AFG’s control and which may affect AFG’s level of business and profitability. Although the cost of certain reinsurance programs may increase, management believes that AFG will be able to maintain adequate reinsurance coverage at acceptable rates without a material adverse effect on AFG’s results of operations. AFG’s gross and net combined ratios are shown in the table below.
See Item 1 - Business - “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Reinsurance” for more information on AFG’s reinsurance programs. For additional information on the effect of reinsurance on AFG’s historical results of operations see Note P - “Insurance - Reinsurance” to the financial statements.
The following table illustrates the effect that purchasing property and casualty reinsurance has had on AFG’s combined ratio over the last three years.
Outside of its property and casualty operations, AFG also has reinsurance recoverables of $6.54 billion related to the annuity business and $265 million related to the run-off long-term care and life business. The annuity related recoverable is due from Commonwealth Annuity and Life Insurance Company. Under the terms of the agreements, Commonwealth is required to maintain collateral in trusts in excess of amounts owed to GALIC. Of the $265 million related to the run-off long-term care and life business, $183 million ($179 million net of credit allowances) is due (directly or indirectly) from Hannover Life Reassurance Company of America (rated AA- by S&P).
Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves Asbestos and environmental reserves of the property and casualty group consisted of the following (in millions):
Asbestos reserves include claims asserting alleged injuries and damages from exposure to asbestos. Environmental reserves include claims relating to polluted sites.
Asbestos claims against manufacturers, distributors or installers of asbestos products were presented under the products liability section of their policies, which typically had aggregate limits that capped an insurer’s liability. In addition, asbestos claims are being presented as “non-products” claims, such as those by installers of asbestos products and by property owners or operators who allegedly had asbestos on their property, under the premises or operations section of their policies. Unlike products exposures, these non-products exposures typically had no aggregate limits, creating greater exposure for insurers. Further, in an effort to seek additional insurance coverage, some insureds with installation activities who have substantially eroded their products coverage are presenting new asbestos claims as non-products operations claims or attempting to reclassify previously settled products claims as non-products claims to restore a portion of previously exhausted products aggregate limits.
Approximately 42% of AFG’s net asbestos reserves relate to policies written directly by AFG subsidiaries. Claims from these policies generally are product-oriented claims with only a limited amount of non-products exposures and are dominated by small to mid-sized commercial entities that are mostly regional policyholders with few national target defendants. The remainder is assumed reinsurance business that includes exposures from 1954 to 1983. The asbestos and environmental assumed claims are ceded by various insurance companies under reinsurance treaties. A majority of the individual assumed claims have exposures of less than $100,000 to AFG. Asbestos losses assumed include some of the industry known manufacturers, distributors and installers. Pollution losses include industry known insured names and sites.
Establishing reserves for A&E claims relating to policies and participations in reinsurance treaties and former operations is subject to uncertainties that are significantly greater than those presented by other types of claims. For this group of claims, traditional actuarial techniques that rely on historical loss development trends cannot be used and a range of reasonably possible losses cannot be estimated. Case reserves and expense reserves are established by the claims department as specific policies are identified. In addition to the case reserves established for known claims, management establishes additional reserves for claims not yet known or reported and for possible development on known claims. These additional reserves are management’s best estimate based on periodic comprehensive studies and internal
reviews adjusted for payments and identifiable changes, supplemented by management’s review of industry information about such claims, with due consideration to individual claim situations.
Management believes that estimating the ultimate liability for asbestos claims presents a unique and difficult challenge to the insurance industry due to, among other things, inconsistent court decisions, an increase in bankruptcy filings as a result of asbestos-related liabilities, novel theories of coverage, and judicial interpretations that often expand theories of recovery and broaden the scope of coverage. Environmental claims likewise present challenges in prediction, due to uncertainty regarding the interpretation of insurance policies, complexities regarding multi-party involvements at sites, evolving cleanup standards and protracted time periods required to assess the level of cleanup required at contaminated sites.
The following factors could impact AFG’s A&E reserves and payments:
•There is interest at the state level to attempt to legislatively address asbestos liabilities and the manner in which asbestos claims are resolved. These developments are fluid and could result in piecemeal state-by-state solutions.
•The manner by which bankruptcy courts are addressing asbestos liabilities is in flux.
•AFG’s insureds may make claims alleging significant non-products exposures.
While management believes that AFG’s reserves for A&E claims are a reasonable estimate of ultimate liability for such claims, actual results may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded due to the difficulty in predicting the number of future claims, the impact of bankruptcy filings and unresolved issues such as whether coverage exists, whether policies are subject to aggregate limits on coverage, how claims are to be allocated among triggered policies and implicated years and whether claimants who exhibit no signs of illness will be successful in pursuing their claims. A 1% variation in loss cost trends, caused by any of the factors previously described, would change net earnings by approximately $38 million.
AFG tracks its A&E claims by policyholder. The following table shows, by type of claim, the number of policyholders that did not receive any payments in the calendar year separate from policyholders that did receive a payment. Policyholder counts represent policies written by AFG subsidiaries and do not include assumed reinsurance.
Amounts paid (net of reinsurance recoveries) for asbestos and environmental claims, including LAE, were as follows (in millions):
The survival ratio is a measure often used by industry analysts to compare A&E reserves’ strength among companies. This ratio is typically calculated by dividing reserves for A&E exposures by the three-year average of paid losses, and therefore measures the number of years that it would take to pay off current reserves based on recent average payments. Because this ratio can be significantly impacted by a number of factors such as loss payout variability, caution should be exercised in attempting to determine reserve adequacy based simply on the survival ratio. At December 31, 2020, the property and casualty insurance segment’s three-year survival ratios compare favorably with industry survival ratios published by A.M. Best (as of December 31, 2019, and adjusted for several large portfolio transfers) as detailed in the following table:
During the third quarter of 2020, AFG completed a comprehensive external study of its asbestos and environmental exposures relating to the run-off operations of its property and casualty insurance segment and its exposures related to former railroad and manufacturing operations and sites. In addition to its ongoing internal monitoring of asbestos and environmental exposures, AFG has periodically conducted comprehensive external studies of its asbestos and environmental reserves with the aid of specialty actuarial, engineering and consulting firms and outside counsel, with an in-depth internal review during the intervening years.
As a result of the 2020 external study, AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment recorded a $47 million pretax special charge to increase its asbestos reserves by $26 million (net of reinsurance) and its environmental reserves by $21 million (net of reinsurance). Over the past few years, the focus of AFG’s asbestos claims litigation has shifted to smaller companies and companies with ancillary exposures. AFG’s insureds with these exposures have been the driver of the property and casualty segment’s asbestos reserve increases in recent years. AFG is seeing modestly increasing estimates for indemnity and defense compared to prior studies on certain specific open claims.
The increase in property and casualty environmental reserves was primarily associated with updated estimates of site investigation and remedial costs with respect to existing sites and its estimate of future, but as yet unreported, claims. AFG has updated its view of legal defense costs on open environmental claims as well as a number of claims and sites where the estimated investigation and remediation costs have increased. As in past years, there were no new or emerging broad industry trends that were identified in this review.
An in-depth internal review of AFG’s A&E reserves was completed in the third quarter of 2019. As a result of the 2019 internal review, AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment recorded an $18 million pretax special charge to increase its asbestos reserves by $3 million (net of reinsurance) and its environmental reserves by $15 million (net of reinsurance). The increase in property and casualty environmental reserves relates to updated estimates of site investigation and remedial costs with respect to existing sites and newly identified sites.
An in-depth internal review of AFG’s A&E reserves was also completed in the third quarter of 2018. As a result of the 2018 internal review, AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment recorded an $18 million pretax special charge to increase its asbestos reserves by $6 million (net of reinsurance) and its environmental reserves by $12 million (net of reinsurance). The increase in property and casualty asbestos reserves relates to increased estimates for indemnity and defense costs. The increase in property and casualty environmental reserves was primarily associated with updated estimates of site investigation and remedial costs with respect to existing sites and newly identified sites.
Contingencies related to Subsidiaries’ Former Operations The A&E studies and reviews discussed above encompassed reserves for various environmental and occupational injury and disease claims and other contingencies arising out of the railroad operations disposed of by American Premier’s predecessor and certain manufacturing operations disposed of by American Premier and its subsidiaries and by Great American Financial Resources, Inc. Charges resulting from the A&E study and reviews were $21 million in 2020, $11 million in 2019 and $9 million in 2018. For a discussion of the charges recorded for those operations, see “Results of Operations - Holding Company, Other and Unallocated.” Liabilities for claims and contingencies arising from these former railroad and manufacturing operations totaled $101 million at December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the uncertainties in determining the ultimate liability, see Note N - “Contingencies” to the financial statements.
Indexed Annuity Embedded Derivatives As of December 31, 2020, annuity benefits accumulated in AFG’s Balance Sheet includes $3.93 billion for the fair value of the derivatives embedded in its fixed-indexed and variable-indexed annuities. As discussed in Note F - “Derivatives” to the financial statements, AFG’s fixed-indexed and variable-
indexed annuities provide policyholders with a crediting rate tied, in part, to the performance of an existing stock market or other financial index. Under GAAP, this index participation is considered an embedded derivative that is required to be carried at fair value in the financial statements. AFG attempts to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of these products through the purchase and sale of call and put options on the appropriate index. AFG’s strategy is designed so that the net change in the fair value of the call option assets and put option liabilities will generally offset the economic change in the net liability from the index participation. The fair value of the embedded derivatives represents an estimate of the present value of projected policyholder benefits from the equity participation in excess of the projected minimum guaranteed contract values. As discussed in Note D - “Fair Value Measurements” to the financial statements, the fair value of the embedded derivatives is impacted by fluctuations in interest rates, the stock market (including the cost of options), policyholder behavior and other factors. Fluctuations in certain of these factors, such as changes in interest rates and the performance of the stock market, are not economic in nature for the current reporting period, but rather impact the timing of reported results. The indexed annuity embedded derivatives are part of the pending sale of annuity business, which is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021.
MANAGED INVESTMENT ENTITIES
Accounting standards require AFG to consolidate its investments in collateralized loan obligation (“CLO”) entities that it manages and owns an interest in (in the form of debt). See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Managed Investment Entities” and Note H - “Managed Investment Entities” to the financial statements. The effect of consolidating these entities is shown in the tables below (in millions). The “Before CLO Consolidation” columns include AFG’s investment and earnings in the CLOs on an unconsolidated basis.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING BALANCE SHEET
(a)Elimination of the fair value of AFG’s investment in CLOs and related accrued interest.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF EARNINGS
(a)Includes income of $19 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and a loss of $7 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, representing the change in fair value of AFG’s CLO investments plus $4 million in both the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019 in CLO management fees earned.
(b)Elimination of the change in fair value of AFG’s investments in the CLOs, including $10 million and $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, respectively, in distributions recorded as interest expense by the CLOs.
(c)Elimination of management fees earned by AFG.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF EARNINGS - CONTINUED
(a)Includes a loss of $2 million in 2020 and income of $4 million in 2019, representing the change in fair value of AFG’s CLO investments plus $15 million in both 2020 and 2019 in CLO management fees earned.
(b)Elimination of the change in fair value of AFG’s investments in the CLOs, including $26 million in both 2020 and 2019 in distributions recorded as interest expense by the CLOs.
(c)Elimination of management fees earned by AFG.
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF EARNINGS - CONTINUED
(a)Includes income of $7 million representing the change in fair value of AFG’s CLO investments plus $16 million in CLO management fees earned.
(b)Elimination of the change in fair value of AFG’s investments in the CLOs, including $21 million in distributions recorded as interest expense by the CLOs.
(c)Elimination of management fees earned by AFG.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders, determined in accordance with GAAP, include certain items that may not be indicative of its ongoing core operations. For example, core net operating earnings excludes realized gains (losses) on securities because such gains and losses are influenced significantly by financial markets, interest rates and the timing of sales. Similarly, significant gains and losses from the sale of real estate are excluded from core earnings as they are influenced by the timing of sales and realized gains (losses) and significant tax benefits (charges) related to subsidiaries are excluded because such gains and losses are largely the result of the changing business strategy and market opportunities. In addition, special charges related to coverage that AFG no longer writes, such as the Neon exited lines and for asbestos and environmental exposures, are excluded from core earnings.
Beginning with the second quarter of 2019, AFG’s core net operating earnings for its annuity segment excludes unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to fixed-indexed annuities (“FIAs”), and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs (“annuity non-core earnings (losses)”). Fluctuations in interest rates and the stock market, among other factors, can cause volatility in the periodic measurement of FIA liabilities that management believes can be inconsistent with the long-term economics of this growing portion of AFG’s annuity business. Management believes that separating these impacts as “non-core” provides investors with a better view of the fundamental performance of the business, and a more comparable measure of the annuity segment’s business compared to the results identified as “core” by its peers. Core net operating earnings for the annuity segment for the first quarter of 2019 and prior periods were not adjusted, so results for periods following the change are not directly comparable to prior periods. The impact of the items now considered annuity non-core earnings on prior periods is highlighted in the discussion following the reconciliation of net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, AFG entered into a reinsurance agreement (“annuity block reinsurance”) with Commonwealth. Under reinsurance accounting guidance, the transaction will be accounted for using the deposit method and the $180 million loss on the transaction will be deferred and recognized over the expected life of the underlying annuity contracts (7-10 years). Consistent with internal management reporting, the impact of reinsurance on earnings, which includes the amortization of the deferred loss and the impact of changes related to FIAs (discussed above) that are related to reinsured policies and other impacts of reinsurance are excluded from core operating earnings and reported as “annuity non-core earnings (losses)”.
In January 2021, AFG entered into a definitive agreement to sell its Annuity business to MassMutual. Beginning with the first quarter of 2021, AFG will report the results of its annuity segment and the run-off life and long-term care operations (reported in the Holding Company, Other and Unallocated segment) as discontinued operations, in accordance with GAAP, which includes adjusting prior period results to reflect these operations as discontinued.
In December 2019, AFG initiated actions to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market, which included placing its Lloyd’s subsidiaries including its Lloyd’s Managing Agency, Neon Underwriting Ltd., into run-off. Neon and its predecessor, Marketform, have failed to achieve AFG’s profitability objectives since AFG’s purchase of Marketform in 2008. Consistent with the treatment of other items that are not indicative of AFG’s ongoing operations (both favorable and unfavorable), beginning with the first quarter of 2020, AFG’s core net operating earnings for its property and casualty insurance segment excludes the run-off operations of Neon (“Neon exited lines”). In the third quarter of 2020, AFG reached a definitive agreement to sell GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon, to RiverStone Holdings Limited. The transaction closed in the fourth quarter of 2020.
AFG recorded $111 million in non-core losses related to the runoff of the Neon business in 2020, which included a $23 million gain on the sale of the business. In conjunction with the sale, AFG recognized a tax benefit of $72 million, resulting in a net non-core, after-tax loss of $39 million from the Neon exited lines in 2020.
The Neon exited lines impact is highlighted in the discussion following the reconciliation of net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings.
The following table (in millions, except per share amounts) identifies non-core items and reconciles net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure. AFG believes core net operating earnings is a useful tool for investors and analysts in analyzing ongoing operating trends and for management to evaluate financial performance against historical results because it believes this provides a more comparable measure of its continuing business.
(a)As discussed above, beginning with the second quarter of 2019, unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs are considered annuity non-core earnings
(losses). In addition, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts are considered non-core earnings (losses).
(b)As discussed above, beginning with the first quarter of 2020, the Neon run-off operations are considered property and casualty insurance non-core earnings (losses).
AFG reported net earnings attributable to shareholders of $692 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $211 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting higher after-tax net realized gains on securities resulting from the disposal of investments associated with AFG’s annuity block reinsurance transaction, higher core net operating earnings and lower non-core losses from the Neon exited lines, partially offset by annuity non-core losses in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to annuity non-core earnings in the fourth quarter of 2019. Core net operating earnings for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased $66 million compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting higher core net operating earnings in the annuity segment and higher core underwriting profit in the property and casualty insurance segment, partially offset by higher interest charges on borrowed money.
Net earnings attributable to shareholders decreased $165 million for the full-year of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 reflecting lower core net operating earnings and higher special A&E charges. In addition, net earnings attributable to shareholders includes after-tax losses of $149 million for the full year of 2020 and $38 million for the full year of 2019 (after tax losses of $9 million in the first quarter, $27 million in the second quarter, $21 million in the third quarter and an after tax gain of $19 million in the fourth quarter) from the annuity reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020, annuity unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs. As discussed above, unlocking and this impact on the accounting for FIAs is considered non-core earnings (losses) beginning with the second quarter of 2019. Excluding the $9 million after-tax negative impact of these items on results for the first quarter of 2019, core net operating earnings decreased $41 million in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting higher interest charges on borrowed money and lower investment income due to lower market interest rates, lower dividend income and the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs in both the property and casualty insurance and annuity segments, partially offset by higher underwriting profit in the property and casualty insurance segment and lower holding company expenses.
Net earnings attributable to shareholders increased $367 million for the full-year of 2019 compared to the same period in 2018 due primarily to after-tax net realized gains on securities of $227 million in 2019 compared to after-tax net realized losses of $210 million in 2018. In addition, net earnings attributable to shareholders includes an after-tax loss of $38 million for the full-year of 2019 (after tax losses of $9 million in the first quarter, $27 million in the second quarter and $21 million in the third quarter, and an after tax gain of $19 million in the fourth quarter) and an after-tax loss of $38 million for the full-year of 2018 from unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs. As discussed above, this impact on the accounting for FIAs is considered non-core earnings (losses) beginning with the second quarter of 2019. Excluding the $9 million after-tax negative impact of these items on results for the first quarter of 2019 and the $38 million after-tax negative impact of these items on results for the full-year of 2018, core net operating earnings decreased $6 million in 2019 compared to 2018 reflecting higher holding company expenses, partially offset by higher earnings in the property and casualty insurance segment. Realized gains (losses) on securities in 2019 and 2018 resulted primarily from the change in fair value of equity securities that were still held at the balance sheet date.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - QUARTERS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Segmented Statement of Earnings
AFG reports its business as three segments: (i) Property and casualty insurance (“P&C”), (ii) Annuity and (iii) Other, which includes run-off long-term care and life, holding company costs and income and expenses related to the managed investment entities (“MIEs”).
AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders, determined in accordance with GAAP, include certain items that may not be indicative of its ongoing core operations. The following tables for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 identify such items by segment and reconcile net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure that AFG believes is a useful tool for investors and analysts in analyzing ongoing operating trends (in millions):
(a)See the reconciliation of core earnings to GAAP net earnings under “Results of Operations - General” for details on the tax and noncontrolling interest impacts of these reconciling items.
(b)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” beginning with the second quarter of 2019, unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs are considered annuity non-core earnings (losses). In addition, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts are considered non-core earnings (losses).
(c)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” beginning with the first quarter of 2020, the Neon run-off operations are considered property and casualty insurance non-core earnings (losses).
Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations
Performance measures such as underwriting profit or loss and related combined ratios are often used by property and casualty insurers to help users of their financial statements better understand the company’s performance. Underwriting profitability is measured by the combined ratio, which is a sum of the ratios of losses and LAE, and commissions and other underwriting expenses to premiums. A combined ratio under 100% indicates an underwriting profit. The combined ratio does not reflect net investment income, other income, other expenses or federal income taxes.
AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations contributed $274 million in GAAP pretax earnings in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $121 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $153 million (126%). Property and casualty core pretax earnings were $274 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $197 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $77 million (39%). The increase in GAAP pretax earnings reflects higher core pretax earnings and the impact of losses in the Neon exited lines in the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase in core pretax earnings reflects higher core underwriting results in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core earnings before income taxes from its property and casualty insurance operations for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
Starting in 1986, AFG’s statutory combined ratio has been better than the U.S. industry average for 33 of the 35 years. Management believes that AFG’s insurance operations have performed better than the industry as a result of its specialty niche focus, product line diversification, stringent underwriting discipline and alignment of compensation incentives.
AFG reports the underwriting performance of its Specialty property and casualty insurance business in the following sub-segments: (i) Property and transportation, (ii) Specialty casualty and (iii) Specialty financial.
To understand the overall profitability of particular lines, the timing of claims payments and the related impact of investment income must be considered. Certain “short-tail” lines of business (primarily property coverages) generally have quick loss payouts, which reduce the time funds are held, thereby limiting investment income earned thereon. In contrast, “long-tail” lines of business (primarily liability coverages and workers’ compensation) generally have payouts that are either structured over many years or take many years to settle, thereby significantly increasing investment income earned on related premiums received.
Gross Written Premiums
Gross written premiums (“GWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $1.72 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $1.75 billion for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $28 million (2%). Detail of AFG’s property and casualty gross written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Reinsurance Premiums Ceded
Reinsurance premiums ceded (“Ceded”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were 29% of gross written premiums for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 25% of gross written premiums for the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of 4 percentage points. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty reinsurance premiums ceded is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Written Premiums
Net written premiums (“NWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $1.23 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $1.31 billion for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $84 million (6%). Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Earned Premiums
Net earned premiums (“NEP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $1.33 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $1.37 billion for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $45 million (3%). Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net earned premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
The $28 million (2%) decrease in gross written premiums in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects a decrease in the Specialty casualty sub-segment, partially offset by an increase in the Specialty property and transportation and Specialty financial sub-segments. Overall average renewal rates increased approximately 13% in the fourth quarter of 2020. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal pricing increased approximately 17%.
Property and transportation Gross written premiums increased $19 million (3%) in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. This increase was largely the result of growth and new business opportunities in the property and inland marine and ocean marine businesses and higher gross written premiums in the crop operations, partially offset by lower premiums in the transportation businesses, primarily from reduced exposures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and premium reductions in two large national accounts. Average renewal rates increased nearly 5% for this group in the fourth quarter of 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 3 percentage points for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting higher cessions in the crop insurance, transportation and ocean marine businesses.
Specialty casualty Gross written premiums decreased $64 million (7%) in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 due primarily to the run-off of Neon. Excluding the impact of $138 million in gross written premiums from the Neon exited lines in the fourth quarter of 2019, gross written premiums increased 9% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. This increase reflects significant renewal rate increases, and new business opportunities in the excess and surplus, excess liability and directors and officers businesses, partially offset by lower premiums in the workers’ compensation businesses due to reduced exposures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with renewal rate decreases. Average renewal rates for this group increased approximately 19% in the fourth quarter of 2020. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal rates for this group increased approximately 29%, much higher than the renewal rate increases in the first three quarters of 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 7 percentage points for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting growth in the excess and surplus businesses, which cede a larger percentage of premiums than the overall Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Specialty financial Gross written premiums increased $3 million (2%) in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, due primarily to growth in the lender services business, partially offset by COVID-related economic impacts on the surety business and heightened risk selection that has reduced new business in the trade credit business. Average renewal rates for this group increased approximately 9% in the fourth quarter of 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased 3 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting lower cessions in the financial institutions business and a change in the mix of business in the fidelity business.
Other specialty The amounts shown as reinsurance premiums ceded represent business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty property and casualty insurance sub-segments. Reinsurance premiums assumed increased $9 million (23%) in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting an increase in premiums retained, primarily from businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Combined Ratio
Performance measures such as the combined ratio are often used by property and casualty insurers to help users of their financial statements better understand the company’s performance. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) and underwriting expense ratios. These ratios are calculated by dividing each of the respective expenses by net earned premiums. The table below (dollars in millions) details the components of the combined ratio for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment:
The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations generated an underwriting profit of $179 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $89 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $90 million (101%). Higher underwriting profitability in the Property and transportation and Specialty casualty sub-segments was partially offset by lower underwriting profit in the Specialty financial sub-segment. The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations did not record any additional reserve charges for COVID-19 in the fourth quarter of 2020. Overall catastrophe losses were
$20 million (1.5 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premium recoveries were $3 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to catastrophe losses of $14 million (1.0 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Property and transportation This group reported an underwriting profit of $74 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to an underwriting loss of $2 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an improvement of $76 million (3,800%). Improved year-over-year results in the crop operations following 2019 losses from prevented planting and, to a lesser extent, improved underwriting results in the aviation and transportation businesses were the drivers of the improved results. Catastrophe losses for this group were $6 million (1.2 points on the combined ratio) in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $7 million (1.4 points) in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Specialty casualty Underwriting profit for this group was $91 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $69 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $22 million (32%). This increase reflects higher year-over-year underwriting profit in the excess and surplus and excess liability businesses and improved year-over-year results in the general liability business, partially offset by lower favorable prior year reserve development in the workers’ compensation businesses. Catastrophe losses were $5 million (0.8 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premium recoveries were $3 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to catastrophe losses of $5 million (0.8 points) and related reinstatement premiums of $1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Specialty financial Underwriting profit for this group was $20 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $32 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $12 million (38%). This decrease reflects lower underwriting profit in the surety and trade credit businesses, along with higher year-over-year catastrophe losses in the financial institutions business. Catastrophe losses were $7 million (4.5 points on the combined ratio) in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $2 million (1.1 points) in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Other specialty This group reported an underwriting loss of $6 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $10 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $4 million (40%), reflecting lower losses in the business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty sub-segments in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Neon exited lines In December 2019, AFG initiated actions to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market, which included placing its Lloyd’s subsidiaries including its Lloyd’s Managing Agency, Neon Underwriting Ltd., into run-off and recording a non-core charge of $76 million for reserve strengthening and expenses related to exit costs incurred with the run-off of this business. The non-core charge includes $46 million to increase loss reserves (including $7 million of net adverse prior year reserve development) and $30 million of underwriting expenses representing contractual employee severance benefits and other incurred exit costs.
In September 2020, AFG reached a definitive agreement to sell GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon. The transaction closed in the fourth quarter of 2020. AFG recorded $53 million in non-core underwriting losses (including $8 million of net adverse prior year reserve development) related to this business in the fourth quarter of 2020. These losses were offset by a $53 million gain on the sale of Neon recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Consistent with the treatment of other items that are not indicative of AFG’s ongoing operations (both favorable and unfavorable), the $53 million underwriting loss at Neon and offsetting gain on sale in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the $76 million charge related to the Neon exited lines recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019 in connection with AFG’s plans to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market are treated as non-core.
Aggregate Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment include an underwriting loss of $53 million at Neon in the fourth quarter of 2020, due primarily to catastrophe losses and several large claims and the $76 million Neon exited lines charge mentioned above in the fourth quarter of 2019. Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment also include adverse prior year reserve development of $16 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to business outside of the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
AFG’s overall loss and LAE ratio was 62.6% for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 66.6% for fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of 4.0 percentage points. The components of AFG’s property and casualty losses and LAE amounts and ratio are detailed below (dollars in millions):
Current accident year losses and LAE, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses
The current accident year loss and LAE ratio, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses for AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations was 59.5% for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 66.0% for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of 6.5 percentage points.
Property and transportation The 12.4 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio in the crop operations due to a high level of prevented planting claims resulting from excess rain in the 2019 period and, to a lesser extent, lower loss and LAE ratios in the aviation and transportation businesses due primarily to rate increases and lower claim frequency in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Specialty casualty The 3.4 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratios of the workers’ compensation, targeted markets, general liability, executive liability and excess and surplus businesses, partially offset by the impact of the Neon exited lines in the fourth quarter of 2019, which has a lower loss and LAE ratio than many of the other businesses in the Specialty casualty group. Excluding the impact of the Neon exited lines, the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses decreased 6.9 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Specialty financial The 2.3 percentage points increase in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses reflects an increase in the loss and LAE ratio of the fidelity business.
Net prior year reserve development
AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations recorded net favorable reserve development related to prior accident years of $32 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $53 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $21 million (40%).
Property and transportation Net favorable reserve development of $29 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the aviation, transportation and agricultural businesses. Net favorable reserve development of $18 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects lower than expected claim frequency at National Interstate and lower than anticipated claim severity in the property and inland marine business.
Specialty casualty Net favorable reserve development of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses, partially offset by higher than expected claim severity in general liability contractor claims and the public sector and excess liability businesses. Net favorable reserve development of $25 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the workers’ compensation businesses, partially offset by higher than expected claim severity in the excess and surplus lines businesses, higher than expected claim frequency in product liability contractor claims, and higher than anticipated claim severity in the public sector business.
Specialty financial Net favorable reserve development of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the fidelity and surety businesses and lower than expected claim severity in the financial institutions business. Net favorable reserve development of $14 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the surety business and lower than anticipated claim severity in the foreign credit business.
Other specialty In addition to the development discussed above, total Specialty prior year reserve development includes net adverse reserve development of $9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $4 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting adverse development associated with AFG’s internal reinsurance program, partially offset by the amortization of deferred gains on the retroactive reinsurance transactions entered into in connection with the sale of businesses in 1998 and 2001.
Aggregate Aggregate net prior accident years reserve development for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment for the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019 includes net adverse reserve development of $8 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $7 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to Neon exited lines discussed above under “Neon exited lines.” Aggregate net prior accident years reserve development for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment also includes net adverse reserve development of $16 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to business outside the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Catastrophe losses
AFG generally seeks to reduce its exposure to catastrophes through individual risk selection, including minimizing coastal and known fault-line exposures, and the purchase of reinsurance. Based on data available at December 31, 2020, AFG’s exposure to a catastrophic earthquake or windstorm that industry models indicate should statistically occur once in every 100, 250 or 500 years as a percentage of AFG’s Shareholders’ Equity is shown below:
AFG maintains comprehensive catastrophe reinsurance coverage for its property and casualty insurance operations, including a $15 million per occurrence net retention for losses up to $100 million in the vast majority of circumstances. In certain unlikely events, AFG’s ultimate loss under this coverage could be as high as $24 million. Effective July 1, 2020, AFG purchased an additional $50 million of reinsurance coverage for losses in excess of $100 million.
Catastrophe losses of $41 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 resulted primarily from Hurricanes Delta, Laura, Sally and Zeta and the Nashville explosion. Catastrophe losses of $14 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 resulted primarily from Typhoons Faxai and Hagibis, storms and tornadoes in the south-central United States and the Kincade fire in California.
Commissions and Other Underwriting Expenses
AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses (“U/W Exp”) were $385 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $446 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $61 million (14%). AFG’s underwriting expense ratio, calculated as commissions and other underwriting expenses divided by net premiums earned, was 29.0% for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 32.5% for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of 3.5 percentage points. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses and underwriting expense ratios is shown below (dollars in millions):
Property and transportation Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 0.1 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting higher profitability-based ceding commissions received from reinsurers in the crop business, partially offset by the impact of lower premiums on the ratio in the transportation businesses.
Specialty casualty Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 5.3 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting the runoff of Neon. Neon has a higher expense ratio than many of the other businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment. Excluding Neon exited lines, the underwriting expense ratio decreased 0.7 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting higher ceding commissions received from reinsurers as a result of growth in the excess liability business.
Specialty financial Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 2.3 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting the impact of higher premiums on the ratio in the fidelity business and lower expenses in the equipment leasing business.
Aggregate Aggregate commissions and other underwriting expenses for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment includes $27 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $30 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to the Neon exited lines. Commissions and other underwriting expenses related to the Neon exited lines in the fourth quarter of 2019
represent contractual employee severance benefits and other incurred exit costs. See “Neon exited lines” above for information about AFG’s exit from the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020.
Property and Casualty Net Investment Income
Excluding the Neon exited lines, net investment income in AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was $122 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $120 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $2 million (2%). The average invested assets and overall yield earned on investments held by AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations are provided below (dollars in millions):
(*)Adjusts the yield on equity securities and tax-exempt bonds to the fully taxable equivalent yield.
The property and casualty insurance segment’s increase in net investment income for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects the impact of growth in the property and casualty insurance segment and higher earnings from alternative investments, partially offset by the effect of lower short-term investment rates and lower dividend income. The property and casualty insurance segment’s overall yield on investments (net investment income as a percentage of average invested assets) was 4.02% for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 4.09% for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of 0.07 percentage points. The annualized yield earned on alternative investments (partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs) was 17.0% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 9.2% in the prior year period.
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s net investment income from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines reported less than $1 million in net investment income in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Property and Casualty Other Income and Expenses, Net
Other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was a net expense of $11 million for both the fourth quarter of 2020 and the fourth quarter of 2019. The table below details the items included in other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations (in millions):
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s other income and expenses, net from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines incurred a net expense of less than $1 million in other income and expenses, net in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Annuity Segment - Results of Operations
AFG’s annuity operations contributed $81 million in GAAP pretax earnings in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $128 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $47 million (37%). This decrease in AFG’s GAAP annuity segment results for the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 is due primarily to the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts and a higher negative impact from lower than expected interest rates on the accounting for FIAs in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by higher core earnings before income taxes.
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core earnings before income taxes from its annuity operations for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
(a)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs are considered non-core earnings (losses). In addition, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts are considered non-core earnings (losses). The impact of these items are shown aggregated as non-core annuity earnings (losses) and excluded from the income statement line items in the table above for the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, respectively:
•Annuity benefits - unfavorable impact of $55 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and favorable impact of $30 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
•Acquisition expenses - favorable impact on the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs of $13 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and unfavorable impact of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
•Other expenses - unfavorable impact of $6 million in the fourth quarter of in 2020.
(b)Details of the components of annuity benefits are provided below.
Annuity core earnings before income taxes were $129 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $104 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $25 million (24%), reflecting higher income from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs, higher gains on equity index call options in excess of policyholder index credits, lower other expenses and a reduction in the cost of funds as a percentage of annuity benefits accumulated due to renewal actions taken by AFG. These favorable items were partially offset by the impact of lower short-term interest rates on investment income. The table below highlights the impact of reinsurance, changes in the fair value of derivatives and other impacts of the changes in the stock market and interest rates on annuity segment results (dollars in millions):
Annuity benefits consisted of the following (dollars in millions):
Because fluctuations in interest rates and the stock market, among other factors, can cause volatility in annuity benefits expense related to FIAs that can be inconsistent with the long-term economics of the FIA business, management believes that including the actual cost of the equity options purchased in the FIA business and excluding unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs provides investors with a better view of the true cost of funds in the business and a more comparable measure to the cost of funds reported by its peers. The cost of the equity options included in AFG’s cost of funds is the net purchase price of the option contracts amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the contracts, which is generally one year. The following table reconciles AFG’s non-GAAP cost of funds measure to total GAAP annuity benefits expense (in millions):
Net Spread on Fixed Annuities (excludes variable annuity earnings)
The profitability of a fixed annuity business is largely dependent on the ability of a company to earn income on the assets supporting the business in excess of the amounts credited to policyholder accounts plus expenses incurred (earning a “spread”). Performance measures such as net interest spread and net spread earned are often presented by annuity businesses to help users of their financial statements better understand the company’s performance.
The table below (dollars in millions) details the components of these spreads for AFG’s fixed annuity operations (including fixed-indexed and variable-indexed annuities):
(*)Excluding the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on annuity benefits and the related impact on the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs.
Annuity Net Investment Income
Net investment income for the fourth quarter of 2020 was $429 million compared to $458 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $29 million (6%). This decrease reflects the impact of lower average fixed annuity investments due to the ceding of investments related to the annuity block reinsurance and the impact of the run-off of higher yielding investments and lower short-term interest rates, partially offset by higher earnings from partnerships and similar investments. The overall yield earned on investments in AFG’s fixed annuity operations, calculated as net investment income divided by average investment balances (at amortized cost), increased by 0.18 percentage points to 4.81% from 4.63% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase in the net investment yield between periods reflects the impact of ceding lower yielding securities related to the annuity block reinsurance and the impact of the run-off of higher yielding investments and lower short-term interest rates, partially offset by the positive impact of higher earnings from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs. AFG’s annuity segment recorded $61 million in earnings from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $23 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $38 million (165%). The annualized yield earned on these partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs was 17.4% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to 7.7% in the prior year period.
Annuity Cost of Funds
Cost of funds for the fourth quarter of 2020 was $208 million compared to $252 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $44 million (17%), reflecting lower average annuity benefits accumulated from the impact of ceding reserves for the annuity block reinsurance and offering lower renewal crediting rates (index participation) on option costs. The average cost of policyholder funds, calculated as cost of funds divided by average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, decreased 0.19 percentage points to 2.35% in the fourth quarter of 2020 from 2.54% in the fourth quarter of 2019 reflecting lower crediting rates (index participation) on both new sales (initial rates) and in force business (renewal rates).
The following table provides details of AFG’s interest credited and other cost of funds (in millions):
Other Annuity Benefits, Net of Guaranteed Withdrawal Benefit Fees
Other annuity benefits, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees excluding the impact of reinsurance and the stock market and interest rates, for the fourth quarter of 2020 were $16 million compared to $15 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $1 million (7%). As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, these net expenses increased 0.03 percentage points to 0.18% from 0.15% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. In addition to interest credited to policyholders’ accounts and the change in fair value of derivatives related to fixed-indexed annuities, annuity benefits expense also includes the following expenses (in millions, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees):
As discussed under “Annuity Benefits Accumulated” in Note A - “Accounting Policies” to the financial statements, guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserves are accrued for and modified using assumptions similar to those used in establishing and amortizing deferred policy acquisition costs. In addition, the guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserve related to FIAs can be inversely impacted by the calculated FIA embedded derivative reserve as the value to policyholders of the guaranteed withdrawal benefits decreases when the benefit of stock market participation increases. As shown in the table above, the impact of reinsurance and changes in the stock market and interest rates on FIAs increased AFG’s guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserve by $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $2 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. This $4 million (200%) increase was the primary cause of the $5 million overall increase in other annuity benefits, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Annuity Net Interest Spread
AFG’s net interest spread increased 0.34 percentage points to 2.28% from 1.94% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due primarily to (i) higher earnings from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs and (ii) lower renewal crediting rates, partially offset by lower investment yields. Features included in current annuity product offerings allow AFG to achieve its desired profitability at a lower net interest spread than historical product offerings. As a result, AFG expects its net interest spread to narrow in the future.
Annuity Policy Charges and Other Miscellaneous Income
Annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income, which consist primarily of surrender charges, amortization of deferred upfront policy charges (unearned revenue) and equity index call option proceeds received at maturity that are not passed to policyholders through index credits due to surrenders, were $19 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $13 million the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $6 million (46%) reflecting higher gains on equity index call options in excess of policyholder index credits. Annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income as a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated increased 0.07 percentage points to 0.18% in the fourth quarter of 2020 from 0.11% in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Annuity Acquisition Expenses
The following table illustrates the acceleration/deceleration of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (“DPAC”) resulting from the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under option costs (in millions):
Annuity acquisition expenses excluding the acceleration/deceleration of the amortization resulting from the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under option costs were $68 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $65 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $3 million (5%).
The negative impact of reinsurance and significantly lower than anticipated interest rates in the fourth quarter of 2020 on the fair value of derivatives and other liabilities related to FIAs resulted in a partially offsetting deceleration of the amortization of DPAC. The positive impact of strong stock market performance during the fourth quarter of 2019 on the fair value of derivatives and other liabilities related to FIAs resulted in an acceleration of the amortization of DPAC.
The table below illustrates the impact of reinsurance and the estimated impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to fixed-indexed annuities and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on FIAs on annuity acquisition expenses as a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated:
Annuity Other Expenses
Annuity other expenses were $26 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $34 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $8 million (24%) reflecting expense reimbursement related to reinsurance and lower expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Annuity other expenses represent primarily general and administrative expenses, as well as selling and issuance expenses that are not deferred. As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, these expenses decreased 0.05 percentage points to 0.28% from 0.33% for the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Derivatives Related to Fixed-Indexed (Including Variable-Indexed) Annuities and Other Impacts of Changes in the Stock Market and Interest Rates on FIAs
AFG’s fixed-indexed (including variable-indexed) annuities provide policyholders with a crediting rate tied, in part, to the performance of an existing stock market or other financial index. AFG attempts to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of these products through the purchase and sale of call and put options on the appropriate index. AFG’s
strategy is designed so that the net change in the fair value of the call option assets and put option liabilities will generally offset the economic change in the net liability from the index participation. Both the index-based component of the annuities (an embedded derivative) and the related call and put options are considered derivatives that must be adjusted for changes in fair value through earnings each period. The fair values of these derivatives are impacted by actual and expected stock market performance and interest rates as well as other factors. For a list of other factors impacting the fair value of the embedded derivative component of AFG’s annuity benefits accumulated, see Note D - “Fair Value Measurements” to the financial statements. Fluctuations in certain of these factors, such as changes in interest rates and the performance of the stock market, are not economic in nature for the current reporting period, but rather impact the timing of reported results.
As discussed above under “Other Annuity Benefits, Net of Guaranteed Withdrawal Benefit Fees” and “Annuity Acquisition Expenses,” the periodic accounting for DPAC and guaranteed withdrawal benefits related to FIAs is also impacted by changes in the stock market and interest rates. These impacts may be temporary in nature and not necessarily indicative of the long-term performance of the FIA business. The table below highlights the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and the other impacts of the stock market and interest rates over or under the cost of the equity index options (discussed above) on earnings before income taxes for the annuity segment (dollars in millions):
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the positive impact of strong stock market performance was more than offset by the impact of lower than anticipated interest rates and the amortization of the deferred loss on the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts, resulting in a decrease in earnings before income taxes for the annuity segment of $48 million. During the fourth quarter of 2019, the positive impact of the strong stock market performance increased the annuity segment’s earnings before income taxes by $24 million. As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the indexed-based component of those FIAs was a net expense of 0.54% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to a net expense reduction of 0.24% in the fourth quarter of 2019.
The following table provides analysis of the primary factors impacting the change in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and the other impacts of the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options discussed above. Each factor is presented net of the estimated related impact on the amortization of DPAC (dollars in millions).
(*) The $47 million loss from the impact of reinsurance reflects the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020, impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs and higher index credits paid to Commonwealth compared to the option cost reimbursements received from Commonwealth.
Annuity Net Spread Earned on Fixed Annuities
AFG’s net spread earned on fixed annuities excluding the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates over or under option costs increased 0.35 percentage points to 1.42% from 1.07% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due primarily to the 0.34 percentage points increase in AFG’s net interest spread discussed above. AFG’s overall net spread earned on fixed annuities decreased 0.43 percentage points to 0.88% in the fourth quarter of 2020 from 1.31% in the fourth quarter of 2019 due to the negative impact of reinsurance in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by the increase in AFG’s net interest spread, higher other income, lower other expenses and the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives and other impacts of the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs and the impact of reinsurance discussed above.
Annuity Benefits Accumulated
Annuity premiums received and benefit payments are recorded as increases or decreases in annuity benefits accumulated rather than as revenue and expense. Increases in this liability for interest credited and other benefits are charged to expense and decreases for surrender and other policy charges are credited to other income.
For certain products, annuity benefits accumulated also includes reserves for accrued persistency and premium bonuses, excess benefits expected to be paid on future deaths and annuitizations (“EDAR”) and guaranteed withdrawal benefits. Annuity benefits accumulated also includes amounts advanced from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati. The following table is a progression of AFG’s annuity benefits accumulated liability for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
Annuity benefits accumulated includes a liability of $817 million at December 31, 2020 and $625 million at December 31, 2019 for guaranteed withdrawal benefits on annuities with features that allow the policyholder to take fixed periodic lifetime benefit payments that could exceed account value. As discussed above under “Other Annuity Benefits, Net of Guaranteed Withdrawal Benefit Fees” and “Annuity Acquisition Expenses,” the periodic accounting for DPAC and guaranteed withdrawal benefits related to FIAs is also impacted by changes in the stock market and interest rates.
Statutory Annuity Premiums
AFG’s annuity operations generated gross statutory premiums of $1.32 billion in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $1.14 billion in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $180 million (16%). The following table summarizes AFG’s annuity sales (dollars in millions):
The 16% increase in total gross annuity premiums in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects higher sales of traditional fixed annuities in the financial institutions channel and higher pension risk transfer premiums.
Annuity Earnings before Income Taxes Reconciliation
The following table reconciles the net spread earned on AFG’s fixed annuities to overall annuity pretax earnings for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
(*)Net investment income (as a % of investments) of 4.81% and 4.63% for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, multiplied by the difference between average fixed annuity investments (at amortized cost) and average fixed annuity benefits accumulated in each period.
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated - Results of Operations
AFG’s net GAAP pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $62 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $55 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $7 million (13%). AFG’s net core pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $57 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $50 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $7 million (14%).
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core loss before income taxes from operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
(*)Excludes a pretax non-core loss on retirement of debt of $5 million in both the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Life, Accident and Health Premiums, Benefits and Acquisition Expenses
AFG’s run-off long-term care and life insurance operations recorded net earned premiums of $4 million and related benefits and acquisition expenses of $11 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to net earned premiums of $5 million and related benefits and acquisition expenses of $11 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Net Investment Income
AFG recorded net investment income on investments held outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments of $16 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $8 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $8 million (100%). The parent company holds a small portfolio of securities that are carried at fair value through net investment income. These securities increased in value by $9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Holding Company and Other - P&C Fees and Related Expenses
Summit, a workers’ compensation insurance subsidiary, collects fees from a small group of unaffiliated insurers for providing underwriting, policy administration and claims services. In addition, certain of AFG’s property and casualty insurance businesses collect fees from customers for ancillary services such as workplace safety programs and premium financing. In both the fourth quarter of 2020 and the fourth quarter of 2019, AFG collected $17 million in fees for these services. Management views this fee income, net of the $12 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $13 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, in expenses incurred to generate such fees, as a reduction in the cost of underwriting its property and casualty insurance policies. Consistent with internal management reporting, these fees and the related expenses are netted and recorded as a reduction of commissions and other underwriting expenses in AFG’s segmented results.
Holding Company and Other - Annuity Segment Option Gains
As discussed under “Annuity Segment - Results of Operations,” AFG purchases and sells equity index options to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of its FIAs. In evaluating the performance of the annuity business, management views the cost of the equity options as a better measurement of the true expenses of the annuity segment as compared to the GAAP accounting for these options as derivatives because any proceeds at expiration from the options generally are passed to policyholders through index credits. On occasion, policyholders surrender their annuity prior to receiving the index credit, which results in any option exercise proceeds being retained by AFG. For internal management reporting, AFG views these “option gains” as miscellaneous (other) income rather than as a component of annuity benefits expense. Consistent with internal management reporting, these option gains are reclassified from annuity benefits to other income in AFG’s segmented results. In the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, AFG had $10 million and $4 million, respectively, in such option gains.
Holding Company and Other - Other Income
Other income in the table above includes $4 million in both the fourth quarter of 2020 and the fourth quarter of 2019, in management fees paid to AFG by the AFG-managed CLOs (AFG’s consolidated managed investment entities). The management fees are eliminated in consolidation - see the other income line in the Consolidate MIEs column under “Results of Operations - Segmented Statement of Earnings.” Excluding amounts eliminated in consolidation, AFG recorded other income outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments of $4 million in both the fourth quarter of 2020 and the fourth quarter of 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Other Expenses
Excluding the non-core loss on retirement of debt discussed below, AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments recorded other expenses of $50 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $42 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $8 million (19%). This increase is due primarily to the impact of higher holding company expenses related to employee benefit plans that are tied to stock market performance in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Interest Charges on Borrowed Money
AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments recorded interest expense of $24 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $18 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $6 million (33%). This increase in interest expense primarily reflects higher average indebtedness. The following table details the principal amount of AFG’s long-term debt balances as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 (dollars in millions):
The increase in interest expense for the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 reflects the following financing transactions completed by AFG between October 1, 2019 and December 31, 2020:
•Issued $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures in December 2019
•Redeemed $150 million of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures in December 2019
•Issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes in April 2020
•Issued $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures in May 2020
•Issued $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures in September 2020
•Redeemed $150 million of 6% Subordinated Debentures in November 2020
Holding Company and Other - Loss on Retirement of Debt
In November 2020, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million. In December 2019, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures due 2054 and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million.
Consolidated Realized Gains (Losses) on Securities
AFG’s consolidated realized gains (losses) on securities were net gains of $591 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $65 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $526 million (809%). Realized gains (losses) on securities consisted of the following (in millions):
The $427 million net realized gains from disposals in the fourth quarter of 2020 includes gains of $415 million on investments disposed of in AFG’s 2020 annuity block reinsurance transaction. See Note P - “Insurance” to the financial statements. The $207 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in the fourth quarter of 2020 includes gains of $46 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $43 million on investments in media companies, $24 million on investments in technology companies, $17 million on investments in energy companies, $15 million on investments in natural gas companies, $8 million on real estate investment trusts and $7 million on investments in healthcare companies. The $67 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in the fourth quarter of 2019 includes gains of $17 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $16 million on investments in technology companies and $14 million on investments in media companies.
The $11 million decrease in previously recognized expected credit losses in the fourth quarter of 2020 includes income of $7 million related to third-party collateralized loan obligations and $6 million related to corporate bonds and other fixed maturities, partially offset by $2 million in charges related to other structured securities. The $9 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2019 includes $7 million on corporate bonds and $2 million on third-party collateralized loan obligations.
Consolidated Realized Gains (Losses) on Subsidiaries
On September 28, 2020, AFG announced that it had reached a definitive agreement to sell GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon, to RiverStone Holdings Limited. AFG recorded a $30 million loss in the third quarter of 2020 to establish a liability equal to the excess of the net carrying value of the assets and liabilities to be disposed over the estimated net sale proceeds. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the estimated loss was adjusted at the closing date to a gain of $23 million based on the final proceeds and the final net assets disposed, which reflects $53 million of non-core losses in the fourth quarter of 2020 at Neon. See Note B - “Acquisitions and Sale of Businesses” to the financial statements.
Consolidated Income Taxes
AFG’s consolidated provision for income taxes was $190 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $68 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, an increase of $122 million (179%). The following is a reconciliation of income taxes at the statutory rate to the provision for income taxes as shown in the segmented statement of earnings (dollars in millions):
See Note M - “Income Taxes” to the financial statements for an analysis of items affecting AFG’s effective tax rate.
Consolidated Noncontrolling Interests
AFG’s consolidated net earnings (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests was net earnings of $2 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to a net loss of $20 million for the fourth quarter of 2019, a change of $22 million (110%). The losses in the fourth quarter of 2019 are related to losses at Neon, AFG’s United Kingdom-based Lloyd’s insurer. Net losses attributable to noncontrolling interests in the fourth quarter of 2019 includes $18 million related to the $76 million non-core charge for costs associated with AFG’s exit of the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020, 2019 AND 2018
Segmented Statement of Earnings
AFG reports its business as three segments: (i) Property and casualty insurance (“P&C”), (ii) Annuity and (iii) Other, which includes run-off long-term care and life, holding company costs and income and expenses related to the managed investment entities (“MIEs”).
AFG’s net earnings attributable to shareholders, determined in accordance with GAAP, include certain items that may not be indicative of its ongoing core operations. The following tables for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 identify such items by segment and reconcile net earnings attributable to shareholders to core net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure that AFG believes is a useful tool for investors and analysts in analyzing ongoing operating trends (in millions):
(a)See the reconciliation of core earnings to GAAP net earnings under “Results of Operations - General” for details on the tax and noncontrolling interest impacts of these reconciling items.
(b)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” beginning with the second quarter of 2019,
unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs are considered non-core earnings (losses). In addition, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts are considered non-core earnings (losses).
(c)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” beginning with the first quarter of 2020, the Neon run-off operations are considered property and casualty insurance non-core earnings (losses).
Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations
AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations contributed $607 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2020 compared to $649 million in 2019, a decrease of $42 million (6%). Property and casualty core pretax earnings were $776 million in 2020 compared to $743 million in 2019, an increase of $33 million (4%). The decrease in GAAP pretax earnings reflects pretax non-core special A&E charges of $47 million in 2020 compared to $18 million in 2019 and higher non-core losses in the Neon exited lines, partially offset by higher core pretax earnings. The increase in core pretax earnings reflects higher core underwriting results, partially offset by lower net investment income in 2020 compared to 2019.
AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations contributed $649 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2019 compared to $709 million in 2018, a decrease of $60 million (8%). Property and casualty core pretax earnings were $743 million in 2019 compared to $727 million in 2018, an increase of $16 million (2%). The decrease in GAAP pretax earnings reflects a pretax non-core charge of $76 million in 2019 related to costs associated with plans to exit the Lloyd’s of London
insurance market in 2020, partially offset by higher core pretax earnings. The increase in core pretax earnings reflects higher net investment income in 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to growth in the business, partially offset by lower underwriting profit.
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core earnings before income taxes from its property and casualty insurance operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions):
AFG reports the underwriting performance of its Specialty property and casualty insurance business in the following sub-segments: (i) Property and transportation, (ii) Specialty casualty and (iii) Specialty financial.
Gross Written Premiums
Gross written premiums (“GWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $7.09 billion in 2020 compared to $7.30 billion in 2019, a decrease of $212 million (3%). GWP increased $459 million (7%) in 2019 compared to 2018. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty gross written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Reinsurance Premiums Ceded
Reinsurance premiums ceded (“Ceded”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were 29% of gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 27% for both the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, an increase of 2 percentage points for 2020 compared to 2019. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty reinsurance premiums ceded is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Written Premiums
Net written premiums (“NWP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $5.01 billion in 2020 compared to $5.34 billion in 2019, a decrease of $329 million (6%). NWP increased $319 million (6%) in 2019 compared to 2018. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net written premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
Net Earned Premiums
Net earned premiums (“NEP”) for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment were $5.10 billion in 2020 compared to $5.19 billion in 2019, a decrease of $86 million (2%). NEP increased $320 million (7%) in 2019 compared to 2018. Detail of AFG’s property and casualty net earned premiums is shown below (dollars in millions):
The $212 million (3%) decrease in gross written premiums in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the Specialty casualty and Specialty financial sub-segments, partially offset by an increase in the Specialty property and transportation sub-segment. Overall average renewal rates increased approximately 11% in 2020. Excluding the workers’ compensation business, renewal pricing increased nearly 15%.
The $459 million (7%) increase in gross written premiums in 2019 compared to 2018 reflects growth in each of the Specialty property and casualty sub-segments. Overall average renewal rates increased approximately 3% in 2019. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal pricing increased approximately 6%.
Property and transportation Gross written premiums increased $54 million (2%) in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to growth and new business opportunities in the property and inland marine and ocean marine businesses, partially offset by lower premiums in the transportation businesses, primarily from the return of premiums and reduced exposures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and premium reductions in two large national accounts. Average renewal rates increased nearly 6% for this group in 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 1 percentage point in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting higher cessions in the transportation businesses.
Gross written premiums increased $114 million (4%) in 2019 compared to 2018, due primarily to new business opportunities in the transportation businesses and higher year-over-year premiums in the property and inland marine and ocean marine businesses. Average renewal rates increased approximately 4% for this group in 2019. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased 2 percentage points in 2019 compared to 2018, reflecting lower cessions in the crop insurance business.
Specialty casualty Gross written premiums decreased $324 million (9%) in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the run-off of Neon. Excluding the $567 million in gross written premiums from the Neon exited lines in 2019, gross written premiums increased approximately 8% in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase reflects growth in the excess and surplus, excess liability, targeted markets and directors and officers businesses, primarily the result of renewal rate
increases, new business opportunities and higher retentions on renewal business, partially offset by lower premiums in the workers’ compensation businesses due to reduced exposures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with renewal rate decreases. Average renewal rates increased approximately 14% for this group in 2020. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal rates for this group increased nearly 24% in 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 5 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting growth in the excess and surplus and public sector businesses, which cede a larger percentage of premiums than many of the businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment and higher cessions in the professional liability business.
Gross written premiums increased $323 million (9%) in 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to the addition of premiums from ABA Insurance Services and growth in the excess and surplus lines, executive liability and targeted markets businesses and higher premiums reported by Neon. This growth was partially offset by lower premiums in the workers’ compensation businesses. Average renewal rates increased approximately 3% for this group in 2019. Excluding rate decreases in the workers’ compensation business, renewal rates for this group increased approximately 8% in 2019. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums increased 1 percentage point in 2019 compared to 2018, reflecting growth in the surplus lines, excess liability and mergers and acquisitions businesses, which have a higher ceding percentage than many of the businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Specialty financial Gross written premiums decreased $34 million (4%) in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to lower premiums from the impact of various state regulations regarding policy cancellations and the placement of forced coverage in the financial institutions business and COVID-related economic impacts on the surety business and heightened risk selection that has reduced new business in the trade credit business, partially offset by higher premiums in the fidelity business. Average renewal rates for this group increased nearly 8% in 2020. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased 2 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting lower cessions in the financial institutions business.
Gross written premiums increased $22 million (3%) in 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher premiums in the fidelity, surety and equipment leasing businesses, partially offset by lower premiums in the financial institutions business. Average renewal rates for this group increased approximately 1% in 2019. Reinsurance premiums ceded as a percentage of gross written premiums were comparable in 2019 and 2018.
Other specialty The amounts shown as reinsurance premiums ceded represent business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty property and casualty insurance sub-segments. Reinsurance premiums assumed increased $49 million (33%) in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting an increase in premiums retained, primarily from businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Reinsurance premiums assumed decreased $10 million (6%) in 2019 compared to 2018, reflecting lower premiums retained, primarily from businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment.
Combined Ratio
The table below (dollars in millions) details the components of the combined ratio for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations generated an underwriting profit of $426 million in 2020 compared to $325 million in 2019, an increase of $101 million (31%). The higher underwriting profit in 2020 reflects higher underwriting profits in the Property and transportation and Specialty casualty sub-segments, partially offset by lower underwriting profit in the Specialty financial sub-segment. Underwriting results for the Specialty property and casualty insurance operations include $95 million in COVID-19 related losses (1.9 points on the combined ratio) in 2020. Overall catastrophe losses were $91 million (1.9 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $2 million for 2020 compared to catastrophe losses of $60 million (1.2 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million for 2019.
The Specialty property and casualty insurance operations generated an underwriting profit of $325 million in 2019 compared to $322 million in 2018, an increase of $3 million (1%). The higher underwriting profit in 2019 reflects higher underwriting profits in the Specialty casualty and Specialty financial sub-segments, partially offset by lower underwriting profit in the Property and transportation sub-segment. Overall catastrophe losses were $60 million (1.2 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $1 million for 2019 compared to catastrophe losses of $103 million (2.1 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $2 million for 2018.
Property and transportation Underwriting profit for this group was $181 million in 2020 compared to $79 million in 2019, an increase of $102 million (129%). This increase reflects higher underwriting profitability in the crop operations following record levels of prevented planting claims in 2019 and, to a lesser extent, higher favorable prior year reserve development in the transportation businesses and improved underwriting results in the aviation business and the Singapore branch. COVID-19 related losses for this group were $7 million (0.4 points on the combined ratio) in 2020.
Catastrophe losses were $47 million (2.5 points on the combined ratio) in 2020 compared to $32 million (1.8 points) in 2019.
Underwriting profit for this group was $79 million in 2019 compared to $120 million in 2018, a decrease of $41 million (34%). Record levels of prevented planting claims in the crop operations were the driver of the lower underwriting profit in 2019 compared to 2018, partially offset by higher underwriting profits in the transportation businesses. Catastrophe losses were $32 million (1.8 points on the combined ratio) in 2019 compared to $26 million (1.5 points) in 2018.
Specialty casualty Underwriting profit for this group was $223 million in 2020 compared to $175 million in 2019, an increase of $48 million (27%). This increase reflects higher year-over-year underwriting profitability in the excess surplus and excess liability businesses and the impact of $36 million of underwriting losses at Neon in 2019, partially offset by lower year-over-year underwriting profits in the targeted markets and workers’ compensation businesses. See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for information about AFG’s exit from the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020. COVID-19 related losses were $60 million (2.7 points on the combined ratio) in 2020, primarily in the workers’ compensation and executive liability businesses. Catastrophe losses were $14 million (0.6 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $2 million in 2020 compared to catastrophe losses of $17 million (0.7 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million in 2019.
Underwriting profit for this group was $175 million in 2019 compared to $141 million in 2018, an increase of $34 million (24%). Higher underwriting profits in the targeted markets and workers’ compensation businesses and a reduction in the underwriting loss at Neon (excluding the Neon exited lines charge), due primarily to lower year-over-year catastrophe losses, were partially offset by lower underwriting profits in the excess and surplus lines, executive liability and general liability businesses. Catastrophe losses were $17 million (0.7 points on the combined ratio) and related net reinstatement premiums were $1 million in 2019 compared to catastrophe losses of $45 million (1.9 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million in 2018.
Specialty financial Underwriting profit for this group was $50 million in 2020 compared to $92 million in 2019, a decrease of $42 million (46%) due primarily to lower underwriting profitability in the trade credit, surety and innovative markets businesses and higher year-over year catastrophe losses in the financial institutions business. COVID-19 related losses were $26 million (4.3 points on the combined ratio) in 2020 primarily related to trade credit insurance. Catastrophe losses were $26 million (4.3 points on the combined ratio) in 2020 compared to $10 million (1.6 points) in 2019.
Underwriting profit for this group was $92 million in 2019 compared to $66 million in 2018, an increase of $26 million (39%) due primarily to higher underwriting profitability in the financial institutions and surety businesses. Catastrophe losses were $10 million (1.6 points on the combined ratio) in 2019 compared to $28 million (4.7 points) and related net reinstatement premiums of $1 million in 2018.
Other specialty This group reported an underwriting loss of $28 million in 2020 compared to $21 million in 2019, an increase of $7 million (33%). This increase reflects higher losses in the business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty sub-segments in 2020 compared to 2019.
This group reported an underwriting loss of $21 million in 2019 compared to $5 million in 2018, an increase of $16 million (320%). This increase reflects higher losses in the business assumed by AFG’s internal reinsurance program from the operations that make up AFG’s other Specialty sub-segments in 2019 compared to 2018.
Aggregate Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment include asbestos and environmental reserve charges of $47 million in 2020, $18 million in 2019 and $18 million in 2018, an underwriting loss of $135 million at Neon in 2020, due primarily to catastrophe losses, COVID-19 related charges and several large claims, and the $76 million Neon exited lines charge in 2019. See “Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves,” under “Uncertainties” and “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Aggregate underwriting results for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment also include adverse prior year reserve development of $20 million in 2020, $19 million in 2019 and $2 million in 2018, related to business outside of the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
AFG’s overall loss and LAE ratio was 64.1%, 63.0% and 61.7% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The components of AFG’s property and casualty losses and LAE amounts and ratio are detailed below (dollars in millions):
Current accident year losses and LAE, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses
The current accident year loss and LAE ratio, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses for AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations was 61.5% in 2020, 64.0% in 2019 and 63.6% in 2018.
Property and transportation The 5.4 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio in the crop operations due to a high level of prevented planting claims resulting from excess rain in 2019 and, to a lesser extent, lower loss and LAE ratios in the aviation and transportation businesses due primarily to rate increases and
lower claim frequency in 2020, and lower loss and LAE ratios in non-crop agricultural businesses and the Singapore branch in 2020 compared to 2019.
The 2.5 percentage points increase in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding catastrophe losses in 2019 compared to 2018 reflects an increase in the loss and LAE ratio of the crop operations due to a high level of prevented planting claims resulting from excess rain in 2019.
Specialty casualty The 0.3 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratios of the workers’ compensation, targeted markets, executive liability and excess and surplus businesses, partially offset by the impact of the Neon exited lines in 2019, which has a lower loss and LAE ratio than many of the other businesses in the Specialty casualty group. Excluding the impact of the Neon exited lines, the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses decreased 2.1 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019.
The 1.6 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding catastrophe losses in 2019 compared to 2018 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio at Neon (excluding the impact of the Neon exited lines charge in 2019).
Specialty financial The 0.8 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding COVID-19 related and catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio of the financial institutions business, partially offset by an increase in the loss and LAE ratio of the fidelity business.
The 1.1 percentage points decrease in the loss and LAE ratio for the current year, excluding catastrophe losses in 2019 compared to 2018 reflects a decrease in the loss and LAE ratio of the financial institutions business.
Net prior year reserve development
AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations recorded net favorable reserve development related to prior accident years of $213 million in 2020 compared to $187 million in 2019 and $212 million in 2018, an increase of $26 million (14%) and a decrease of $25 million (12%), respectively.
Property and transportation Net favorable reserve development of $107 million in 2020 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the aviation, transportation and agricultural businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $67 million in 2019 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity at National Interstate and lower than expected losses in the crop business.
Net favorable reserve development of $50 million in 2018 reflects lower than expected losses in the crop business and lower than expected claim severity at National Interstate, partially offset by higher than expected claim frequency and severity in the Singapore branch and aviation operations.
Specialty casualty Net favorable reserve development of $97 million in 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses and lower than anticipated claim frequency in the executive liability business, partially offset by higher than expected claim frequency and severity in general liability contractor claims and the excess and surplus and excess liability businesses and higher than anticipated claim severity in the targeted markets businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $88 million in 2019 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the workers’ compensation businesses, partially offset by higher than expected claim severity in the excess and surplus lines businesses and higher than expected claim frequency in product liability contractor claims.
Net favorable reserve development of $139 million in 2018 reflects lower than anticipated claim severity in the workers’ compensation businesses and lower than expected emergence in assumed 2017 property catastrophe losses at Neon, and to a lesser extent, lower than expected claim severity in the executive liability business.
Specialty financial Net favorable reserve development of $28 million in 2020 reflects lower than anticipated claim frequency in the trade credit business and lower than anticipated claim frequency and severity in the financial institutions, fidelity and surety businesses.
Net favorable reserve development of $38 million in 2019 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the surety and financial institutions businesses and lower than anticipated claim severity in the foreign credit business.
Net favorable reserve development of $26 million in 2018 reflects lower than expected claim frequency and severity in the surety business, lower than expected claim severity in the fidelity business and lower than expected claim frequency in run-off businesses.
Other specialty In addition to the reserve development discussed above, total Specialty prior year reserve development includes net adverse reserve development of $19 million, $6 million and $3 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The net adverse reserve development reflects $24 million, $12 million and $10 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, of adverse development associated with AFG’s internal reinsurance program, partially offset by the amortization of the deferred gains on the retroactive reinsurance transactions entered into in connection with the sale of businesses in 1998 and 2001.
Asbestos and environmental reserve charges As previously discussed under “Uncertainties” - “Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves,” AFG has established property and casualty reserves for claims related to environmental exposures and asbestos claims. Total charges recorded to increase reserves (net of reinsurance recoverable) for A&E exposures of AFG’s property and casualty group (included in loss and loss adjustment expenses) were $47 million in 2020 and $18 million in both 2019 and 2018.
Neon exited lines AFG recorded net adverse prior year reserve development of $19 million in 2020 and $7 million in 2019 related to Neon’s exited lines of business (included in loss and loss adjustment expenses). See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for information about AFG’s exit of the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020.
Aggregate Aggregate net prior accident years reserve development for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment includes the special A&E charges, reserve development related to the Neon exited lines mentioned above and net adverse reserve development of $20 million, $19 million and $2 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to business outside the Specialty group that AFG no longer writes.
Covid-19 related losses
Underwriting results for AFG’s Specialty property and casualty insurance operations in 2020 included $95 million in COVID-19 related losses. Given the uncertainties surrounding the ultimate number or scope of claims relating to the pandemic, these charges, approximately 72% of which establish reserves for claims that have been incurred but not reported, represent AFG’s current best estimate of losses from the pandemic and related economic disruption incurred through December 31, 2020. Approximately 70% of AFG’s COVID-19 related losses were reported in the workers’ compensation, directors and officers and trade credit businesses, with the remainder spread across numerous other businesses.
In addition, underwriting results for the Neon exited lines includes $20 million of COVID-19 related losses in 2020.
Catastrophe losses
AFG generally seeks to reduce its exposure to catastrophes through individual risk selection, including minimizing coastal and known fault-line exposures, and the purchase of reinsurance. AFG recorded net catastrophe losses of $128 million in 2020 primarily from storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States in the first quarter; storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States and civil unrest in the second quarter; Hurricanes Hanna, Laura and Sally, Tropical Storm Isaias, storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States and multiple wildfires in west coast states in the third quarter, and Hurricanes Laura, Sally, Delta and Zeta and the Nashville explosion in the fourth quarter.
Catastrophe losses of $60 million in 2019 resulted primarily from winter storms in multiple regions of the United States in the first quarter; storms and tornadoes in multiple regions of the United States in the second quarter; Hurricane Dorian and Tropical Storm Imelda in the third quarter and Typhoons Faxai and Hagibis, storms and tornadoes in the south-central United States and the Kincade fire in California in the fourth quarter.
Catastrophe losses of $103 million in 2018 resulted primarily from mudslides in California in the first quarter, storms and flooding in several regions of the United States in the second quarter, Hurricane Florence in the third quarter and Hurricane Michael and wildfires in California in the fourth quarter.
Commissions and Other Underwriting Expenses
AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses (“U/W Exp”) were $1.60 billion in 2020 compared to $1.70 billion in 2019, a decrease of $98 million (6%). AFG’s underwriting expense ratio was 31.4% in 2020 compared to 32.8% in 2019, a decrease of 1.4 percentage points.
AFG’s property and casualty U/W Exp were $1.70 billion in 2019 compared to $1.56 billion in 2018, an increase of $142 million (9%). AFG’s underwriting expense ratio was 32.8% in 2019 compared to 32.1% in 2018, an increase of 0.7 percentage points.
Detail of AFG’s property and casualty commissions and other underwriting expenses and underwriting expense ratios is shown below (dollars in millions):
Property and transportation Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums increased 1.1 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting lower profitability-based ceding commissions received from reinsurers in the crop business.
Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums increased 0.6 percentage points in 2019 compared to 2018 reflecting lower profitability-based ceding commissions received from reinsurers in the crop business.
Specialty casualty Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 4.7 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the runoff of Neon. Neon has a higher expense ratio than many of the other businesses in the Specialty casualty sub-segment. Excluding Neon exited lines, the underwriting expense ratio decreased 1.5 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting higher ceding commissions received from reinsurers as a result of growth in the excess liability business.
Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 0.5 percentage points in 2019 compared to 2018 reflecting the impact of higher premiums on the ratio.
Specialty financial Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums decreased 1.2 percentage points in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting the impact of higher premiums on the ratio in the fidelity and equipment leasing businesses and lower travel expenses.
Commissions and other underwriting expenses as a percentage of net earned premiums increased 2.2 percentage points in 2019 compared to 2018 reflecting higher profitability-based commissions paid to agents in the financial institutions business, partially offset by lower underwriting expenses in the equipment leasing business.
Aggregate Aggregate commissions and other underwriting expenses for AFG’s property and casualty insurance segment includes $117 million of underwriting expenses in the Neon run-off operations in 2020 and $30 million related to the Neon exited lines charge in 2019 representing contractual employee severance benefits and other incurred exit costs. See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Property and Casualty Net Investment Income
Excluding the Neon exited lines, net investment income in AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was $404 million in 2020 compared to $472 million in 2019, a decrease of $68 million (14%). Net investment income in AFG’s property and casualty operations was $472 million in 2019 compared to $438 million in 2018, an increase of $34 million (8%). The average invested assets and overall yield earned on investments held by AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations are provided below (dollars in millions):
(*)Adjusts the yield on equity securities and tax-exempt bonds to the fully taxable equivalent yield.
The property and casualty insurance segment’s decrease in net investment income in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects lower earnings from alternative investments (partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs) in 2020 as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on financial markets, lower short-term interest rates and lower dividend income, partially offset by growth in the property and casualty insurance segment. The property and casualty insurance segment’s overall yield on investments (net investment income as a percentage of average invested assets) was 3.44% in 2020 compared to 4.16% in 2019, a decrease of 0.72 percentage points. The yield earned on alternative investments was 6.6% in 2020 compared to 10.3% in 2019.
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s net investment income from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines reported a $5 million loss in 2020 in net investment income, primarily from changes in the fair value of equity securities.
The increase in average invested assets and net investment income in the property and casualty insurance segment in 2019 compared to 2018 reflects growth in the property and casualty insurance segment. The property and casualty insurance segment’s overall yield on investments was 4.16% in 2019 compared to 4.17% in 2018, a decrease of 0.01 percentage points reflecting lower earnings from alternative investments. The yield earned on alternative investments was 10.3% in 2019 compared to 13.9% in 2018.
Property and Casualty Other Income and Expenses, Net
Other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations was a net expense of $34 million in 2020, $35 million in 2019, and $31 million in 2018. The table below details the items included in other income and expenses, net for AFG’s property and casualty insurance operations (in millions):
In addition to the property and casualty segment’s other income and expenses, net from ongoing operations discussed above, the Neon exited lines incurred a net expense of $5 million in other income and expenses, net during 2020.
Annuity Segment - Results of Operations
AFG’s annuity operations contributed $171 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2020 compared to $362 million in 2019, a decrease of $191 million (53%) due primarily to lower core earnings, the impact of a stronger stock market performance in 2019 as compared to 2020, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts and higher unlocking charges in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by a less negative impact from lower than expected interest rates on the accounting for FIAs in 2020 compared to 2019. AFG monitors the major actuarial assumptions underlying its annuity operations throughout the year and conducts detailed reviews (“unlocking”) of its assumptions annually. Beginning with the third quarter of 2019, AFG moved its annual unlocking from the fourth quarter to the third quarter and expects to continue to conduct the annual review in the third quarter of each year (consistent with many of its peers). If changes in the economic environment or actual experience would cause material revisions to future estimates, these assumptions are updated (unlocked) in an interim quarter. AFG’s unlocking of the actuarial assumptions underlying its annuity operations resulted in a net charge of $46 million in 2020 compared to $1 million in 2019.
AFG’s annuity operations contributed $362 million in GAAP pretax earnings in 2019 compared to $361 million in 2018, an increase of $1 million. This slight increase in AFG’s GAAP annuity segment results for 2019 compared 2018 is due primarily to the positive impact of strong market performance in the 2019 period, the unfavorable impact of the decline in the stock market in 2018 and higher unlocking charges in the 2018 period, offset by the unfavorable impact of significantly lower than anticipated interest rates on the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs in 2019 compared to the favorable impact of higher than anticipated interest rates in 2018. In addition to the fourth quarter detailed review in 2018, AFG unlocked its assumptions for option costs and interest rates in the second quarter of 2018 due to continued higher FIA option costs (resulting primarily from higher than expected risk-free rates). AFG’s unlocking of the actuarial assumptions underlying its annuity operations resulted in a net charge of $1 million in 2019 compared to $31 million in 2018.
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core earnings before income taxes from its annuity operations for 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions):
(a)As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” beginning with the second quarter of 2019, unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs are considered non-core earnings (losses). In addition, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts are considered non-core earnings (losses). The impact of these items are shown aggregated as non-core annuity earnings (losses) and excluded from the income statement line items in the table above for 2020 and 2019, respectively:
•Policy charges and other miscellaneous income - $5 million unfavorable impact in 2020 and $1 million favorable in 2019.
•Annuity benefits - unfavorable impact of $140 million in 2020 and $11 million in 2019.
•Acquisition expenses - unfavorable impact on the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs of $37 million in 2020 and $26 million in 2019.
•Other expenses - unfavorable impact of $6 million in 2020.
(b)Details of the components of annuity benefits are provided below.
Annuity earnings before income taxes were $359 million in 2020 compared to $398 million in 2019, a decrease of $39 million (10%). As discussed under “Results of Operations - General,” beginning with the second quarter of 2019, unlocking, changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs are considered non-core earnings (losses). In addition, the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts are considered non-core earnings (losses). For 2020, the annuity segment’s core earnings before income taxes excludes $188 million in pretax losses related to these items. Since annuity core earnings for the first quarter of 2019 and prior periods were not adjusted, the annuity segment’s core earnings before income taxes for 2019 includes the $11 million unfavorable impact from changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of those FIAs in the first quarter of 2019 and the full-year results for 2018 include the $48 million unfavorable impact from these items. Excluding the $11 million unfavorable impact of these items in the first quarter of 2019, annuity core net operating earnings decreased $50 million in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting lower income from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs and the impact of lower short-term interest rates on investment income in 2020, partially offset by higher gains on equity index call options in excess of policyholder index credits, lower other expenses, higher than expected persistency and a reduction in the cost of funds due to renewal rate actions taken by AFG. Excluding the unfavorable impact of these items in the first quarter of 2019 and full-year 2018, annuity core earnings before income taxes were $409 million for both 2019 and 2018 reflecting growth in the business, offset by the impact of lower investment yields and higher renewal option costs. The
table below highlights the impact of reinsurance, unlocking, changes in the fair value of derivatives and other impacts of the changes in the stock market and interest rates on annuity segment results (dollars in millions):
Annuity benefits consisted of the following (dollars in millions):
Because fluctuations in interest rates and the stock market, among other factors, can cause volatility in annuity benefits expense related to FIAs that can be inconsistent with the long-term economics of the FIA business, management believes that including the actual cost of the equity options purchased in the FIA business and excluding unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs provides investors with a better view of the true cost of funds in the business and a more comparable measure to the cost of funds reported by its peers. The cost of the equity options included in AFG’s cost of funds is the net purchase price of the option contracts amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the contracts, which is generally one year. The following table reconciles AFG’s non-GAAP cost of funds measure to total GAAP annuity benefits expense (in millions):
See “Annuity Unlocking” below for a discussion of the impact that the unlocking of actuarial assumptions had on annuity benefits expense.
Net Spread on Fixed Annuities (excludes variable annuity earnings)
The table below (dollars in millions) details the components of the spreads for AFG’s fixed annuity operations (including fixed-indexed and variable-indexed annuities):
(*)Excluding the impact of reinsurance, unlocking, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs, and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on annuity benefits and the related impact on the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs.
Annuity Net Investment Income
Net investment income in 2020 was $1.70 billion compared to $1.79 billion in 2019, a decrease of $93 million (5%). The overall yield earned on investments in AFG’s annuity operations, calculated as net investment income divided by average investment balances (at amortized cost), decreased by 0.36 percentage points to 4.31% from 4.67% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in net investment income and the net investment yield between periods reflects the negative impact of lower earnings from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs, and the impact of the run-off of higher yielding investments and lower short-term interest rates. AFG’s annuity segment recorded $64 million in earnings from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs in 2020 compared to $110 million in 2019, a decrease of $46 million (42%). The annualized yield earned on these partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs was 4.8% in 2020 compared to 9.7% in 2019.
Net investment income in 2019 was $1.79 billion compared to $1.64 billion in 2018, an increase of $154 million (9%). This increase reflects the growth in AFG’s annuity business, partially offset by the impact of lower investment yields. The overall yield earned on investments in AFG’s annuity operations decreased by 0.06 percentage points to 4.67% from 4.73% in 2019 compared to 2018. This decrease in net investment yield reflects lower yields on partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs.
Annuity Cost of Funds
Cost of funds for 2020 was $961 million compared to $982 million for 2019, a decrease of $21 million (2%). This decrease reflects a reduction in the cost of funds as a percentage of average annuity benefits accumulated due to offering lower renewal crediting rates (index participation) on option costs. The average cost of policyholder funds, calculated as cost of funds divided by average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, decreased 0.11 percentage points to 2.44% from 2.55% in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting a reduction in the cost of funds as a percentage of average annuity benefits accumulated due to the impact of lower crediting rates (index participation) on both new sales (initial rates) and in force business (renewal rates).
Cost of funds for 2019 was $982 million compared to $863 million for 2018, an increase of $119 million (14%). This increase reflects growth in the annuity business and higher renewal option costs. The average cost of policyholder funds increased 0.06 percentage points to 2.55% from 2.49% in 2019 compared to 2018 reflecting higher renewal option costs.
The following table provides details of AFG’s interest credited and other cost of funds (in millions):
Other Annuity Benefits, Net of Guaranteed Withdrawal Benefit Fees
Other annuity benefits, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees excluding the impact of reinsurance, unlocking and the stock market and interest rates were $51 million in 2020 and $54 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $3 million (6%) in 2020 compared to 2019. As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, these net expenses decreased 0.01 percentage points to 0.13% in 2020 from 0.14% in 2019.
Other annuity benefits, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees excluding the impact of unlocking and the stock market and interest rates were $54 million in 2019 and $49 million in 2018, representing an increase of $5 million (10%) in 2019 compared to 2018. As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, these net expenses decreased 0.01 percentage points to 0.14% in 2019 from 0.15% in 2018.
In addition to interest credited to policyholders’ accounts and the change in fair value of derivatives related to fixed-indexed annuities, annuity benefits expense also includes the following expenses (in millions, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees):
As discussed under “Annuity Benefits Accumulated” in Note A - “Accounting Policies” to the financial statements, guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserves are accrued for and modified using assumptions similar to those used in establishing and amortizing deferred policy acquisition costs. In addition, the guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserve
related to FIAs can be inversely impacted by the calculated FIA embedded derivative reserve as the value to policyholders of the guaranteed withdrawal benefits decreases when the benefit of stock market participation increases. As shown in the table above, the impact of reinsurance and changes in the stock market and interest rates on FIAs increased AFG’s guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserve by $56 million in 2020 compared to $14 million in 2019. This $42 million (300%) increase was the primary cause of the $39 million overall increase in other annuity benefits, net of guaranteed withdrawal fees in 2020 compared to 2019.
The change in the stock market and interest rates increased AFG’s guaranteed withdrawal benefit reserve by $14 million in 2019 compared to $83 million 2018. This $69 million (83%) decrease was the primary cause of the $64 million overall decrease in other annuity benefits, net of guaranteed withdrawal benefit fees in 2019 compared to 2018.
See “Annuity Unlocking” below for a discussion of the impact that the unlocking of actuarial assumptions had on annuity benefits expense.
Annuity Net Interest Spread
AFG’s net interest spread decreased 0.24 percentage points to 1.74% from 1.98% in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the negative impact of lower earnings from partnerships and similar investments and AFG-managed CLOs in 2020 and lower investment yields. Features included in current annuity product offerings allow AFG to achieve its desired profitability at a lower net interest spread than historical product offerings. As a result, AFG expects its net interest spread to narrow in the future.
AFG’s net interest spread decreased 0.11 percentage points to 1.98% in 2019 from 2.09% in 2018 due primarily to higher renewal option costs and lower investment yields.
Annuity Policy Charges and Other Miscellaneous Income
Excluding the $5 million unlocking charge in 2020 and the $1 million favorable impact of unlocking in 2019 related to unearned revenue, annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income, which consist primarily of surrender charges, amortization of deferred upfront policy charges (unearned revenue) and equity index call option proceeds received at maturity that are not passed to policyholders through index credits due to surrenders, were $67 million in 2020 compared to $52 million in 2019, an increase of $15 million (29%), reflecting higher gains on equity index call options in excess of policyholder index credits. Excluding the impact of unlocking charges related to unearned revenue, annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income as a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated increased 0.03 percentage points to 0.14% in 2020 from 0.11% in 2019.
Excluding the $1 million favorable impact of unlocking in 2019 and $1 million unlocking charge in 2018 related to unearned revenue, annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income were $52 million in 2019 compared to $60 million in 2018, a decrease of $8 million (13%). Excluding the impact of unlocking charges related to unearned revenue, annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income as a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated decreased 0.04 percentage points to 0.11% in 2019 from 0.15% in 2018.
See “Annuity Unlocking” below for a discussion of the impact that the unlocking of actuarial assumptions had on annuity policy charges and other miscellaneous income.
Annuity Acquisition Expenses
In addition to the impact of unlocking, the following table illustrates the acceleration/deceleration of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (“DPAC”) resulting from reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under option costs (in millions):
Annuity acquisition expenses excluding reinsurance, unlocking and the acceleration/deceleration of the amortization resulting from changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under option costs were $265 million for 2020 compared to $256 million for 2019, an increase of $9 million (4%), reflecting growth in the year-over-year average of fixed annuity benefits accumulated.
Annuity acquisitions expenses excluding unlocking and the acceleration/deceleration of the amortization resulting from changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under option costs were $256 million for 2019 compared to $242 million for 2018, an increase of $14 million (6%), reflecting growth in the annuity business.
See “Annuity Unlocking” below for a discussion of the impact that the unlocking of actuarial assumptions had on annuity and supplemental insurance acquisition expenses. Unanticipated spread compression, decreases in the stock market, adverse mortality experience, and higher than expected lapse rates could lead to future write-offs of DPAC or present value of future profits on business in force of companies acquired (“PVFP”).
The negative impact of significantly lower than anticipated interest rates during both 2020 and 2019 on the fair value of derivatives and other liabilities related to FIAs and the negative impact of reinsurance in the fourth quarter of 2020 resulted in a deceleration of the amortization of DPAC. In contrast, the positive impact of higher than anticipated interest rates during 2018 on the fair value of derivatives and other liabilities related to FIAs resulted in a partially offsetting acceleration of the amortization of DPAC.
The table below illustrates the impact of reinsurance, unlocking and the estimated impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives related to fixed-indexed annuities and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on FIAs on annuity acquisition expenses as a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated:
Annuity Other Expenses
Annuity other expenses were $126 million in 2020 compared to $139 million in 2019, a decrease of $13 million (9%) reflecting expense reimbursement related to reinsurance and lower expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Annuity other expenses were $139 million in 2019 compared to $131 million in 2018, an increase of $8 million (6%) reflecting growth in the annuity business. Annuity other expenses represent primarily general and administrative expenses, as well as selling and issuance expenses that are not deferred. As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, these expenses decreased 0.04 percentage points to 0.31% in 2020 from 0.35% in 2019 and decreased 0.02 percentage points in 2019 from 0.37% in 2018.
Change in Fair Value of Derivatives Related to Fixed-Indexed (Including Variable-Indexed) Annuities and Other Impacts of Changes in the Stock Market and Interest Rates on FIAs
AFG’s fixed-indexed (including variable-indexed) annuities provide policyholders with a crediting rate tied, in part, to the performance of an existing stock market or other financial index. AFG attempts to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of these products through the purchase and sale of call and put options on the appropriate index. AFG’s strategy is designed so that the net change in the fair value of the call option assets and put option liabilities will generally offset the economic change in the net liability from the index participation. Both the index-based component of the annuities (an embedded derivative) and the related call and put options are considered derivatives that must be adjusted for changes in fair value through earnings each period. The fair values of these derivatives are impacted by actual and expected stock market performance and interest rates as well as other factors. For a list of other factors impacting the fair value of the embedded derivative component of AFG’s annuity benefits accumulated, see Note D - “Fair Value Measurements” to the financial statements. Fluctuations in certain of these factors, such as changes in interest rates and the performance of the stock market, are not economic in nature for the current reporting period, but rather impact the timing of reported results.
As discussed above under “Other Annuity Benefits, Net of Guaranteed Withdrawal Benefit Fees” and “Annuity Acquisition Expenses,” the periodic accounting for DPAC and guaranteed withdrawal benefits related to FIAs is also impacted by changes in the stock market and interest rates. These impacts may be temporary in nature and not necessarily indicative of the long-term performance of the FIA business. The table below highlights the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and the other impacts of the stock market and interest rates (excluding the impact of unlocking) over or under the cost of the equity index options (discussed above) on earnings before income taxes for the annuity segment (dollars in millions):
During 2020, the negative impact of significantly lower than anticipated interest rates and the amortization of the deferred loss related to the annuity block reinsurance agreement entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other reinsurance impacts reduced the annuity segment’s earnings before income taxes (excluding unlocking) by $142 million compared to the $46 million negative impact of the stock market and interest rates (excluding unlocking) on annuity earnings before income taxes for 2019, an increase of $96 million (209%). In 2019, the negative impact of significantly lower than anticipated interest rates was partially offset by the positive impact of strong stock market performance. In 2018, the positive impact of higher than expected interest rates was more than offset by higher interest on the embedded derivative, the negative impact of higher than expected option costs and significantly lower stock market performance. As a percentage of average fixed annuity benefits accumulated, the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options purchased to mitigate the risk in the indexed-based component of those FIAs in 2020 was a net expense (excluding unlocking) of 0.36%, 0.12% and 0.04% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The following table provides analysis of the primary factors impacting the change in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and the other impacts of the stock market and interest rates (excluding the impact of unlocking) on the accounting for FIAs over or under the cost of the equity index options discussed above on a net of reinsurance basis. Each factor is presented net of the estimated related impact on amortization of DPAC (dollars in millions).
(*) The $47 million loss from the impact of reinsurance reflects the amortization of the deferred loss from the annuity block reinsurance transaction entered into in the fourth quarter of 2020, impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs and higher index credits paid to Commonwealth compared to the option cost reimbursements received from Commonwealth.
See “Annuity Unlocking” below for a discussion of the impact that the unlocking of actuarial assumptions had on the change in the fair value of the embedded derivative and other annuity liabilities.
Annuity Net Spread Earned on Fixed Annuities
AFG’s net spread earned on fixed annuities excluding the impact of reinsurance, unlocking, changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates over or under option costs decreased 0.17 percentage points to 0.91% in 2020 from 1.08% in 2019 due primarily to the 0.24 percentage points decrease in AFG’s net interest spread discussed above. AFG’s overall net spread earned on fixed annuities decreased 0.53 percentage points to 0.43% in 2020 from 0.96% in 2019 due to the decrease in AFG’s net interest spread, the impact of reinsurance and changes in the fair value of derivatives and other impacts of the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs discussed above and the impact of unlocking discussed below under “Annuity Unlocking.”
AFG’s net spread earned on fixed annuities excluding the impact of unlocking, changes in the fair value of derivatives related to FIAs and other impacts of changes in the stock market and interest rates over or under option costs decreased 0.12 percentage points to 1.08% in 2019 from 1.20% in 2018 due primarily to the 0.11 percentage point decrease in AFG’s net interest spread discussed above. AFG’s overall net spread earned on fixed annuities decreased 0.11 percentage points to 0.96% in 2019 from 1.07% in 2018 due to the decrease in AFG’s net interest spread, the impact of changes in the fair value of derivatives and other impacts of the stock market and interest rates on the accounting for FIAs discussed above, partially offset by the impact of the unlocking of actuarial assumptions discussed below under “Annuity Unlocking.”
Annuity Benefits Accumulated
Annuity premiums received and benefit payments are recorded as increases or decreases in annuity benefits accumulated rather than as revenue and expense. Increases in this liability for interest credited and other benefits are charged to expense and decreases for surrender and other policy charges are credited to other income.
For certain products, annuity benefits accumulated also includes reserves for accrued persistency and premium bonuses, excess benefits expected to be paid on future deaths and annuitizations (“EDAR”) and guaranteed withdrawal benefits. Annuity benefits accumulated also includes amounts advanced from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati. The following table is a progression of AFG’s annuity benefits accumulated liability for 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
Statutory Annuity Premiums
AFG’s annuity operations generated gross statutory premiums of $4.09 billion in 2020, $4.96 billion in 2019 and $5.41 billion in 2018, a decrease of $873 million (18%) in 2020 compared to 2019 and a decrease of $447 million (8%) in 2019 compared to 2018. The following table summarizes AFG’s annuity sales (dollars in millions):
Management attributes the 18% decrease in gross annuity premiums in 2020 compared to 2019 to the lower market interest rate environment. In response to the continued drop in market interest rates during 2019 and 2020, AFG lowered crediting rates on several products, which has slowed annuity sales compared to 2019 and 2018 levels. In addition, many of the restrictions from the COVID-19 pandemic impact the ability of agents to conduct business in the same manner as usual.
Management attributes the 8% decrease in annuity premiums in 2019 compared to 2018 to the lower market interest rate environment.
Annuity Unlocking
AFG monitors the major actuarial assumptions underlying its annuity operations throughout the year and conducts detailed reviews (“unlocking”) of its assumptions annually. Beginning with the third quarter of 2019, AFG moved its unlocking from the fourth quarter to the third quarter and expects to continue to conduct the annual review in the third quarter of each year (consistent with many of its peers). If changes in the economic environment or actual experience would cause material revisions to future estimates, these assumptions are updated (unlocked) in an interim period.
The unlocking of the major actuarial assumptions underlying AFG’s annuity operations resulted in net charges related to its annuity business of $46 million, $1 million and $31 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which impacted AFG’s financial statements as follows (in millions):
The net charge from unlocking annuity assumptions in 2020 is due primarily to the unfavorable impact related to lower expected future investment income resulting from a decrease to the long-term interest rate assumptions and the unfavorable impact related to changes in assumed persistency outside the surrender period on policies without guaranteed withdrawal benefits, partially offset by the favorable impact of lowering projected FIA option costs, including anticipated renewal rate actions. For the 2020 unlocking, reinvestment rate assumptions are based primarily on the expectation that the 7-year U.S. Treasury rate will increase to 2.45% and the 10-year U.S. Treasury rate will increase to 2.75% over time. For the unlocking in the third quarter of 2020, AFG assumed a net reinvestment rate (net of default and expense assumptions) of 3.08% in 2021, grading up ratably to an ultimate net reinvestment rate of 4.58% in 2031 and beyond.
The net charge from unlocking annuity assumptions in 2019 is due primarily to the unfavorable impacts of a decrease in projected net interest spreads on in force business (due primarily to lower than previously anticipated reinvestment rates and the impact of lower than previously anticipated interest rates on floating rate investments) and higher assumed persistency in certain blocks of business, offset by lowering projected FIA option costs, including anticipated renewal rate actions.
In addition to the $4 million net charge from the periodic review of annuity assumptions in the fourth quarter of 2018, AFG recorded a $27 million net unlocking charge in the second quarter of 2018 due primarily to the unfavorable impact of higher projected option costs, partially offset by the favorable impact of an increase in projected net interest spreads on in force business (due primarily to higher than previously anticipated reinvestment rates).
Annuity Earnings before Income Taxes Reconciliation
The following table reconciles the net spread earned on AFG’s fixed annuities to overall annuity pretax earnings for 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
(*)Net investment income (as a % of investments) of 4.31%, 4.67% and 4.73% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, multiplied by the difference between average fixed annuity investments (at amortized cost) and average fixed annuity benefits accumulated in each period.
Holding Company, Other and Unallocated - Results of Operations
AFG’s net GAAP pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $219 million in 2020 compared to $190 million in 2019, an increase of $29 million (15%). AFG’s net core pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $189 million in 2020 compared to $174 million in 2019, an increase of $15 million (9%).
AFG’s net GAAP pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $190 million in 2019 compared to $165 million in 2018, an increase of $25 million (15%). AFG’s net core pretax loss outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments (excluding realized gains and losses) totaled $174 million in 2019 compared to $156 million in 2018, an increase of $18 million (12%).
The following table details AFG’s GAAP and core loss before income taxes from operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments in 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions):
(a)Excludes pretax non-core long-term care loss recognition charge of $4 million in 2020.
(b)Excludes pretax non-core special A&E charges of $21 million, $11 million and $9 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and a pretax non-core loss on retirement of debt of $5 million in both 2020 and 2019.
Holding Company and Other - Life, Accident and Health Premiums, Benefits and Acquisition Expenses
AFG’s run-off long-term care and life insurance operations recorded net earned premiums of $19 million and related benefits and acquisition expenses of $44 million in 2020 (excluding the loss recognition charge described below) compared to net earned premiums of $22 million and related benefits and acquisition expenses of $41 million in 2019. The $4 million (11%) increase in life, accident and health benefits reflects lower policyholder lapses in the run-off life insurance business in 2020 compared to 2019.
AFG’s run-off long-term care and life insurance operations recorded net earned premiums of $22 million and related benefits and acquisition expenses of $41 million in 2019 compared to net earned premiums of $24 million and related benefits and acquisition expenses of $46 million in 2018. The $4 million (10%) decrease in life, accident and health benefits reflects lower claims in both the run-off life and run-off long-term care insurance businesses in 2019 compared to 2018.
Holding Company and Other - Net Investment Income
AFG recorded net investment income on investments held outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments of $32 million, $43 million and $25 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The $11 million (26%) decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 and the $18 million (72%) increase in 2019 compared to 2018 is due primarily to the impact of the stock market performance on a small portfolio of securities that are carried at fair value through net investment
income. These securities increased in value by $5 million and $13 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and decreased in value by $4 million in 2018.
Holding Company and Other - P&C Fees and Related Expenses
Summit, a workers’ compensation insurance subsidiary, collects fees from a small group of unaffiliated insurers for providing underwriting, policy administration and claims services. In addition, certain of AFG’s property and casualty insurance businesses collect fees from customers for ancillary services such as workplace safety programs and premium financing. In 2020, AFG collected $67 million in fees for these services compared to $69 million in both 2019 and 2018. Management views this fee income, net of the $46 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, in expenses incurred to generate such fees, as a reduction in the cost of underwriting its property and casualty insurance policies. Consistent with internal management reporting, these fees and the related expenses are netted and recorded as a reduction of commissions and other underwriting expenses in AFG’s segmented results.
Holding Company and Other - Annuity Segment Option Gains
As discussed under “Annuity Segment - Results of Operations,” AFG purchases and sells equity index options to mitigate the risk in the index-based component of its FIAs. In evaluating the performance of the annuity business, management views the cost of the equity options as a better measurement of the true expenses of the annuity segment as compared to the GAAP accounting for these options as derivatives because any proceeds at expiration from the options generally are passed to policyholders through index credits. On occasion, policyholders surrender their annuity prior to receiving the index credit, which results in any option exercise proceeds being retained by AFG. For internal management reporting, AFG views these “option gains” as miscellaneous (other) income rather than as a component of annuity benefits expense. Consistent with internal management reporting, these option gains are reclassified from annuity benefits to other income in AFG’s segmented results. In 2020, 2019 and 2018, AFG had $33 million, $12 million and $18 million, respectively, in such option gains.
Holding Company and Other - Other Income
Other income in the table above includes $15 million in both 2020 and 2019 and $16 million in 2018, in management fees paid to AFG by the AFG-managed CLOs (AFG’s consolidated managed investment entities). The management fees are eliminated in consolidation - see the other income line in the Consolidated MIEs column under “Results of Operations - Segmented Statement of Earnings.” Excluding amounts eliminated in consolidation, AFG recorded other income outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments of $12 million in 2020 and $13 million in both 2019 and 2018.
Holding Company and Other - Other Expenses
Excluding the non-core special A&E charges, the non-core loss on retirement of debt and the non-core run-off long-term care loss recognition charge discussed below, AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments recorded other expenses of $135 million in 2020 compared to $158 million in 2019, a decrease of $23 million (15%). This decrease reflects lower holding company expenses related to employee benefit plans that are tied to stock market performance and lower expenses associated with certain incentive compensation plans in 2020 compared to 2019.
Excluding the non-core special A&E charges and the non-core loss on retirement of debt discussed below, AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments recorded other expenses of $158 million in 2019 compared to $126 million in 2018, an increase of $32 million (25%). This increase reflects a $3 million charitable donation in 2019 and higher holding company expenses related to employee benefit plans that are tied to stock market performance in 2019 compared to 2018, partially offset by a $5 million charge to increase liabilities related to the environmental exposures of AFG’s former railroad and manufacturing operations in 2018.
Holding Company and Other - Interest Charges on Borrowed Money
AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments recorded interest expense of $88 million in 2020, $68 million in 2019 and $62 million in 2018. The $20 million (29%) increase in interest expense in 2020 compared to 2019 and the $6 million (10%) increase in interest expense in 2019
compared to 2018 reflect higher average indebtedness. The following table details the principal amount of AFG’s long-term debt balances as of December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (dollars in millions):
The increase in interest expense in 2020 compared to 2019 and in 2019 compared to 2018 reflect the following financing transactions completed by AFG between January 1, 2018 and December 31, 2020:
•Issued $125 million of 5.875% Subordinated Debentures in March 2019
•Issued $200 million of 5.125% Subordinated Debentures in December 2019
•Redeemed $150 million of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures in December 2019
•Issued $300 million of 5.25% Senior Notes in April 2020
•Issued $150 million of 5.625% Subordinated Debentures in May 2020
•Issued $200 million of 4.50% Subordinated Debentures in September 2020
•Redeemed $150 million of 6% Subordinated Debentures in November 2020
Holding Company and Other - Special A&E Charges
As a result of the comprehensive external study and in-depth internal reviews of A&E exposures discussed under “Uncertainties - Asbestos and Environmental-related (“A&E”) Insurance Reserves,” AFG’s holding companies and other operations outside of its property and casualty insurance and annuity segments recorded pretax non-core special charges of $21 million in 2020, $11 million in 2019 and $9 million in 2018 to increase liabilities related to the A&E exposures of AFG’s former railroad and manufacturing operations. The charges in 2020, 2019 and 2018 are due to relatively small movements across several sites that primarily reflect changes in the scope and costs of investigation and an increase in estimated ongoing operation and maintenance costs. AFG has also increased its reserve for asbestos and toxic substance exposures arising out of these operations. Total charges recorded to increase liabilities for A&E exposures of AFG’s former railroad and manufacturing operations (included in other expenses) were $28 million in 2020, $19 million in 2019 and $21 million in 2018.
Holding Company and Other - Loss on Retirement of Debt
In November 2020, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6% Subordinated Debentures due in 2055 and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million. In December 2019, AFG redeemed its $150 million outstanding principal amount of 6-1/4% Subordinated Debentures due in 2054 at par value and wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million.
Holding Company and Other - Long-Term Care Loss Recognition Charge
The $4 million pretax loss recognition charge in 2020 was due primarily to the unfavorable impact related to lower expected future investment income resulting from a decrease in the long-term interest rate assumptions.
Consolidated Realized Gains (Losses) on Securities
AFG’s consolidated realized gains (losses) on securities were net gains of $289 million in 2020 compared to $287 million in 2019, an increase of $2 million (1%). AFG’s consolidated realized gains (losses) on securities were net gains of $287 million in 2019 compared to net losses of $266 million in 2018, a change of $553 million (208%). Realized gains (losses) on securities consisted of the following (in millions):
The $475 million net realized gains from disposals in 2020 includes gains of $415 million on investments disposed of in AFG’s 2020 annuity block reinsurance transaction. See Note P - “Insurance” to the financial statements. The $96 million net realized loss from the change in the fair value of equity securities in 2020 includes losses of $57 million on investments in natural gas companies, $25 million on investments in energy companies, $19 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $18 million on real estate investment trusts and $17 million on investments in media companies. These losses were partially offset by gains of $17 million on investments in healthcare companies and $16 million on investments in technology companies. The $46 million of impairment allowance expense in 2020 includes $21 million in charges related to other structured securities, $13 million in charges related to third-party collateralized loan obligations and $12 million in charges related to corporate bonds and other fixed maturities.
The $278 million net realized gain from the change in the fair value of equity securities in 2019 includes gains of $97 million on investments in banks and financing companies, $36 million from investments in media companies, $32 million from investments in technology companies, $21 million on investments in asset management companies and $21 million on insurance companies. AFG’s impairment charges in 2019 include $17 million in charges on third-party collateralized loan obligations and $11 million on corporate bonds.
The $262 million net realized loss from the change in the fair value of equity securities in 2018 includes losses of $92 million on banks and financing companies, $31 million on real estate investment trusts, $30 million on energy exploration and production companies and $27 million on asset management companies. AFG’s impairment charges on securities in 2018 all relate to fixed maturities. Approximately $19 million of impairment charges were taken on corporate bonds and $6 million were taken on residential MBS.
Consolidated Realized Gains (Losses) on Subsidiaries
In the third quarter of 2020, AFG reached a definitive agreement to sell GAI Holding Bermuda and its subsidiaries, comprising the legal entities that own Neon, to RiverStone Holdings Limited. The transaction closed in the fourth quarter of 2020. AFG recorded $111 million in non-core losses related to the runoff of the Neon business in 2020, which included a $23 million gain on the sale of the business. In conjunction with the sale, AFG recognized a tax benefit of $72 million, resulting in an overall net non-core, after-tax loss of $39 million from the Neon exited lines in 2020. See Note B - “Acquisitions and Sale of Businesses” to the financial statements.
Consolidated Income Taxes
AFG’s consolidated provision for income taxes was $127 million in 2020 compared to $239 million in 2019, a decrease of $112 million (47%). AFG’s consolidated provision for income taxes was $239 million in 2019 compared to $122 million in 2018, an increase of $117 million (96%). See Note M - “Income Taxes” to the financial statements for an analysis of items affecting AFG’s effective tax rate.
Consolidated Noncontrolling Interests
AFG’s consolidated net earnings (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests was a net loss of $11 million in 2020 compared to $28 million in 2019, a decrease of $17 million (61%). AFG’s consolidated net earnings (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests was a net loss of $28 million in 2019 compared to $13 million in 2018, an increase of $15 million (115%). Each period reflects losses at Neon, AFG’s United-Kingdom-based Lloyd’s insurer, which was sold on December 31, 2020. See Note B - “Acquisitions and Sale of Businesses” to the financial statements.
Net losses attributable to noncontrolling interests in 2019 includes $18 million related to the $76 million non-core charge for costs associated with AFG’s plans to exit the Lloyd’s of London insurance market in 2020. See “Neon exited lines” under “Property and Casualty Insurance Segment - Results of Operations” for the quarters ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
RECENTLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” to the financial statements for a discussion of accounting guidance adopted on January 1, 2020, which provides a new credit loss model for determining credit-related impairments for financial instruments measured at amortized cost (mortgage loans, premiums receivable and reinsurance recoverables) and requires an entity to estimate the credit losses expected over the life of an exposure or pool of exposures.
See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Leases” and Note K - “Leases” to the financial statements for a discussion of accounting guidance adopted on January 1, 2019, which requires entities that lease assets for terms longer than one year to recognize the assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by those leases on the balance sheet based on the present value of cash flows.
See Note A - “Accounting Policies - Investments” to the financial statements for a discussion of accounting guidance adopted on January 1, 2018, which, among other things, requires equity investments that are not accounted for under the equity method of accounting to be measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in net earnings.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS TO BE ADOPTED
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-12, Financial Services - Insurance: Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Contracts, which changes the assumptions used to measure the liability for future policy benefits for traditional and limited pay contracts (e.g. life, accident and health benefits) from being locked in at inception to being updated at least annually and standardizes the liability discount rate to be used and updated each reporting period, requires the measurement of market risk benefits associated with deposit contracts (e.g. annuities) to be recorded at fair value, simplifies the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs to a constant level basis over the expected life of the related contracts and requires enhanced disclosures. AFG will be required to adopt this guidance effective January 1, 2023. See Note R - “Subsequent Event” to the financial statements regarding AFG’s definitive agreement to sell its annuity business (which includes AFG’s annuities and limited pay contracts) to Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, which is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021.