Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and certain information incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements within the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements included or incorporated by reference in this Annual Report, other than statements that are purely historical, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “seek,” “estimate,” “will,” “should,” “would,” “could,” “may” and similar expressions also identify forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements regarding our future operations, financial condition and prospects, operating results, revenues and earnings liquidity, our estimated income tax rate, unrecognized tax positions, amortization expenses, impact of recent accounting pronouncements, our cost management program, our acquisition strategy and our growth plans, expectations regarding our recent acquisitions, and the reasonableness of the carrying value related to specific financial assets and liabilities.
Our expectations, beliefs, objectives, intentions and strategies regarding future results are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from results contemplated by our forward-looking statements.
We urge you to carefully consider risks and uncertainties and review the additional disclosures we make concerning risks and uncertainties that may materially affect the outcome of our forward-looking statements and our future business and operating results, including those made in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as such risk factors may be amended, supplemented or superseded from time to time by other reports we file with the SEC. We assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an arrhythmia management company focused on improving the way cardiac arrhythmias are diagnosed and treated. Despite several decades of effort by the incumbents in this field, the clinical and economic challenges associated with arrhythmia treatment continue to be a huge burden for patients, providers and payors. We are committed to advancing the field of electrophysiology with a unique array of products and technologies which will enable more physicians to treat more patients more effectively and efficiently. Through internal product development, acquisitions and global partnerships, we have established a global sales presence delivering a broad portfolio of highly differentiated electrophysiology products. Our goal is to provide our customers with a complete solution for catheter-based treatment of cardiac arrhythmias in the geographic markets that we serve.
Our product portfolio includes novel access catheters, diagnostic and mapping catheters, ablation catheters, mapping and imaging consoles and accessories, as well as supporting algorithms and software programs. Our foundational and most highly differentiated product is our AcQMap imaging and mapping system. Our paradigm-shifting AcQMap System offers a novel approach to mapping the drivers and maintainers of arrhythmias with unmatched speed and precision. With the ability to rapidly and accurately identify ablation targets and to confirm both ablation success and procedural completion, we believe our AcQMap System addresses the primary unmet need in electrophysiology procedures today.
We were incorporated in the State of Delaware on March 25, 2011 and are headquartered in Carlsbad, California. Early versions of our AcQMap System and certain related accessory products have been used in the United States since May 2018 and Western Europe since July 2016 in a limited, pilot launch capacity, where our focus was on optimizing workflow and validating our value proposition. We fully commenced the launch of our commercial-grade console and software products in the first quarter of 2020. Critical to our launch were a series of recent strategic transactions and regulatory approvals, including: FDA 510(k) clearance and CE Mark of our second-generation AcQMap console and SuperMap software suite; the addition of an integrated family of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems to our product portfolio through our acquisition of Rhythm Xience, Inc., or Rhythm Xience; and the acquisition of our AcQBlate Force sensing product line from Biotronik. Since our full launch, we have continued to enhance our product portfolio and global presence by entering into bi-lateral distribution agreements with Biotronik in May 2020, which added a full suite of diagnostic and ablation catheters to our product portfolio and significantly expanded our international distribution and market development capabilities.
We market our electrophysiology products worldwide to hospitals and electrophysiologists that treat patients with arrhythmias. We have strategically developed a direct selling presence in the United States and select markets in Western Europe where cardiac ablation is a standard of care and third-party reimbursement is well-established. In these markets, we install our AcQMap console and workstation with customer accounts and then sell our disposable products to those accounts for use with our system. In other international markets, we leverage our partnership with Biotronik to install our AcQMap console and workstation with customer accounts and then to sell our disposable products to those accounts. Once an AcQMap console and workstation is established in a customer account, our revenue from that account becomes predominantly recurring in nature and derived from the sale of our portfolio of disposable products used with our system. Our currently marketed disposable products include access sheaths, transseptal crossing tools, diagnostic and mapping catheters, ablation catheters and accessories. We plan to leverage the geographically concentrated nature of procedure volumes and the recurring nature of our sales to drive an increasingly efficient commercial model.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated revenue of $8.5 million and $2.8 million, respectively, of which 43% and 74%, respectively, was from customers located outside of the United States. Since our inception, we have generated significant losses. Our net loss was $102.0 million and $97.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (which included $15.0 million in payments attributable to the product line we acquired from Biotronik pursuant to the Biotronik License Agreement), respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of $361.0 million and $259.0 million, respectively, and working capital of $129.5 million and $50.5 million, respectively. Prior to our IPO in August 2020, our operations were financed primarily by aggregate net proceeds from the sale of our convertible preferred stock and principal of our converted debt of $253.9 million, as well as other indebtedness.
We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization. We believe increasing the number of sales representatives and expanding our international marketing programs will help facilitate further adoption of our products among existing customer accounts as well as broaden awareness of our products to new accounts. We also expect to continue to make substantial investments in our ongoing clinical trials and in additional clinical trials that are designed to provide clinical evidence of the safety and effectiveness of our existing and future generations of products. We expect to continue to make investments in research and development and regulatory affairs to develop future generations of products based on our technology, supported with appropriate regulatory submissions. We may in the future seek to acquire or invest in additional businesses, products or technologies that we believe could complement or expand our portfolio, enhance our technical capabilities or otherwise offer growth opportunities. We will also incur costs as a public company that we have not previously incurred or have previously incurred at lower rates, including increased costs for employee-related expenses, director and officer insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees, fees to members of our board of directors and expenses for compliance with public-company reporting requirements under the Exchange Act and rules implemented by the SEC, as well as Nasdaq rules. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur substantial net losses and negative cash flows from operations for at least the next several years.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key business metric, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe that the following metric is representative of our current business. However, we anticipate this metric may change or may be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business grows and as we introduce new products.
Installed Base
Once an AcQMap console and workstation is established in a customer account, our revenue from that account becomes predominantly recurring in nature and derived from the sale of our portfolio of disposable products used with our system. We define our installed base as the cumulative number of AcQMap consoles and workstations placed into service at customer sites, all of which to date were originally placed without charge to the customer. Beginning in late 2019, we began to install our second-generation AcQMap console and workstation with customers under evaluation contracts. Under these evaluation contracts, we place our AcQMap console and workstation with customers for no upfront fee to the customer during the applicable evaluation period and seek to reach agreement with the customer for purchase of the console and workstation in the form of a contractual commitment to purchase a minimum amount of our disposable products or a cash purchase. Our total installed base as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is set forth in the table below:
Our net increase in installed base for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, exclusive of transfers between Acutus and Biotronik, is set forth in the table below:
Growth in our yearly installed base can fluctuate due to a number of factors, including the commercial effectiveness of our sales representatives and strategic partners such as Biotronik, and the procurement and budgeting cycles of many of our customers, especially those where unused funds may be forfeited or future budgets may be reduced if purchases are not made by their fiscal year end. We also believe the timing of installations has been impacted and will continue to be impacted by the timing of product introductions and transitions. In addition, the growth of our market in certain geographic regions and our continued efforts to service these regions impact unit volumes year to year. Finally, macroeconomic conditions may also impact timing of installations.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
There are a number of factors that have impacted, and we believe will continue to impact, or that we expect to impact, our results of operations and growth. These factors include:
•
Market Acceptance. The growth of our business will depend substantially on our ability to increase our installed base. Once an AcQMap console and workstation is established in a customer account, our revenue from that account becomes predominantly recurring in nature and is derived from the sale of our portfolio of disposable products used with our system. Our ability to increase our installed base will depend on our ability to gain broader acceptance of our AcQMap System by continuing to make physicians and other hospital staff aware of the benefits of the AcQMap System, thereby generating increased demand for system installations and the frequency of use of our disposable products. Although we are attempting to increase our installed base through our established relationships and focused sales efforts, we cannot provide assurance that our efforts will be successful.
•
Commercial Organization Size and Effectiveness. As of December 31, 2020, our commercial organization consisted of 78 individuals with substantial applicable medical device, sales and clinical experience, including sales managers, sales representatives and mappers. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our commercial organization by increasing the number of our sales representatives, sales managers and mappers, as well as by expanding our global marketing and training programs, to help facilitate further adoption of our products among existing and new customer accounts. The rate at which we grow our commercial organization and the speed at which newly hired personnel become effective can impact our revenue growth or our costs incurred in anticipation of such growth.
•
Strategic Partnerships and Acquisitions. We have in the past, and may in the future, enter into strategic partnerships and acquire complementary businesses, products or technologies. For example, we have entered into strategic partnerships with Innovative Health and Stereotaxis and, most recently, we entered into our Global Alliance for Electrophysiology with Biotronik in May 2020. In addition, we added an integrated family of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems to our product portfolio through our acquisition of Rhythm Xience in June 2019 and acquired our AcQBlate Force Sensing Ablation System from Biotronik in July 2019. Our strategic partnerships and acquisitions have helped us establish a global sales presence delivering a broad portfolio of highly differentiated electrophysiology products. Our ability to grow our revenue will depend substantially on our ability to leverage our strategic partnerships and acquisitions to achieve distribution at a global scale, broaden our product portfolio and enable and accelerate global connectivity.
•
Continued Investment in Innovation. Our business strategy relies significantly on innovation to develop and introduce new products and to differentiate our products from our competitors. In 2020, research and development continued to provide both new products as well as generational improvements to the current product lines through the release of five major versions of software, six disposables products including our first therapy device, and a significant improvement to our mapping system hardware. Additionally, research efforts evolved into development projects for advanced therapies, improved navigational accuracy, and enhanced mapping capabilities. We expect our research and development expenditures to increase as we make additional investments to support our growth strategies. We plan to increase our research and development expenditures with internal initiatives, as well as potentially licensing or acquiring technology from third parties. We also expect expenditures associated with our manufacturing organization to grow over time as production volume increases and we bring new products to market. Our internal and external investments will be focused on initiatives that we believe will offer the greatest opportunity for growth and profitability. With a significant investment in research and development, a strong focus on innovation and a well-managed innovation process, we believe we can continue to innovate and grow. Introducing additional, innovative products is also expected to help support our existing installed base and help drive demand for additional installations of our system. If, however, our future innovations are not successful in meeting customers’ needs or prove to be too costly relative to their perceived benefit, we may not be successful. Moreover, as cost of products sold, operating expenses and capital expenditures fluctuate over time, we may experience short-term, negative impacts to our results of operations and cash flows, but we are undertaking such investments in the belief that they will contribute to long-term growth.
•
Product and Geographic Mix; Timing. Our financial results, including our gross margins, may fluctuate from period to period due to a variety of factors, including: average selling prices; production volumes; the cost of direct materials; the timing of customer orders or medical procedures and the timing and number of system installations; the number of available selling days in a particular period, which can be impacted by a number of factors such as holidays or days of severe inclement weather in a particular geography; the mix of products sold and the geographic mix of where products are sold; the level of reimbursement available for our products; discounting practices; manufacturing costs; product yields; headcount; and cost-reduction strategies. For example, gross margins on the sale of our products by our direct selling organization in the United States and Western Europe are higher than gross margins on the sale of our products by Biotronik in other parts of the world. Moreover, gross margins on the sale of our proprietary products are generally higher than gross margins on the sale of products we source through our strategic partnerships with third parties. Future selling prices and gross margins for our products may fluctuate due to a variety of other factors, including the introduction by others of competing products or the attempted integration by third parties of capabilities similar to ours into their existing products. We aim to mitigate downward pressure on our selling prices by increasing the value proposition offered by our products through innovation. While we have not yet experienced significant seasonality in our results, it is not uncommon in our industry to experience seasonally weaker revenue during the summer months and end-of-year holiday season.
•
Regulatory Approvals/Clearances and Timing and Efficiency of New Product Introductions. We received CE Mark in December 2020 in Europe and are seeking FDA PMA approval for the use of our AcQBlate Force Sensing Ablation System in the United States, as well as regulatory clearance or approval of our other pipeline products in the United States and in international markets. Our ability to grow our revenue will depend on our obtaining necessary regulatory approvals or clearances for our products. In addition, as we introduce new products, we expect to build our inventory of components and finished goods in advance of sales, which may cause yearly fluctuations in our results of operations.
•
Competition. Our industry is intensely competitive, subject to rapid change and significantly affected by new product introductions and other market activities of industry participants. Our most significant competitors are large, well-capitalized companies. We must continue to successfully compete considering our competitors’ existing and future products and related pricing and their resources to successfully market to the physicians who could use our products. Publications of clinical results by us, our competitors and other third parties can also have a significant influence on whether, and the degree to which, we are able to gain market share and increase utilization of our products.
•
COVID-19 Pandemic. Beginning in early March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures imposed to contain this pandemic disrupted and are expected to continue to impact our business. For example, on March 19, 2020, the Executive Department of the State of California issued Executive Order N-33-20, ordering all individuals in the State of California to stay home or at their place of residence except as needed to maintain continuity of operations of the federal critical infrastructure sectors. Our primary operations are located in Carlsbad, California. As a result of such order, the majority of our employees have telecommuted, which may impact certain of our operations over the near term and long term. Moreover, beginning in March 2020, access to hospitals and other customer sites was restricted to essential personnel, which negatively impacted our ability to install our AcQMap consoles and workstations in new accounts and for our sales representatives and mappers to promote the use of our products with physicians. Moreover, hospitals and other therapeutic centers suspended many elective procedures, resulting in a significantly reduced volume of procedures using our products. In addition, all clinical trials in Europe were suspended with follow-ups for clinical trials done via telecom, and we believe enrollment timing in our planned clinical trials will be slowed due to COVID-19 driven delayed access to enrollment sites. As a result of the interruptions to our business due to COVID-19, we enacted a cash conservation program, which included delaying certain non-critical capital expenditures and other projects and implementing a hiring freeze, headcount reductions and temporary compensation reductions (through August 2020). The effects of the pandemic began to decrease in late April 2020 as electrophysiology labs began reopening and procedure volumes began increasing as compared to COVID-19 related low points in March 2020. Our IPO in August 2020 provided resources sufficient to restore compensation reductions to pre-COVID levels, as well as to restart hiring and capital expenditures in support of our growth. The second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic was initially observed negatively impacting electrophysiology procedural activity early during the fourth quarter of 2020 and we are continuing to see hospitals focusing on these patients and slowing elective procedures. We are again seeing the suspension of many elective procedures in many hospitals, resulting in reduced volume of procedures using our products. Access restrictions in certain hospitals have slowed our ability to install our AcQMap consoles and workstations in new accounts and for our sales representatives and mappers to promote the use of our products with physicians. The magnitude of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our productivity, results of operations and financial position, and its disruption to our business and our clinical programs and timelines, will depend, in part, on the length and severity of these restrictions and on our ability to conduct business in the ordinary course. Quarantines, shelter-in-place and similar government orders have also impacted, and may continue to impact, our third-party manufacturers and suppliers, and could in turn adversely impact the availability or cost of materials, which could disrupt our supply chain.
In addition, we may experience meaningful variability in our yearly revenue and gross profit/loss as a result of a number of factors, including, but not limited to: inventory write-offs and write-downs; costs, benefits and timing of new product introductions; the availability and cost of components and raw materials; and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Additionally, we may experience quarters in which our costs and operating expenses, in particular our research and development expenses, fluctuate depending on the stage and timing of product development.
While certain of these factors may present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for more information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of: (i) revenue from the sale of our disposable products; (ii) systems and; (iii) service/other revenue. In the United States and select markets in Western Europe where we have developed a direct selling presence, we install our AcQMap console and workstation with our customer accounts and then generate revenue from the sale of our disposable products to these accounts for use with our system. In other international markets, we leverage our partnership with Biotronik to install our AcQMap console and workstation with customer accounts and then generate revenue from Biotronik’s sale of our disposable products to these accounts for use with our system. Our currently marketed disposable products include access sheaths, transseptal crossing tools, diagnostic and mapping catheters, ablation catheters and accessories.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately 43% and 74%, respectively, of our sales were denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars, primarily in Euros and the British Pound Sterling. Our revenue is subject to fluctuation based on the foreign currency in which our products are sold.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Products Sold
Cost of products sold consist primarily of raw materials, direct labor, manufacturing overhead associated with the production and sale of our disposable products and, to a more limited extent, production and depreciation of our AcQMap console and workstation that we install with our customer accounts. We depreciate equipment over a three-year period. Cost of products sold also includes expenditures for warranty, field service, freight, royalties and inventory reserve provisions. We expect cost of products sold to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as our revenue increases.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs (including stock-based compensation) for personnel directly engaged in research and development activities, clinical trial expenses, equipment costs, materials costs, allocated rent and facilities costs and depreciation.
Research and development expenses related to possible future products are expensed as incurred. We also accrue and expense costs for activities associated with clinical trials performed by third parties as incurred. All other costs relative to setting up clinical trial sites are expensed as incurred. Clinical trial site costs related to patient enrollment are accrued as patients are entered into the trials.
Research and Development Expenses-License Acquired
In July 2019, we entered into the Biotronik License Agreement with Biotronik and VascoMed GmbH (collectively, the Biotronik Parties) for certain licenses of patents, technology, know-how rights and equipment (the Biotronik Asset Acquisition). In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 805, Business Combinations, the Biotronik Asset Acquisition was accounted for as an asset acquisition as substantially all of the $15.0 million in value transferred to Biotronik was allocated to intellectual property. On the acquisition date, the products licensed had not yet received regulatory approval and the intellectual property did not have an alternative use. Accordingly, the $15.0 million paid to Biotronik was immediately charged to research and development expenses-license acquired in our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Additional contingent milestone payments of up to $10.0 million, of which $2.0 million has been earned and accrued as of December 31, 2020, are to be made to the Biotronik Parties upon certain regulatory approvals and first commercial sale. In further consideration of the rights granted, beginning with our first commercial sale of the first force sensing ablation catheter within the licensed product line, we will also make per unit royalty payments. We have determined that the remaining $8.0 million contingent
milestone and royalty payments are not probable and estimable and therefore have not been recorded as a liability as of December 31, 2020. All $10.0 million of the contingent milestone and royalty payments were not probable and estimable and therefore were not recorded as a liability as of December 31, 2019. Upon regulatory approval in December 2020 of our force sensing ablation catheter in Europe, the $2.0 million milestone was capitalized and will be amortized, and the royalty payments are recorded as cost of products sold as sales of catheters are recognized.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs (including stock-based compensation) for personnel in sales, executive, finance and other administrative functions, allocated rent and facilities costs, legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting and consulting services, marketing costs and insurance costs.
In connection with our IPO, certain performance-based restricted stock awards vested as the completion of our IPO constituted the relevant performance condition. As a result, we recorded an incremental stock-based compensation charge of $3.8 million for the awards that vested upon the IPO as part of selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability and Embedded Derivative
We accounted for certain of our freestanding warrants to purchase shares of our common stock and preferred stock as liabilities at fair value. We accounted for certain features of our convertible notes issued in 2018 (which were converted into shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock in 2019) as an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation and separate accounting at fair value. On August 5, 2020, in connection with the registration statement relating to our IPO being declared effective, the warrants recorded as liabilities no longer meet the definition of a derivative. Accordingly, the fair value of the common and preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to stockholders’ equity (deficit) in the consolidated balance sheet.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
During 2019, we prepaid the entire principal amount of our loan under our loan and security agreement with Oxford Finance LLC, or the 2018 Term Loan. We recorded a loss on debt extinguishment for the write off of deferred financing fees, the prepayment penalty and related fees upon our prepayment of this loan.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates to our: (i) Credit Agreement with Orbimed Royalty Opportunities II, LP and Deerfield Private Design Fund II, L.P., or the 2019 Credit Agreement; (ii) 2018 Term Loan, which was repaid during 2019; (iii) convertible notes issued in 2018, or the 2018 Convertible Notes; and (iv) convertible notes issued in 2019, or the 2019 Convertible Notes. Our 2018 Convertible Notes and our 2019 Convertible Notes were converted into shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock during 2019.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes. The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
NMNot meaningful
(1)
The following tables sets forth our revenue for disposable, systems and service/other for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(2)
The following table sets forth the stock-based compensation expense included in our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
Revenue was $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $5.6 million, or 198%, was primarily attributable to a $3.5 million increase in purchase volume of our disposable products used in electrophysiology procedures as a result of a higher installed base, and $2.1 million of AcQMap systems sales.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Products Sold
Cost of products sold was $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $6.6 million, or 72%, was primarily attributable to increased revenue. Gross margin was (88)% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to (226)% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This improvement in gross margin was primarily attributable to increased revenue and higher production volumes.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $33.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $10.4 million, or 45%, was primarily attributable to $5.3 million in increased materials and supplies costs related to higher engineering project spending and $4.7 million in increased compensation and related costs from higher headcount.
Research and Development Expenses - License Acquired
Research and development expenses - license acquired were $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the Biotronik Asset Acquisition, where we acquired intellectual property. Since the acquired intellectual property had no alternative use and was for products that have not yet received regulatory approval, the intellectual property was immediately charged to research and development expenses - license acquired.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $26.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $23.5 million, or 88%, was primarily attributable to $15.2 million in increased compensation and related costs due to our investment in our commercial organization in support of our full commercial launch, $3.8 million of stock-based compensation for certain performance-based awards as the applicable performance conditions were achieved upon the completion of our IPO, $2.0 million in increased insurance costs in connection with our operations as a public company, and $1.3 million in increased consulting expenses.
Impairment of Property and Equipment
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an impairment of property and equipment related to the first generation of our AcQMap System that was no longer in service. The impairment is the result of an analysis that indicated it was probable the undiscounted cash flows derived from the assets would not exceed their book value during their remaining useful life.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively, for the increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration for the acquisition of Rhythm Xience.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense, net was $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease of $13.8 million, or 57%, was primarily attributable to $16.8 million in decreased interest expense primarily related to the 2019 Credit Agreement and 2018 Convertible Notes, partially offset by an increase of $3.6 million in the fair value of the warrant liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and we anticipate that we will incur significant losses for at least the next several years. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $139.8 million and $71.8 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net losses were $102.0 million and $97.0 million, respectively, and our net cash used in operating activities was $85.2 million and $56.0 million, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $361.0 million and $259.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Prior to our IPO in August 2020, our operations had been financed primarily by aggregate net proceeds from the sale of our convertible preferred stock and principal of our converted debt of $253.9 million, as well as other indebtedness. In June and July 2019, we completed an equity financing pursuant to which we issued 8,200,297 shares of Series D convertible preferred stock in a private placement. The Series D convertible preferred stock issuance was comprised of: (i) 4,091,819 shares at $16.67 per share for cash proceeds of $66.6 million, net of fees of $1.6 million; and (ii) 1,884,565 shares at $13.33 per share (including a 20% discount) for the conversion of our 2018 Convertible Notes (and related accrued interest) and 2,223,913 shares at $16.67 per share for the conversion of our 2019 Convertible Notes (and related accrued interest), in an aggregate amount of $68.5 million, including the fair value of the embedded derivative of $6.3 million relating to the 20% discount for the conversion of the 2018 Convertible Notes. On August 10, 2020, we issued 10,147,058 shares of common stock in our IPO, which included 1,323,529 shares of common stock issued upon the exercise in full by the underwriters of an option to purchase additional shares of our common stock, at the public offering price less underwriting discounts and commissions. The price to the public was $18.00 per share, for net proceeds to us of approximately $166.3 million.
Our future liquidity and capital funding requirements will depend on numerous factors, including:
•
our revenue growth;
•
our research and development efforts;
•
our sales and marketing activities;
•
our success in leveraging our strategic partnerships, including with Biotronik, as well as entrance into any other strategic partnerships or strategic transactions in the future;
•
our ability to raise additional funds to finance our operations;
•
the outcome, costs and timing of any clinical trial results for our current or future products;
•
the emergence and effect of competing or complementary products;
•
the availability and amount of reimbursement for procedures using our products;
•
our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
our ability to retain our current employees and the need and ability to hire additional management and sales, scientific and medical personnel;
•
the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing or other arrangements that we have or may establish;
•
debt service requirements;
•
the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies; and
•
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, investment in our commercial organization and related expenses, clinical research and development services, laboratory and related supplies, legal and other regulatory expenses, general administrative costs and working capital. In addition, we have acquired, and may in the future seek to acquire or invest in, additional businesses, products or technologies that we believe could complement or expand our portfolio, enhance our technical capabilities or otherwise offer growth opportunities. For example, in June 2019, we acquired Rhythm Xience, a medical device company specializing in the design and manufacture of transseptal crossing and steerable introducer systems, for $3.0 million in cash. The cash payment did not include the potential $17.0 million in earn out consideration to be paid based on the achievement of certain regulatory milestones and revenue milestones. In February 2020, we issued to the former owners of Rhythm Xience 119,993 shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock and paid them $2.5 million in connection with the regulatory and revenue milestones earned to date. In addition, pursuant to the Biotronik License Agreement, we paid Biotronik a $3.0 million upfront fee at the time the agreement was signed, as well as a technology transfer fee consisting of $7.0 million in cash in December 2019 and $5.0 million in shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock in February 2020. We are required to pay the Biotronik Parties up to $10.0 million, of which $2.0 million has been accrued as of December 31, 2020, upon the achievement of various regulatory and sales-related milestones, as well as unit-based royalties on any sales of force sensing catheters. We will also incur costs as a public company that we have not previously incurred or have previously incurred at lower rates.
With the closing of our IPO, our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are sufficient to fund operations for at least the next 12 months. However, we will need to raise additional funds through one or more of the following: issuance of additional debt, equity or both. Until such time, if ever, that we can generate revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our operations through equity or debt financings, which may not be available to us on the timing needed or on terms that we deem to be favorable. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable to maintain sufficient financial resources, our business, financial condition and results of operations will be materially and adversely affected. We may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product discovery and development activities or future commercialization efforts. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain the needed financing on acceptable terms or at all.
Debt Obligations
On May 20, 2019, we entered into the 2019 Credit Agreement. The 2019 Credit Agreement provided us with a senior term loan facility in aggregate principal amount of $70.0 million, of which we borrowed $40.0 million upon closing. Of the remaining $30.0 million, none is available for borrowing. The 2019 Credit Agreement bears interest per annum at 7.75% plus LIBOR for such interest period, and the principal amount of term loans outstanding under the 2019 Credit Agreement is due on May 20, 2024. The 2019 Credit Agreement can be prepaid but is subject to prepayment penalties. The 2019 Credit Agreement provides for final payment fees of an additional $4.6 million that are due upon prepayment, on the maturity date or upon acceleration.
Our obligations under the 2019 Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets, including our intellectual property, and is guaranteed by our subsidiary. The 2019 Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and restrictive covenants, including with respect to our ability to enter into fundamental transactions, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, pay any dividend or make any distributions to our holders, make investments and merge or consolidate with any other person or engage in transactions with our affiliates, but does not include any financial covenants, other than a minimum liquidity requirement.
In connection with our entry into the 2019 Credit Agreement, we issued liability-classified warrants with a fair value of $0.9 million to purchase 419,992 shares of our Series C convertible preferred stock at $16.67 per share. These warrants were subsequently automatically converted into warrants to purchase an equal number of shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock at a price of $16.67 per share and then were automatically converted into warrants to purchase an equal number of shares of common stock at a price of $16.67 per share.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $85.2 million of cash, an increase of $29.2 million from the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to unfavorable changes in working capital of $3.9 million, higher net losses of $4.9 million, and a decrease in non-cash items of $20.3 million. This decrease was primarily driven by a decrease of $16.8 million in amortization of debt issuance costs and a $15.0 million write-off of intellectual property acquired in the Biotronik Asset Acquisition in 2019 which did not re-occur, partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $9.1 million and an increase in the change in fair value of warrant liability and embedded derivative of $3.6 million.
Investing Activities
Total cash used in investing activities was $63.8 million and $70.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used in investing activities during 2020 was related to purchases of marketable securities of $114.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $11.2 million. These outflows were partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $45.0 million and the sales of marketable securities of $17.1 million.
Cash used in investing activities during 2019 was related to purchases of marketable securities of $68.7 million, cash paid for the Biotronik research and development license of $10.0 million, cash paid for the Rhythm Xience acquisition of $3.0 million, as well as purchases of property and equipment of $3.4 million. These outflows were partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $14.7 million.
Financing Activities
Total cash provided by financing activities was $164.4 million and $126.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was related to the closing of the Company’s IPO which resulted in net proceeds of $166.3 million partially offset by the payment of contingent consideration of $2.5 million related to the Rhythm Xience acquisition for the achievement of certain regulatory milestones and revenue targets.
Cash provided by financing activities during 2019 was primarily related to the closing of the 2019 Credit Agreement of $40.0 million, the issuance of shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock in June 2019 of $66.6 million, and the issuance of the 2019 Convertible Notes in May 2019 of $37.0 million. These inflows were partially offset by debt repayments related to the repayment of the 2018 Term Loan and payments of issuance and extinguishment costs of $17.3 million.
In addition, we enter into agreements in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for clinical trials and with vendors for preclinical trials and other services and products for operating purposes which are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice.
Further, the agreement to acquire Rhythm Xience requires us to pay the former owners of Rhythm Xience up to $15.0 million in additional cash earn out consideration based on the achievement of certain regulatory and revenue milestones. In February 2020, we issued to the former owners of Rhythm Xience 119,993 shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock valued at $2.2 million and paid them $2.5 million in connection with the regulatory and revenue milestones earned to date. In addition, pursuant to the Biotronik License Agreement, we issued to Biotronik $5.0 million in shares of our Series D convertible preferred stock in February 2020, and we are required to pay the Biotronik Parties up to $10.0 million, of which $2.0 million has been earned as of December 31, 2020, upon the achievement of various regulatory and sales-related milestones, as well as unit-based royalties on any sales of force sensing catheters.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the SEC rules and regulations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We account for revenue earned from contracts with customers under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. The core principle of the revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
•
Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer.
•
Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
•
Step 3: Determine the transaction price.
•
Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
•
Step 5: Recognize revenue when, or as, the company satisfies a performance obligation.
We usually place our medical diagnostic equipment, AcQMap System, at customer sites under loan agreements and generates revenue from disposable products used with the AcQMap System. Disposable products include AcQMap Catheters and AcQGuide Steerable Sheaths. We provide the disposable products in exchange for consideration, which occurs when a customer submits a purchase order and we provide disposables at the agreed upon prices in the invoice. Generally, customers purchase disposable products using separate purchase orders after the equipment has been provided to the customer for free with no binding agreement or requirement to purchase any disposable products. We also sell the AcQMap System to customers along with software updates on a when-and-if-available basis and equipment service. We have elected the practical expedient and accounting policy election to account for the shipping and handling as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the disposable products and not as a separate performance obligation.
We also have deferred equipment agreements that are generally structured such that we agree to provide an AcQMap System at no up-front charge, with title of the device transferring to the customer at the end of the contract term, in exchange for the customer’s commitment to purchase disposables at a specified price over the term of the agreement, which generally ranges from two to four years. We determined that the deferred equipment agreements include embedded sales-type leases. We allocate contract consideration under deferred equipment agreements containing fixed annual disposable purchase commitments to the underlying lease and non-lease components at contract inception. We expense the cost of the device at the inception of the agreement and record a financial lease asset equal to the gross consideration allocated to the lease. The lease asset will be reduced by payments for minimum disposable purchases that are allocated to the lease.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock awards, or RSAs, restricted stock units, or RSUs, and restricted stock units with non-market performance and service conditions, or PSUs, to be recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on their respective grant date fair values. We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The RSAs, RSUs and PSUs are valued based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. We expense stock-based compensation related to stock options, RSAs and RSUs over the requisite service period. As the PSUs have a performance condition, compensation expense was recognized for each vesting tranche over the respective requisite service period of each tranche upon the IPO closing on August 10, 2020, when management deemed it probable that the performance conditions were satisfied. We recognized a cumulative true-up adjustment related to PSUs once the conditions became probable of being satisfied as the related service period had been completed in a prior period. All stock-based compensation costs are recorded in cost of products sold, research and development expense or selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based upon the respective employee’s or non-employee’s roles within the Company. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
Fair Value Measurements
Accounting guidance regarding fair value measurements addresses how companies should measure fair value when they are required to use a fair value measure for recognition or disclosure purposes under GAAP and provides a common definition of fair value to be used throughout GAAP. It defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly fashion between market participants at the measurement date. In addition, it establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for the disclosure of fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy is based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation of an asset or liability as of the measurement date. The level in the hierarchy within which a given fair value measurement falls is determined based on the lowest level input that is significant to the measurement (Level 1 being the highest and Level 3 being the lowest). We classify our common and preferred stock warrant liability and our contingent consideration liability (discussed in “Business Combinations”) as Level 3.
Warrant Liability
We accounted for certain common stock warrants and convertible preferred stock warrants outstanding as a liability, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, at fair value and adjusted the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The fair value of these warrants were estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation in the first quarter of 2019 and as an output of the Hybrid Method for the remaining quarters of 2019 and the first and second quarter of 2020. The underlying equity included in the Monte Carlo simulation and the Hybrid Method was determined based on the equity value implied from preferred stock transactions and from examination of income and market approaches for measurement dates in which a preferred transaction was not applicable. Additionally, the expected IPO value was considered in the determination of the equity value. The fair value of the warrants was impacted by the model selected as well as assumptions surrounding unobservable inputs including the underlying equity value, risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected term and expected volatility. On August 10, 2020 when the warrants were converted and became equity classified warrants, the fair value of the common and preferred stock warrant liability was estimated using a Black-Scholes model. The underlying equity included in the Black-Scholes model was based on the IPO share price of $18.00.
This liability was subject to re-measurement at each reporting period and upon conversion to equity-classified warrants, and any change in fair value was recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. In connection with the IPO on August 10, 2020, the common stock warrants and convertible preferred stock warrants that had been liability-classified, were automatically converted into an equal number of warrants to purchase common stock and became equity-classified. The fair value of the outstanding liability on the conversion date was reclassified to additional paid-in capital in our consolidated balance sheet.
Business Combinations
Under the acquisition method of accounting, we allocate the fair value of the total consideration transferred to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the date of acquisition. The fair values assigned, defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between willing market participants, are based on estimates and assumptions determined by management. We record the excess consideration over the aggregate fair value of tangible and intangible assets, net of liabilities assumed, as goodwill. These valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets.
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, additional contingent consideration can be earned by the sellers upon achievement of certain milestones and revenue-based targets in certain years. The initial fair value of the revenue-based contingent consideration was calculated through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation utilizing revenue projections for the respective earn-out period, corresponding targets and approximate timing of payments as outlined in the purchase agreement. The analyses used the following assumptions: (i) expected term; (ii) risk-adjusted net sales or earnings; (iii) risk-free interest rate; and (iv) expected volatility of earnings.
Estimated payments, as determined through the respective model, were further discounted by a credit spread assumption to account for credit risk. The fair value of the milestones-based contingent consideration was determined by probability weighting and discounting to the respective valuation date at our cost of debt. Our cost of debt was determined by performing a synthetic credit rating for us and selecting yields based on companies with a similar credit rating. The contingent consideration is revalued to fair value each period, and any increase or decrease is recorded in operating loss. The fair value of the contingent consideration may be impacted by certain unobservable inputs, most significantly with regard to discount rates, expected volatility and historical and projected performance. Significant changes to these inputs in isolation could result in a significantly different fair value measurement.
Management typically uses the discounted cash flow method to value our acquired intangible assets. This method requires significant management judgment to forecast future operating results and establish residual growth rates and discount factors. The estimates we use to value and amortize intangible assets are consistent with the plans and estimates that we use to manage our business and are based on available historical information and industry estimates and averages. If the subsequent actual results and updated projections of the underlying business activity change compared with the assumptions and projections used to develop these values, we could experience impairment charges. In addition, we have estimated the economic lives of certain acquired assets and these lives are used to calculate depreciation and amortization expense. If our estimates of the economic lives change, depreciation or amortization expenses could be accelerated or slowed.
Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to periodic impairment testing. Goodwill is assigned to a reporting unit and the reporting unit’s goodwill is tested for impairment at least on an annual basis and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. In the evaluation of goodwill for impairment, which we perform annually during the fourth quarter, we could first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances led to a determination that it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. We could also elect to perform a quantitative impairment test without first assessing qualitative factors.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption and expected effects on our results of operations and financial condition, see Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference in response to this item.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. As such, we are eligible for exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and an exemption from the requirements to obtain a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements. We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in our future filings with the SEC. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different than you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
In addition, an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this provision of the JOBS Act. As a result, we will not be subject to new or revised accounting standards at the same time as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. Therefore, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of: (i) December 31, 2025; (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion; (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year; or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.