Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
Certain statements included in this section constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are made based on management’s current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects upon the Company. The Company’s actual results may differ, possibly materially, from expectations or estimates reflected in such forward-looking statements. Certain important factors that could cause actual results to differ, possibly materially, from expectations or estimates reflected in such forward-looking statements can be found in the “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” sections herein.
MD&A OVERVIEW
The following financial review provides a discussion of the Company’s results of operations and financial condition, as well as a summary of the Company’s critical accounting estimates. This section should be read in conjunction with Part I - Item 1. Business and the audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report. This MD&A is divided into the following sections:
Page
Executive Summary
Industry Trends
Outlook
Results of Operations
Investments
Policy Liabilities
Benefit Plans
Policyholder Protection
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the consolidated financial statements presented in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Readers should refer to Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed on February 21, 2020, for reference to discussion of the year ended December 31, 2018, the earliest of the three years presented. Amounts reported in this MD&A may not add due to rounding.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
COVID-19
The impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on the Company continues to evolve, and its future effects remain uncertain. At the onset of the pandemic, the majority of the Company’s employees in Japan and the U.S. shifted to remote working environments, with returns to office undertaken throughout the year as warranted by local conditions. Both Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. took measures to address employee health and safety and increase employees’ ability to develop and maintain more flexible working conditions. The Company established command centers to monitor and communicate on developments, and operations remained stable throughout the year. The Company also took prompt action at the beginning of the pandemic to strengthen its capital and liquidity position, and it continued to undertake de-risking activity in its investment portfolios and to adjust to market conditions throughout the year. Both Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. also accelerated investments in digital initiatives to improve productivity, efficiency and customer service over the long term.
In 2020, both Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. experienced a significant decrease in sales due to the effects of the pandemic and related government responses. Pandemic-related claims and associated reserve increases in both Japan and the U.S. have not materially impacted 2020 results and were more than offset by a reduction in claims related to routine medical needs. The pandemic’s impact on economic conditions have contributed to sales declines, pressuring premium growth rates. This, in turn, has been partially offset by lower lapse rates in the U.S. Economic conditions in the U.S. have resulted in lower interest rates having an impact on net investment income. The Company did not experience material realized losses or impairments and credit losses associated with the pandemic. The Company continues to closely monitor the effects and risks of COVID-19 to assess its impact on economic conditions in Japan and the U.S. and on the Company's business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital position. Those impacts may cause changes to estimates of future earnings, capital deployment, regulatory capital position, segment dividend payout ratios and other measures the Company provides in this MD&A.
The Company’s efforts and other developments are outlined below.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company entered the crisis in a strong capital and liquidity position, having maintained capital ratios in Japan and the U.S. at a level designed to absorb a degree of market volatility. To further support liquidity and capital resources, the Parent Company, in March 2020, issued four series of senior notes totaling ¥57.0 billion and, in April 2020, issued $1.0 billion in senior notes through public debt offerings under its U.S. shelf registration statement. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020 the Company held approximately $5.1 billion in cash and cash equivalents for stress conditions, which includes the Parent Company's target minimum amount of $2.0 billion held to provide a capital buffer and liquidity support at the holding company. Even after these debt offerings, the Company’s leverage ratio remains at levels that the Company believes are adequate to maintain current ratings and leave capacity for further debt issuances. The Company has available liquidity in its unsecured revolving credit facilities of $1.0 billion and ¥100.0 billion, respectively, and currently has no borrowings under either of these facilities. In April 2020, Aflac increased its internal limit for Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta (FHLB) borrowings to $800 million, $300 million of which the Company has designated to be used for short-term liquidity needs of the U.S. insurance subsidiaries and subject to qualified collateral availability and other conditions. The Company has the ability to adjust cash flow management from other sources of liquidity including reinvestment cash flows and selling investments.
The Company remains committed to prudent liquidity and capital management and is taking a tactical approach to capital allocation. In terms of repurchases, the Company remains in the market and is being tactical in its approach to repurchasing its stock. The Company believes that this approach will allow it to increase or decrease repurchase activity depending on how the pandemic and market conditions evolve.
The Company is committed to maintaining a strong Aflac Japan solvency margin ratio (SMR) and Aflac U.S. risk-based capital (RBC) ratios. While the SMR is particularly sensitive to market volatility resulting from widening of credit spreads, both SMR and RBC are sensitive to credit downgrades and defaults. The Company has capital tools available to increase SMR and RBC including the reduction of subsidiary dividends paid to the Parent Company by its insurance subsidiaries and Parent Company capital contributions to insurance subsidiaries sourced through cash on hand, proceeds from debt issuances or by drawing on the revolving credit facilities noted above. For example, the Parent Company made a capital contribution of $150 million to CAIC in May 2020 and, pursuant to surplus notes, loaned $50 million to CAIC in December 2020 and $130 million to Aflac in September 2020, the latter of which was used toward the acquisition of Zurich North America's U.S. Corporate Life and
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Pensions business in November 2020. The Company also has a committed reinsurance facility in the amount of approximately ¥120 billion of reserves that could be deployed to support SMR. Additionally, Aflac Japan reduced the dividends it provides to the Parent Company in 2020 by ¥75 billion compared to initial 2020 plans. The Company intends to maintain a target minimum SMR of 500% for Aflac Japan and a target minimum RBC of approximately 400% for Aflac, consistent with the Company's risk management practices.
As a result of market volatility, the Company has made tactical adjustments to its existing foreign currency-hedging program in Aflac Japan to mitigate hedging cost and settlement risk while maintaining a strong SMR. Prior to and continuing through the pandemic, Aflac Japan has maintained a collar program on a portion of its U.S. dollar program to mitigate against more extreme moves in foreign exchange rates and therefore support SMR. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company reduced the size of the collar program by approximately $3 billion. In December 2020, the Company reduced the total size of the forward and collar programs by approximately $5 billion and purchased foreign currency options to hedge approximately $5 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated assets. While these adjustments will moderately increase the Company's exposure to SMR volatility, the Company believes that they will also reduce its exposure to pricing volatility and the related risk of negative settlements should there be a material weakening in the yen. Depending on further developments, including the possibility of further market volatility, there may be additional costs associated with maintaining the collar program. The Company is continually evaluating other adjustments, including the possibility of changing the level of hedging employed with the U.S. dollar-denominated investments. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A for additional information regarding other potential sources of liquidity and capital resources.
•Investment Portfolio
The Company's investment portfolio was well-positioned entering the crisis, and the Company continues to follow its strategy of investing primarily in fixed maturity securities to generate a reliable stream of income. Fundamental credit analysis and de-risking activity in prior periods contributed to the current quality of the Company’s investments. The Company continued with de-risking activity in 2020, reducing positions in the portfolios seen as more vulnerable in the current environment. Although economic and market conditions improved in the second half of 2020, the Company remains cautious about the continued path of the recovery and the potential longer term impacts on certain sectors most vulnerable to the impacts of the pandemic. The Company continues seeking ways to improve the health of the portfolio through de-risking and other repositioning actions. Certain investments have been adversely impacted with credit rating downgrades and increased price volatility, including investments in issuers that faced an immediate and severe impact such as those in travel and lodging, leisure, non-emergency medical and energy sectors. The Company continues working with certain issuers to provide temporary relief of terms by providing payment deferrals and other modifications or waivers where the Company believes it improves its overall position. For additional information on these loan modifications, see Notes 1 and 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Markets have stabilized from the extreme volatility seen at the outset of the crisis, although issuers continue to be affected by reduced business activity and consumer demand. Volatility in oil prices and reduction in global energy demand continue to adversely impact issuers in the energy sector. U.S. interest rates declined, and availability of new investments in certain private asset classes such as middle market loans, commercial mortgages and transitional real estate remain below pre-crisis levels. As a result, net investment income may be adversely impacted over time from lower reinvestment rates for fixed maturity investments and lower interest on floating rate assets. The Company continues to make tactical adjustments to its investment portfolios in response to the crisis, and continues to assess its investment strategy and asset allocation to identify additional tactical adjustments that may be necessary due to the continuing effects of the pandemic.
•Crisis Management
The Company has crisis command centers set up in Japan and the U.S. These command centers are generally utilized for any type of crisis, including natural disasters and cybersecurity events. The command centers participate in regular updates to the Company's leadership regarding developments in Japan and the U.S., including government and regulatory actions, operations, employee policies and conditions and distribution status. In addition, capital market, central bank and government stimulus updates are provided, as well as updates on cybersecurity, including with respect to the Company's remote workforce. Moreover, the Company's financial leadership group meets more frequently and has focused on the capital markets, capital and liquidity position, stress testing and any defensive actions that may be necessary as the crisis unfolds.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•Aflac Japan initiatives
In February 2020, Aflac Japan began to implement actions such as working from home, staggered work hours, limitations on the number of personnel attending in-person meetings and restrictions on traveling between buildings and floors in Aflac Japan worksites. In response to the state of emergency and requests made by the Japan government in April 2020, over 70% of Aflac Japan employees were working from home as of mid-April. The state of emergency was lifted nationwide in May 2020; however, in January 2021, the state of emergency was reinstated in certain prefectures experiencing elevated rates of infection. As of December 31, 2020, Aflac Japan had approximately 50% of its workforce working remotely. Aflac Japan is evaluating return to the office measures; however, throughout the development of the pandemic in 2020, including the increase in COVID-19 cases in Japan during the fourth quarter, Aflac Japan has evaluated its operational capabilities and anticipates that the remote configuration could remain for an indefinite period of time without materially impacting operations.
Aflac Japan has announced several additional actions taken for its employees including travel restrictions and extended paid leave.
Aflac Japan remains focused on generating new business through direct mail made to existing and prospective customers. In addition, Aflac Japan is promoting digital and web-based sales to groups and introduced a new system that enables smart device-based insurance application by allowing the customer and an Aflac Japan operator to see the same screen through their smart devices. Further, in October 2020, Aflac Japan implemented a new virtual sales tool that enables online consultations and policy applications to be completed entirely online. During 2020, Aflac Japan also accelerated investments in digital and paperless initiatives designed to increase long term productivity, efficiency, customer service and business continuity. Face-to-face sales have been challenged and are having an impact on sales results. In 2020, Aflac Japan experienced a sales decline of 36.2% on a yen basis, compared to 2019, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the continuing effects of the Japan Post investigation. See the Aflac Japan Segment of this MD&A for additional information regarding sales in the Japan Post channel and the strategic alliance with Japan Post.
Aflac Japan has also followed the guidance of the FSA in terms of treating customers with care, ensuring ease and timeliness of claims payments and extended coverage for temporary medical facilities and telemedicine in certain circumstances, and waiver of interest on certain policyholder loans. In March 2020, Aflac Japan extended the grace period on premium payments for six months up to September 30, 2020 and it was re-extended to April 30, 2021 in certain cases. In January 2021, the grace period was extended to July 31, 2021 for the policyholders who live in areas under the state of emergency and in February 2021, the scope was expanded to all regions in Japan. Policyholders are required to file for relief through this extension. In April 2020, Aflac Japan announced that it will pay certain accidental death and disability benefits in the event of a death directly caused by COVID-19.
To assist with the COVID-19 pandemic, Aflac Japan has donated ¥500 million to the Japan Medical Associations and to identified municipalities where Aflac Japan has operations.
•Aflac U.S. and Corporate and Other initiatives
The Parent Company and Aflac U.S. began to implement Company mandates including restrictions on travel and in-person meetings applicable to U.S. employees beginning in February 2020 and required work from home directives across their U.S. work force in March 2020. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 95% of U.S. employees were working remotely. The Company currently anticipates that a return to the worksite for U.S. based employees of the Parent Company and Aflac U.S. will be conducted in phases beginning no sooner than the second half of 2021, subject to factors including the availability of treatments and vaccines, the return schedule of school systems and the availability of child care, the number of COVID-19 cases and the COVID-19 replication rate in areas of the U.S. where the Company has significant operations. However, Aflac U.S. anticipates that the remote configuration could remain for an indefinite period of time without materially impacting operations. The Parent Company and Aflac U.S. continue to maintain employee and worksite safety measures including travel restrictions, building access restrictions and in-person meeting restrictions.
Aflac U.S. has announced several actions taken for its employees. These include a commitment to cover the costs of COVID-19 testing and extended paid leave in certain circumstances.
Aflac U.S. is focused on supporting its agency channel, most of which are small businesses, by offering zero-interest loans and cash stipends in lieu of canceled recognition trips.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Aflac U.S. policy sales, enrollment and agent recruiting functions are highly dependent upon face-to-face interaction between independent agents and brokers with prospective and new customers and agents. Opportunities for such interaction have been significantly reduced by reactions to the pandemic, such as social distancing, shelter in place orders and work from home initiatives. In addition, licensure of newly recruited agents has been delayed in some states due to the unavailability or difficulty of temporary licenses or online training. Further, despite government stimulus measures, the long-term economic effects of the pandemic on prospective and existing customers is still largely unknown. Similar to Aflac Japan, the Aflac U.S. sales team has worked to adjust its sales approach given the reduction in face-to-face sales. Key elements to this approach include realizing sales at the worksite through an enrollment call center, video enrollment through co-browsing and self-enrollment. The traditional agent sales team is also using virtual recruiting and training through video conferencing in order to maintain or increase the recruiting pipeline. The Aflac U.S. broker sales team is focused on product enhancements due to COVID-19 as well as leveraging technology based solutions to drive enrollment. Further, during 2020 Aflac U.S. also accelerated investments in digital initiatives designed to improve long term productivity, efficiency and customer service. Aflac U.S. is in its second year of the build-out of the Consumer Markets business for the digital direct-to-consumer sale of insurance and sales made through that platform have continued to grow.
Face-to-face sales have been challenged and are having an impact on sales results. In 2020, Aflac U.S. experienced a sales decline of 30.8%, compared to 2019, reflecting the impacts of the pandemic. The Aflac U.S. benefit ratio decreased in 2020, as compared to 2019; however, the ratio began to recover in the second half of 2020, which management believes may indicate the beginning of a return to levels seen over the past several years. The Company expanded a previously piloted wellness initiative beginning in the third quarter of 2020, using digital and direct account engagement to raise awareness among policyholders as to the availability of valuable wellness benefits. The Company estimates this effort had an impact on incurred claims of approximately $19 million since September 2020.
Aflac U.S. is encouraging policyholders who are displaying COVID-19 symptoms to seek treatment and is paying wellness benefits on applicable policies for COVID-19 tests, when completed claims are submitted. Aflac U.S. is also providing coverage for treatment in temporary facilities and by telemedicine in certain circumstances.
Throughout 2020, Aflac U.S. has taken steps to comply with COVID-19-related directives issued by state regulatory authorities, including those requiring or requesting premium grace periods. As of December 31, 2020, premium grace periods remained in effect in 10 states and Puerto Rico. Although aggregate policy lapses decreased from the prior year, Aflac U.S. experienced an increase in policy lapses in the second half of 2020 in certain states where premium grace periods expired and government stimulus measures discussed below were not renewed or initiated. If the premium grace periods continue to expire in 2021, Aflac U.S. would expect an increase in lapse rates.
In September 2020, the Company announced a voluntary separation program for certain U.S. employees. The program provided eligible employees with a severance package, including twelve months of salary, the employee's targeted bonus payout for 2020 and one year of Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) or retiree medical, if eligible. Employees accepted into this program were notified in October 2020 and most transitions were completed by December 31, 2020, with a small number continuing into the first quarter of 2021. The Company recorded a one-time severance charge of $43 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to the program.
In 2020, the Parent Company contributed $6 million to organizations that are providing assistance for health care workers assisting with the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Major government initiatives
Government authorities in Japan and the U.S. have implemented several initiatives in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including actions designed to mitigate the adverse health effects of the virus and those designed to provide broad-based relief and economic support to all aspects of the economy.
In Japan, initial emergency orders declared by the Japan government were lifted; however, emergency orders have been reinstated in certain prefectures that include Tokyo and surrounding areas experiencing elevated rates of infection.
The FSA has requested that financial service providers in Japan respond appropriately while continuing their
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
essential operations. This request includes insurance companies, which have been asked to continue essential operations such as benefits and claims payment, including policyholder loans. Moreover, following the expansion of the impact of COVID-19, the FSA requested insurance companies to consider flexible interpretation and application of insurance policy provisions and measures required for products from the standpoint of protecting policyholders. In accordance with the FSA’s request, Aflac Life Insurance Japan Ltd. implemented a measure to pay accidental death benefits and accidental serious disability benefits under its accidental death benefit rider, etc. in cases of death or specified serious disabilities from COVID-19.
In April 2020, the Cabinet of Japan approved ¥117 trillion or more than 20% of GDP in emergency stimulus measures, including various tax measures. In May 2020, the Cabinet of Japan approved a second ¥117 trillion stimulus package. The Diet passed a supplementary budget to fund the package in June 2020. The second stimulus package was intended to help small and mid-sized businesses fund leave allowances for furloughed workers and provides rent assistance for business operations.
In the U.S., initial statewide shelter in place or stay at home orders were lifted although reopening plans have been paused or reversed in certain states experiencing an increase in cases, and shelter in place orders have been reinstated in some areas.
The U.S. government took action in response to the COVID-19 pandemic by providing broad-based relief and economic support to all aspects of the economy.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, was signed into law in March 2020 and was designed to provide approximately $2 trillion in financial stimulus in the form of financial aid to individuals, businesses, nonprofits, states, and municipalities. Among other measures, the CARES Act provided for $260 billion in expanded unemployment benefits and $290 billion of direct payments to individuals, and established a $349 billion Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) providing for loans to small businesses, nonprofits, and veteran’s organizations with 500 or fewer employees. In April 2020, an additional $320 billion was allocated to the PPP, including $10 billion for administrative costs and $60 billion allocated to small lenders and community banks. In December 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA) was signed into law. Among other measures, the CAA allocated an additional $284 billion to the PPP, extended the program to March 31, 2021, and provided for expanded unemployment benefits and direct payments to individuals. The CARES Act also included a five-year net operating loss (NOL) carryback, payroll tax relief and other significant provisions for businesses. Section 4013 of the CARES Act gives entities temporary relief from certain accounting and disclosure requirements for troubled debt restructurings (TDRs). The Company has applied GAAP relief with respect to certain qualifying loan modifications. See Notes 1 and 3 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
The Federal Reserve has also taken various actions in an effort to support the economy and markets in response to heightened volatility and uncertainty. These actions include reducing by 1.5% each the rate that it charges for direct loans to banks, as well as the target for the rate banks charge each other for overnight funds (federal funds rate); initiating quantitative easing with no stated cap on purchases; committing to purchase U.S. Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed and agency commercial mortgaged-backed securities; re-establishing the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) originally launched in 2009, through which it will lend to holders of AA-rated asset-backed securities; and establishing facilities to support purchase of corporate bonds from large investment-grade companies.
Performance Highlights
For the full year of 2020, total revenues were down .7% to $22.1 billion, compared with $22.3 billion for the full year of 2019. Net earnings were $4.8 billion, or $6.67 per diluted share, compared with $3.3 billion, or $4.43 per diluted share, for the full year of 2019. The increase in net earnings and net earnings per diluted share in 2020 primarily reflects a $1.4 billion benefit from the release of valuation allowances on deferred foreign tax credits, which were allowed due to newly released U.S. tax regulations. The Company recorded a one-time severance charge of $43 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to the voluntary separation program.
Results for 2020 included pretax net investment losses of $270 million, compared with net investment losses of $135 million in 2019. Net investment losses in 2020 included $200 million of credit losses primarily driven by increases in credit losses; $169 million of net losses from certain derivative and foreign currency gains or losses; $184 million of net gains on equity securities; and $85 million of net losses from sales and redemptions.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The average yen/dollar exchange rate(1) in 2020 was 106.86, or 2.1% stronger than the rate of 109.07 in 2019.
Adjusted earnings(2) for the full year of 2020 were $3.6 billion, or $4.96 per diluted share, compared with $3.3 billion, or $4.44 per diluted share, in 2019. The stronger yen/dollar exchange rate impacted adjusted earnings per diluted share by $.04.
Total investments and cash at the December 31, 2020 were $149.8 billion, compared with $138.1 billion at December 31, 2019. In 2020, Aflac Incorporated repurchased $1.5 billion, or 37.9 million of its common shares. At December 31, 2020, the Company had 99.2 million remaining shares authorized for repurchase.
Shareholders’ equity was $33.6 billion, or $48.46 per share, at December 31, 2020, compared with $29.0 billion, or $39.84 per share, at December 31, 2019. Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 included a net unrealized gain on investment securities and derivatives of $10.3 billion, compared with a net unrealized gain of $8.5 billion at December 31, 2019. Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 also included an unrealized foreign currency translation loss of $1.1 billion, compared with an unrealized foreign currency translation loss of $1.6 billion at December 31, 2019. The annualized return on average shareholders’ equity in 2020 was 15.3%, driven primarily by a benefit from new tax regulations.
Shareholders’ equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI)(2) (adjusted book value) was $24.6 billion, or $35.56 per share at December 31, 2020, compared with $22.3 billion, or $30.74 per share, at December 31, 2019. The annualized adjusted return on equity excluding foreign currency impact(2) in 2020 was 15.0%.
(1) Yen/U.S. dollar exchange rates are based on the published MUFG Bank, Ltd. telegraphic transfer middle rate (TTM).
(2) See the Results of Operations section of this MD&A for a definition of this non-U.S. GAAP financial measure.
INDUSTRY TRENDS
The Company is impacted by financial markets, economic conditions, regulatory oversight and a variety of trends that affect the industries where it competes.
Financial and Economic Environment
The Company’s business and results of operations are materially affected by conditions in the global capital markets and the economy generally. Stressed conditions, volatility and disruptions in global capital markets, particular markets, or financial asset classes can have an adverse effect on the Company, in part because the Company has a large investment portfolio and its insurance liabilities and derivatives are sensitive to changing market factors. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for the risk factor entitled, "Difficult conditions in global capital markets and the economy, including those caused by the novel coronavirus COVID-19, could have a material adverse effect on the Company's investments, capital position, revenue, profitability, and liquidity and harm the Company's business."
Demographics
Aflac Japan
With Japan’s aging population and the rise in healthcare costs, supplemental health care insurance products remain attractive. However, due to the aging population and decline in birthrate, new opportunities for customer demographics are not as readily available. Japan’s existing customers and potential customers seek products that are easily understood, cost-effective and can be accessed through technology-enabled devices.
Aflac U.S.
Customer demographics continue to evolve and new opportunities present themselves in different customer segments such as the millennial and multicultural markets. Customer expectations and preferences are changing. Trends indicate existing customers and potential customers seek cost-effective solutions that are easily understood and can be accessed through technology-enabled devices. Additionally, income protection and the health needs of retiring baby boomers are continuing to shape the insurance industry.
Regulatory Environment
See Item 1. Business - Aflac Japan Government Regulation and Aflac U.S. Government Regulation for a discussion of regulatory developments that may impact the Company and the associated risks.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Competitive Environment
See Item 1. Business - Aflac Japan Competitive Markets and Aflac U.S. Competitive Markets for a discussion of the competitive environment and the basis on which the Company competes in each of its segments.
2021 OUTLOOK
The Company’s strategy to drive long-term shareholder value is to pursue growth through product development, distribution expansion and digital advancements to improve the customer experience.
The Company's objectives in 2021 are to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic while maintaining strong pre-tax margins in its Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. segments, continuing to accelerate the pace of investment in its digital technology, and integrating and building upon recent acquisitions. The Company believes that its strategy of positioning itself for future growth and efficiency while defending and leveraging its market-leading position, powerful brand recognition and diverse distribution in Japan and the U.S. will provide support toward these objectives.
The Company announced a 17.9% increase in the first quarter 2021 dividend compared to the prior quarter, and it intends to maintain strong capital ratios in Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. in support of its commitment to shareholder dividends while remaining tactical in its deployment of capital in the form of share repurchases and opportunistic investments. The Company intends to maintain a target minimum SMR of 500% for Aflac Japan and a target minimum RBC of approximately 400% for Aflac, consistent with the Company's risk management practices.
Aflac Japan Segment
In Japan, the Company anticipates that the shift in earned premium from first sector savings products to third sector cancer and medical products and first sector protection products, will continue to result in moderately lower benefit ratios in the Aflac Japan segment. The Company expects expenses to be elevated in 2021 as Aflac Japan’s investments in its paperless initiative and other digital projects are being accelerated. The Company also anticipates that benefit and expense ratios will continue to experience some level of revenue pressure due to the impact of paid up policies and reduced sales in 2020. For the 2020 through 2022 period, the Company expects a decline in Aflac Japan revenue in the range of 2.0% to 3.0% on a compound annual growth rate basis.
Aflac U.S. Segment
The Company expects the profit margins for the Aflac U.S. segment to decline in 2021 as benefit ratios stabilize, expense ratios continue to be elevated in light of investments into U.S. platforms and revenues face pressure due to the impact of the global pandemic on sales. For the 2020 through 2022 period, the Company expects Aflac U.S. revenue to range from a decline of 1.0% to a growth of 1.5% on a compound annual growth rate basis.
Corporate and Other Segment
The Company expects corporate segment results to reflect stable net investment income in 2021 compared to 2020, assuming that U.S. interest rates remain stable.
For important disclosures applicable to statements made in this 2021 Outlook, please see the Risk Factors section and the statement on Forward-Looking Information at the beginning of Item 1. Business, the Risk Factors identified in Item 1A. and Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Company earns its revenues principally from insurance premiums and investments. The Company’s operating expenses primarily consist of insurance benefits provided and reserves established for anticipated future insurance benefits, general business expenses, commissions and other costs of selling and servicing its products. Profitability for the Company depends principally on its ability to price its insurance products at a level that enables the Company to earn a margin over the costs associated with providing benefits and administering those products. Profitability also depends on, among other items, actuarial and policyholder behavior experience on insurance products, and the Company's ability to attract and retain customer assets, generate and maintain favorable investment results, effectively deploy capital and utilize tax capacity, and manage expenses.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Yen-denominated income statement accounts are translated to U.S. dollars using a weighted average Japanese yen/U.S. dollar foreign exchange rate, except realized gains and losses on security transactions which are translated at the exchange rate on the trade date of each transaction. Yen-denominated balance sheet accounts are translated to U.S. dollars using a spot Japanese yen/U.S. dollar foreign exchange rate.
The following discussion includes references to the Company's performance measures, adjusted earnings, adjusted earnings per diluted share, and amortized hedge costs/income, which are not calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP (non-U.S. GAAP). These measures exclude items that the Company believes may obscure the underlying fundamentals and trends in the Company's insurance operations because they tend to be driven by general economic conditions and events or related to infrequent activities not directly associated with its insurance operations. The Company's management uses adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per diluted share to evaluate the financial performance of its insurance operations on a consolidated basis, and the Company believes that a presentation of these measures is vitally important to an understanding of its underlying profitability drivers and trends of its insurance business. The Company believes that amortized hedge costs/income, which are a component of adjusted earnings, measure the periodic currency risk management costs/income related to hedging certain foreign currency exchange risks and are an important component of net investment income.
The Company defines the non-U.S. GAAP financial measures included in this filing as follows:
•Adjusted earnings are the profits derived from operations. The most comparable U.S. GAAP measure is net earnings. Adjusted earnings are adjusted revenues less benefits and adjusted expenses. The adjustments to both revenues and expenses account for certain items that cannot be predicted or that are outside management’s control. Adjusted revenues are U.S. GAAP total revenues excluding net investment gains and losses, except for amortized hedge costs/income related to foreign currency exposure management strategies and net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies. Adjusted expenses are U.S. GAAP total acquisition and operating expenses including the impact of interest cash flows from derivatives associated with notes payable but excluding any nonrecurring or other items not associated with the normal course of the Company’s insurance operations and that do not reflect the Company's underlying business performance.
•Adjusted earnings per share (basic or diluted) are adjusted earnings for the period divided by the weighted average outstanding shares (basic or diluted) for the period presented. The most comparable U.S. GAAP measure is net earnings per share.
•Amortized hedge costs/income represent costs/income incurred or recognized as a result of using foreign currency-derivatives to hedge certain foreign exchange risks in the Company's Japan segment or in the Corporate and Other segment. These amortized hedge costs/income are estimated at the inception of the derivatives based on the specific terms of each contract and are recognized on a straight line basis over the term of the hedge. There is no comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure for amortized hedge costs/income.
•Adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact are computed using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the comparable prior-year period, which eliminates fluctuations driven solely by foreign currency exchange rate changes. The most comparable U.S. GAAP measure is net earnings.
•Adjusted earnings per diluted share excluding current period foreign currency impact are adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact divided by the weighted average outstanding diluted shares for the period presented. The most comparable U.S. GAAP measure is net earnings per share.
•U.S. dollar-denominated investment income excluding foreign currency impact is determined using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the comparable prior year period.
•Adjusted book value is the U.S. GAAP book value (representing total shareholders' equity), less AOCI as recorded on the U.S. GAAP balance sheet. The most comparable U.S. GAAP measure is total book value. The Company considers adjusted book value important as it excludes AOCI, which fluctuates due to market movements that are outside management's control.
•Adjusted return on equity (ROE) excluding foreign currency impact is calculated using adjusted earnings excluding current period foreign currency impact divided by average shareholders’ equity, excluding AOCI. The most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure is return on average equity as determined using net earnings and average total shareholders’ equity.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following table is a reconciliation of items impacting adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per diluted share to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures of net earnings and net earnings per diluted share, respectively, for the years ended December 31.
Reconciliation of Net Earnings to Adjusted Earnings(1)
(1) Amounts may not foot due to rounding.
(2) Amortized hedge costs of $206 in 2020 and $257 in 2019, related to certain foreign currency exposure management strategies have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a decrease to net investment income. See "Hedge Costs/Income" discussion below for further information.
(3) Amortized hedge income of $97 in 2020 and $89 in 2019, related to certain foreign currency exposure management strategies have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as an increase to net investment income. See "Hedge Costs/Income" discussion below for further information.
(4) Net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies of $12 in 2020 and $(17) in 2019 have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a component of net investment income.
(5) A gain of $56 in 2020 and $66 in 2019 related to the interest rate component of the change in fair value of foreign currency swaps on notes payable have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a component of interest expense.
(6) The impact of tax reform was adjusted in 2019 as a result of additional guidance released by the IRS.
(7) One-time tax benefit recognized in 2020 representing the release of valuation allowances on deferred foreign tax credits due to new tax regulations.
(8) Prior period foreign currency impact reflected as “N/A” to isolate change for current period only.
Reconciling Items
Net Investment Gains and Losses
The Company's investment strategy is to invest primarily in fixed maturity securities to provide a reliable stream of investment income, which is one of the drivers of the Company’s growth and profitability. This investment strategy incorporates asset-liability matching (ALM) to align the expected cash flows of the portfolio to the needs of the Company's liability structure. The Company does not purchase securities with the intent of generating investment gains or losses. However, investment gains and losses may be realized as a result of changes in the financial markets and the creditworthiness of specific issuers, tax planning strategies, and/or general portfolio management and rebalancing. The realization of investment gains and losses is independent of the underwriting and administration of the Company's insurance products. Net investment gains and losses include securities transactions, credit losses, derivative and foreign currency activities and changes in fair value of equity securities.
Securities Transactions, Credit Losses and Gains (Losses) on Equity Securities
Securities transactions include gains and losses from sales and redemptions of investments where the amount received is different from the amortized cost of the investment. Prior to January 1, 2020, impairments include other-than-temporary impairment losses on investment securities as well as changes in loan loss reserves for loan receivables. Effective January 1, 2020, credit losses include losses for held-to-maturity fixed maturity securities, available-for-sale fixed maturity securities, loan receivables, loan commitments and reinsurance recoverables.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain Derivative and Foreign Currency Gains (Losses)
The Company's derivative activities include:
•foreign currency forwards and options used in hedging foreign exchange risk on U.S. dollar-denominated investments in Aflac Japan's portfolio
•foreign currency forwards and options used to economically hedge certain portions of forecasted cash flows denominated in yen and hedge the Company's long term exposure to a weakening yen
•cross-currency interest rate swaps, also referred to as foreign currency swaps, associated with certain senior notes and subordinated debentures
•foreign currency swaps that are associated with variable interest entity (VIE) bond purchase commitments, and investments in special-purpose entities, including VIEs where the Company is the primary beneficiary
•interest rate swaps used to economically hedge interest rate fluctuations in certain variable-rate investments
•interest rate swaptions used to hedge changes in the fair value associated with interest rate fluctuations for certain U.S. dollar-denominated available-for-sale fixed-maturity securities
•bond purchase commitments at the inception of investments in consolidated VIEs.
Gains and losses are recognized as a result of valuing these derivatives, net of the effects of hedge accounting. The Company also excludes from adjusted earnings the accounting impacts of remeasurement associated with changes in the foreign currency exchange rate. Amortized hedge costs/ income related to certain foreign currency exposure management strategies (see Amortized Hedge Cost/Income section below), and net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies and notes payable are reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings.
Amortized hedge costs/income can fluctuate based upon many factors, including the derivative notional amount, the length of time of the derivative contract, changes in both U.S. and Japan interest rates, and supply and demand for dollar funding. Amortized hedge costs and income have fluctuated in recent periods due to changes in the previously mentioned factors. For additional information regarding foreign currency hedging, refer to Hedging Activities in the Investments section of this MD&A.
For additional information regarding net investment gains and losses, including details of reported amounts for the periods presented, see Notes 3 and 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other and Non-recurring Items
The U.S. insurance industry has a policyholder protection system that provides funds for the policyholders of insolvent insurers. The system can result in periodic charges to the Company as a result of insolvencies/bankruptcies that occur with other companies in the life insurance industry. Some states permit member insurers to recover assessments paid through full or partial premium tax offsets. These charges neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business performance, but result from external situations not controlled by the Company. The Company excludes any charges associated with U.S. guaranty fund assessments and the corresponding tax benefit or expense from adjusted earnings.
In Japan, the government also requires the insurance industry to contribute to a policyholder protection corporation that provides funds for the policyholders of insolvent insurers; however, these costs are calculated and administered differently than in the U.S. In Japan, these costs are not directly related to specific insolvencies or bankruptcies, but are rather a regular operational cost for an insurance company. Based on this structure, the Company does not remove the Japan policyholder protection expenses from adjusted earnings.
In 2020, other items also included integration costs related to the Company's acquisition of Zurich North America's U.S. Corporate Life and Pensions business; these costs primarily consist of expenditures for legal, accounting, consulting, integration of systems and processes and other similar services. These integration costs amounted to $13 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Income Taxes
The Company's combined U.S. and Japanese effective income tax rate on pretax earnings was (14.9)% in 2020 and 25.7% in 2019. In 2020, the combined effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the release of certain valuation allowances established on the Company's deferred foreign tax credit benefits. The release of these valuation allowances was a result of the issuance of Final and Proposed Regulations by the U.S. Treasury and Internal Revenue Service in September 2020, and resulted in a one-time income tax benefit of $1.4 billion in the third quarter of 2020. Total income taxes were $(.6) billion in 2020 and $1.1 billion in 2019. Japanese income taxes on Aflac Japan's results account for most of the Company's consolidated income tax expense.
For additional information, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Critical Accounting Estimates - Income Taxes section of this MD&A.
The Company expects that its effective tax rate for future periods will be approximately 20%. The effective tax rate continues to be subject to future tax law changes both in the U.S. and in foreign jurisdictions. See the risk factor entitled "Tax rates applicable to the Company may change" in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors for more information.
Foreign Currency Translation
Aflac Japan’s premiums and a significant portion of its investment income are received in yen, and its claims and most expenses are paid in yen. Aflac Japan purchases yen-denominated assets and U.S. dollar-denominated assets, which may be hedged to yen, to support yen-denominated policy liabilities. These and other yen-denominated financial statement items are, however, translated into dollars for financial reporting purposes. The Company translates Aflac Japan’s yen-denominated income statement into dollars using the average exchange rate for the reporting period, and the Company translates its yen-denominated balance sheet using the exchange rate at the end of the period.
Due to the size of Aflac Japan, whose functional currency is the Japanese yen, fluctuations in the yen/dollar exchange rate can have a significant effect on the Company's reported results. In periods when the yen weakens, translating yen into dollars results in fewer dollars being reported. When the yen strengthens, translating yen into dollars results in more dollars being reported. Consequently, yen weakening has the effect of suppressing current period results in relation to the comparable prior period, while yen strengthening has the effect of magnifying current period results in relation to the comparable prior period. Management evaluates the Company's financial performance both including and excluding the impact of foreign currency translation to monitor, respectively, cumulative currency impacts on book value and the currency-neutral operating performance over time.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS BY SEGMENT
U.S. GAAP financial reporting requires that a company report financial and descriptive information about operating segments in its annual and interim period financial statements. Furthermore, the Company is required to report a measure of segment profit or loss, certain revenue and expense items, and segment assets. The Company's insurance business consists of two segments: Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. Aflac Japan is the principal contributor to consolidated earnings. Businesses that are not individually reportable, such as the Parent Company, asset management subsidiaries and business activities, including reinsurance retrocession activities are included in the Corporate and other segment. See the Item 1. Business section of this Form 10-K for a summary of each segment's products and distribution channels.
In 2020, Aflac Japan sales for protection-type first sector and third sector products decreased 36.9% and total sales decreased 36.2% on a yen basis, compared to 2019, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the continuing effects of the Japan Post investigation. Sales from Aflac U.S. were down 30.8% in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to social distancing efforts, which eliminated face-to-face sales opportunities beginning in mid-March 2020. The respective Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S. platforms and distribution partners continue to work to adapt to the new environment. The Company continues to monitor the effects of COVID-19 on its operating results and has taken several steps to mobilize its resources to ensure adequate liquidity, a strong capital position, business continuity and employee safety during this pandemic. See the Executive Summary subsection of this MD&A for additional information.
Consistent with U.S. GAAP guidance for segment reporting, pretax adjusted earnings is the Company's U.S. GAAP measure of segment performance. The Company believes that a presentation of this measure is vitally important to an understanding of the underlying profitability drivers and trends of its business. Additional performance measures used to evaluate the financial condition and performance of the Company's segments are listed below.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•Operating Ratios
•Expense Ratio
•New Annualized Premium Sales
•New Money Yield
•Return on Average Invested Assets
•Average Weekly Producer
For additional information on the Company’s performance measures included in this MD&A, see the Glossary of Selected Terms found directly following Part II. Other Information. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the reconciliation of segment results to the Company's consolidated U.S. GAAP results and additional information.
AFLAC JAPAN SEGMENT
Aflac Japan Pretax Adjusted Earnings
Changes in Aflac Japan's pretax adjusted earnings and profit margins are primarily affected by morbidity, mortality, expenses, persistency and investment yields. The following table presents a summary of operating results for Aflac Japan for the years ended December 31.
Aflac Japan Summary of Operating Results
(1) Net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies of $9 and $(17) in 2020 and 2019, respectively, have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a component of net investment income.
In yen terms, Aflac Japan's net premium income decreased in 2020, primarily due to an anticipated decrease in first sector premiums as savings products reached premium paid-up status and constrained sales from the impact of pandemic
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
conditions. Adjusted net investment income increased in 2020 primarily due to higher income from U.S. dollar-denominated assets and lower hedge costs.
Annualized premiums in force at December 31, 2020, were ¥1.43 trillion, compared with ¥1.49 trillion in 2019. The decrease in annualized premiums in force in yen of 4.2% in 2020 and 2.5% in 2019 was driven primarily by limited-pay products reaching paid up status. Annualized premiums in force, translated into dollars at respective year-end exchange rates, were $13.8 billion in 2020 and $13.6 billion in 2019.
Aflac Japan's investment portfolios include U.S. dollar-denominated securities and reverse-dual currency securities (yen-denominated debt securities with dollar coupon payments). In years when the yen strengthens in relation to the dollar, translating Aflac Japan's U.S. dollar-denominated investment income into yen lowers growth rates for net investment income, total adjusted revenues, and pretax adjusted earnings in yen terms. In years when the yen weakens, translating U.S. dollar-denominated investment income into yen magnifies growth rates for net investment income, total adjusted revenues, and pretax adjusted earnings in yen terms.
The following table illustrates the effect of translating Aflac Japan's U.S. dollar-denominated investment income and related items into yen by comparing certain segment results with those that would have been reported had foreign currency exchange rates remained unchanged from the prior year. Amounts excluding foreign currency impact on U.S. dollar-denominated investment income were determined using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the comparable prior year period. See non-U.S. GAAP financial measures defined above.
Aflac Japan Percentage Changes Over Prior Year
(Yen Operating Results)
For the Years Ended December 31,
The following table presents a summary of operating ratios in yen terms for Aflac Japan for the years ended December 31.
In 2020, the benefit ratio to total premiums increased, compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher persistency, resulting in an increase in future policy benefit reserves, partially offset by the continued change in mix of first and third sector business as first sector products become paid-up. In 2020, the adjusted expense ratio increased mainly due to the decrease in total revenues and an increase in expenses related to the paperless and COVID-19 initiatives, which include the expansion of and enhancements to virtual desktops and telework terminals to support a remote workforce, partially offset by lower DAC amortization due to higher persistency. In total for 2020, the pretax adjusted profit margin decreased slightly as compared to 2019. For 2021, the Company will continue to monitor the situation with respect to COVID-19, and potential impacts on the pretax adjusted profit margin and benefit ratio.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Aflac Japan Sales
The following table presents Aflac Japan's new annualized premium sales for the years ended December 31.
The following table details the contributions to Aflac Japan's new annualized premium sales by major insurance product for the years ended December 31.
(1) Includes term and whole life
The foundation of Aflac Japan's product portfolio has been, and continues to be, third sector products, which include cancer, medical and income support insurance products. Aflac Japan has been focusing more on promotion of cancer and medical insurance products in this low-interest-rate environment. These products are less interest-rate sensitive and more profitable compared to first sector savings products. With continued cost pressure on Japan’s health care system, the Company expects the need for third sector products will continue to rise in the future and that the medical and cancer insurance products Aflac Japan provides will continue to be an important part of its product portfolio.
Sales of protection-type first sector and third sector products on a yen basis decreased 36.9% in 2020, compared with 2019. The decline in sales primarily reflects the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the continuing effects of the Japan Post investigation.
Sales of Aflac Japan cancer products in the Japan Post Group channel experienced a material decline beginning in August 2019 and continued in 2020. For additional information, see the risk factor entitled "Events related to the ongoing Japan Post investigation and other matters regarding sales of Japan Post Insurance products could negatively impact the Company’s sales and results of operations," in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. Aflac Japan experienced a sharp drop-off in total sales, beginning in the second quarter of 2020 and continuing into 2021, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and continuing effects of the Japan Post investigation.
The following table details the contributions to Aflac Japan's new annualized premium sales by agency type for the years ended December 31.
(1) Includes Japan Post
In 2020, Aflac Japan recruited 48 new sales agencies. At December 31, 2020, Aflac Japan was represented by more than 8,500 sales agencies, with approximately 112,000 licensed sales associates employed by those agencies. The number of sales agencies has declined in recent years due to Aflac Japan's focus on supporting agencies with strong management frameworks, high productivity and more producing agents.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Japan Post offers Aflac's cancer insurance products in more than 20,000 postal outlets. Notwithstanding the recent reduction in sales of Aflac Japan's cancer products in the Japan Post channel, the Company believes this alliance with Japan Post has benefited and will continue to benefit its cancer insurance sales over the long term.
At December 31, 2020, Aflac Japan had agreements to sell its products at 361 banks, approximately 90% of the total number of banks in Japan.
Strategic Alliance with Japan Post Holdings
On December 19, 2018, the Parent Company and Aflac Japan entered into a Basic Agreement with Japan Post Holdings a Japanese corporation. Pursuant to the terms of the Basic Agreement, Japan Post Holdings agreed to form a capital relationship with the Parent Company, and Japan Post Holdings and Aflac Japan agreed to reconfirm existing initiatives regarding cancer insurance and to consider new joint initiatives, including leveraging digital technology in various processes, cooperation in new product development to promote customer-centric business management, cooperation in domestic and/or overseas business expansion and joint investment in third party entities and cooperation regarding asset management.
On February 28, 2019, the Parent Company entered a Shareholders Agreement with Japan Post Holdings, J&A Alliance Holdings Corporation, a Delaware corporation, solely in its capacity as trustee of J&A Alliance Trust, a New York voting trust (Trust), and General Incorporated Association J&A Alliance, a Japanese general incorporated association. Pursuant to the Shareholders Agreement, Japan Post Holdings agreed to cause the Trust to use commercially reasonable efforts to acquire, through open market or private block purchases in the U.S., beneficial ownership of approximately 7% of the Common Stock in connection with the Basic Agreement. According to a Schedule 13G/A filed by Japan Post Holdings with the SEC on January 6, 2021, the Trust had beneficially acquired 7.45% of the outstanding Common Shares as of December 31, 2020. Japan Post Holdings is the sole beneficiary of the Trust.
On May 1, 2020, the Parent Company filed a registration statement on Form S-3 that registered the sale of its common stock from time to time by J&A Alliance Holdings Corporation in its capacity as trustee of the Trust. The filing was made strictly pursuant to a contractual requirement contained in the Shareholders Agreement. Notwithstanding the contractual commitment and filing of the Form S-3, the Trust continues to be subject to a lockup period for a period expiring four years after the Trust acquired 7% of the Parent Company's outstanding shares, under the terms of the Shareholders Agreement.
The Trust has agreed not to own more than 10% of the Parent Company’s outstanding shares for a period expiring four years after the Trust acquired 7% of such shares, five years after it acquires 5% of such shares, or ten years after the Trust begins acquiring the Parent Company’s stock. After expiration of such period, the Trust has agreed not to own more than the greater of 10% of the Parent Company’s outstanding shares or such shares representing 22.5% of the voting rights in the Parent Company.
In light of the fact that the shares acquired by the Trust, like all Aflac Incorporated common shares, will be eligible for 10-for-1 voting rights after being held for 48 consecutive months, the Shareholders Agreement further provides for voting restrictions that effectively limit the trustee’s voting rights to no more than 20% of the voting rights in the Parent Company and further restrict the trustee’s voting rights with respect to certain change in control transactions. Japan Post Holdings will not have a Board seat on the Parent Company’s Board of Directors and will not have rights to control, manage or intervene in the management of the Parent Company.
As of December 31, 2019, all regulatory approvals expressly set forth in the Shareholders Agreement have been obtained. The Shareholders Agreement requires the parties to use reasonable best efforts to cooperate in connection with any ongoing regulatory matters related to or arising from the Trust’s acquisition or ownership or control of the shares of Company Common Stock, including any applications or filings in connection with a direct or indirect acquisition of control of or merger with an insurer by the Company or its affiliates. The foregoing is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Shareholders Agreement, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 10.50 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed April 26, 2019, and the terms of which exhibit are incorporated herein by reference.
Aflac Japan Investments
The level of investment income in yen is affected by available cash flow from operations, the timing of investing the cash flow, yields on new investments, the effect of yen/dollar exchange rates on U.S. dollar-denominated investment income, and other factors.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
As part of the Company's portfolio management and asset allocation process, Aflac Japan invests in yen and U.S. dollar-denominated investments. Yen-denominated investments primarily consist of JGBs and public and private fixed maturity securities. Aflac Japan's U.S. dollar-denominated investments include fixed maturity investments and growth assets, including public equity securities and alternative investments in limited partnerships or similar investment vehicles. Aflac Japan has been investing in both publicly-traded and privately originated U.S. dollar-denominated investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities and loan receivables, and has entered into foreign currency forwards and options to hedge the currency risk on the fair value of a portion of the U.S. dollar investments.
The following table details the investment purchases for Aflac Japan for the years ended December 31.
See the Investments section of this MD&A for further discussion of these investment programs, and see Notes 1, 3 and 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding loans and loan receivables.
Funds available for investment include cash flows from operations, investment income, and funds generated from maturities, redemptions, securities lending, and other securities transactions. Securities lending is also used from time to time to accelerate the availability of funds for investment. Purchases of securities from period to period are determined based on multiple objectives including appropriate portfolio diversification, the relative value of a potential investment and availability of investment opportunities, liquidity, credit and other risk factors while adhering to the Company's investment policy guidelines.
The following table presents the results of Aflac Japan's investment yields for the years ended and as of December 31.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(1) Includes fixed maturity securities, commercial mortgage and other loans, equity securities, and excludes alternative investments in limited partnerships
(2) Reported on a gross yield basis; excludes investment expenses, external management fees, and amortized hedge costs
(3) Net of investment expenses and amortized hedge costs, year-to-date number reflected on a quarterly average basis
The decrease in the Aflac Japan new money yield in 2020 was primarily due to lower yields on floating rate asset classes.
See Notes 3, 4 and 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Investments section of this MD&A for additional information on the Company's investments and hedging strategies.
AFLAC U.S. SEGMENT
Aflac U.S. Pretax Adjusted Earnings
Changes in Aflac U.S. pretax adjusted earnings and profit margins are primarily affected by morbidity, mortality, expenses, persistency and investment yields. The following table presents a summary of operating results for Aflac U.S. for the years ended December 31.
Aflac U.S. Summary of Operating Results
(1) Net interest cash flows from derivatives associated with certain investment strategies of $3 for the year ended December 31, 2020 have been reclassified from net investment gains (losses) and included in adjusted earnings as a component of net investment income.
Annualized premiums in force decreased 3.2% in 2020 and increased 1.1% in 2019. Annualized premiums in force at December 31 were $6.1 billion in 2020, compared with $6.3 billion in 2019.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following table presents a summary of operating ratios for Aflac U.S. for the years ended December 31.
The benefit ratio decreased in 2020, compared with 2019, reflecting reduced accidents, wellness medical visits and routine procedures due to shelter-in-place orders and heightened social distancing due to COVID-19. The adjusted expense ratio increased in 2020, compared with 2019, primarily due to anticipated spending increases reflecting ongoing investments in the U.S. platform, distribution, and customer experience, TPA related expenses from the acquisition of Argus, the Voluntary Separation Plan, and lower unit cost capitalization reflecting a decline in sales. The pretax adjusted profit margin decreased slightly in 2020 when compared with 2019, due to higher expense ratios, offset somewhat by lower benefit ratios. For 2021, the Company will continue to monitor the situation with respect to COVID-19, and potential impacts on the pretax adjusted profit margin and benefit ratio.
Aflac U.S. Sales
The following table presents Aflac's U.S. new annualized premium sales for the years ended December 31.
The following table details the contributions to Aflac's U.S. new annualized premium sales by major insurance product category for the years ended December 31.
(1) Includes cancer, critical illness and hospital intensive care products
New annualized premium sales for accident insurance, the Aflac U.S. leading product category, decreased 36.6%, short-term disability sales decreased 31.5%, critical care insurance sales (including cancer insurance) decreased 30.1%, and hospital indemnity insurance sales decreased 25.2% in 2020, compared with 2019. Overall sales decreased in 2020 as well net earned premium decreased .9%. Primarily, the decline in sales for Aflac U.S. is attributable COVID-19 social distancing efforts, which limited face-to-face sales opportunities beginning in mid-March 2020. See the Executive Summary section entitled "COVID-19" of this MD&A for additional information.
In 2020, the Aflac U.S. sales forces included an average of approximately 6,500 U.S. agents, including brokers, who were actively producing business on a weekly basis. The Company believes that this average weekly producer equivalent
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
metric allows sales management to monitor progress and needs, as well as serve as a leading indicator of future production capacity.
In November 2020, the Company, through its insurance subsidiaries Aflac and Aflac New York, acquired Zurich North America’s U.S. Corporate Life and Pensions business, which consists of group life, disability and absence management products. Aflac and Aflac New York agreed to reinsure on an indemnity basis Zurich North America’s U.S. in-force group life and disability policies with annualized earned premium of over $100 million. Aflac also acquired assets needed to support the group life and disability business, along with an absence management platform.
In November 2019, the Company acquired Argus Holdings, LLC and its subsidiary Argus Dental & Vision, Inc., a benefits management organization and national network dental and vision company, which provides a platform for Aflac Dental and Vision. Argus is an addition to the Aflac U.S. segment.
Aflac U.S. Investments
The level of investment income is affected by available cash flow from operations, the timing of investing the cash flow, yields on new investments, and other factors.
As part of the Company's portfolio management and asset allocation process, Aflac U.S. invests in fixed maturity investments and growth assets, including public equity securities and alternative investments in limited partnerships. Aflac U.S. has been investing in both publicly traded and privately originated investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities and loan receivables.
The following table details the investment purchases for Aflac U.S. as of December 31.
Funds available for investment include cash flows from operations, investment income, and funds generated from maturities, redemptions, and other securities transactions. Purchases of securities from period to period are determined based on multiple objectives, including appropriate portfolio diversification, the relative value of a potential investment and availability of investment opportunities, liquidity, credit and other risk factors while adhering to the Company's investment policy guidelines.
The following table presents the results of Aflac's U.S. investment yields for the years ended and as of December 31.
(1) Includes fixed maturity securities, commercial mortgage and other loans, equity securities, and excludes alternative investments in limited partnerships
(2) Reported on a gross yield basis; excludes investment expenses and external management fees
(3) Net of investment expenses, year-to-date number reflected on a quarterly average basis
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The decrease in the Aflac U.S. new money yield for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower U.S. interest rates.
See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Market Risks of Financial Instruments - Credit Risk subsection of