ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K ("Form 10-K"). You should review the sections titled “Risk Factors” for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. For the periods presented, references to originating bank partners are to Cross River Bank and Celtic Bank. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this report to “Affirm,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” “us,” or similar terms refer to Affirm Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Final Prospectus dated January 12, 2021 and filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on January 14, 2021.
Overview
We are building the next generation platform for digital and mobile-first commerce. We believe that by using modern technology, the very best engineering talent, and a mission-driven approach, we can reinvent payments and commerce. Our solutions, which are built on trust and transparency, make it easier for consumers to spend responsibly and with confidence, easier for merchants to convert sales and grow, and easier for commerce to thrive.
Our point-of-sale solution allows consumers to pay for purchases in fixed amounts without deferred interest, hidden fees, or penalties. We empower consumers to pay over time rather than paying for a purchase entirely upfront. This increases consumers’ purchasing power and gives them more control and flexibility. Our platform facilitates both true 0% APR payment options and interest-bearing loans. On the merchant side, we offer commerce enablement, demand generation, and customer acquisition tools. Our solutions empower merchants to more efficiently promote and sell their products, optimize their customer acquisition strategies, and drive incremental sales. We also provide valuable product-level data and insights - information that merchants cannot easily get elsewhere - to better inform their strategies. Finally, our consumer app unlocks the full suite of Affirm products for a delightful end-to-end consumer experience. Consumers can use our app to manage payments, open a high-yield savings account, and access a personalized marketplace.
Our company is predicated on the principles of simplicity, transparency, and putting people first. By adhering to these principles, we have built enduring, trust-based relationships with consumers and merchants that we believe will set us up for long-term, sustainable success. We believe our innovative approach uniquely positions us to define the future of commerce and payments.
Technology and data are at the core of everything we do. Our expertise in sourcing, aggregating, and analyzing data has been what we believe to be the key competitive advantage of our platform since our founding. We believe our proprietary technology platform and data give us a unique advantage in pricing risk. We use data to inform our risk scoring in order to generate value for our consumers, merchants, and capital partners. We collect and store petabytes of information that we carefully structure and use to regularly recalibrate and revalidate our models, thereby getting to risk scoring and pricing faster, more efficiently, and with a higher degree of confidence. We also prioritize building our own technology and investing in product and engineering talent as we believe these are enduring competitive advantages that are difficult to replicate. Our solutions use the latest in machine learning, artificial intelligence, cloud-based technologies, and other modern tools to create differentiated and scalable products.
We have achieved significant growth in recent periods. Our total revenue, net was $870.5 million, $509.5 million, and $264.4 million for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. We incurred net losses
of $430.9 million, $112.6 million, and $120.5 million for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively.
The combination of our differentiated product offering, efficient go-to-market strategy, and strong monetization engine has resulted in rapid growth.
•Accelerating GMV growth. We grew our Gross Merchandise Volume ("GMV") by 79% year-over-year to $8.3 billion during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, GMV was $4.6 billion, which represented 77% growth over the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
•Increased consumer engagement. The number of active consumers on our platform grew by 3.5 million consumers from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021, an increase of 97% to a total of 7.1 million.
•Expanded merchant network. We have also continued to scale the breadth and reach of our platform. From June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021, our merchant base expanded by 412% to 28,995 active merchants.
•Compelling network revenue growth. Network revenue, which combines merchant network revenue and virtual card network revenue, increased 56% year-over-year compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. We believe that the continued growth of network revenue demonstrates the value of our platform to our merchants.
Our business was designed to scale efficiently. Our partnerships with banks and other funding relationships have allowed us to remain equity capital efficient. Since July 1, 2016, we have processed approximately $17.5 billion of GMV on our platform. As of June 30, 2021, we had over $6.5 billion in funding capacity from a diverse set of capital partners, including through our warehouse facilities, securitization trusts, and forward flow arrangements, an increase of $3.2 billion from $3.3 billion as of June 30, 2020.
Through the diversity of these funding relationships, the equity capital required to build our total platform portfolio has declined from approximately 9% of the total platform portfolio as of June 30, 2020, to approximately 4% as of June 30, 2021. We define our total platform portfolio as the unpaid principal balance outstanding of all loans facilitated through our platform as of the balance sheet date, including both those loans held for investment and those loans owned by third-parties. This amount totaled $4.7 billion and $2.5 billion as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. Additionally, we define the equity capital required as the balance of loans held for investment, plus loans held for sale, less funding debt and notes issued by securitization trusts, per our consolidated balance sheet. This amount totaled $178.1 million and $220.8 million as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. Equity capital required as a percent of the last twelve months' GMV was 2% and 5% as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively.
We have focused on growing our platform and plan to continue making investments to drive future growth, as evidenced by our strategic acquisitions. In January 2021, we acquired PayBright, one of Canada's leading providers of installment payment plans for e-commerce and in-store purchases, to expand the scale and reach of our platform, creating a larger, more diverse merchant and consumer network across the United States and Canada. In May 2021, we acquired Returnly, a leader in online return experiences and post-purchase payments, to expand the capabilities of our platform and address the full shopping journey by enabling seamless return experiences that drive customer loyalty and satisfaction.
We believe that our continued success will depend on many factors, including our ability to attract additional merchant partners, retain our existing merchant partners, and grow and develop our relationships with new and existing merchant partners (including our relationship with Amazon), help our merchants grow their revenue on our platform, and develop new innovative solutions to establish the ubiquity of our network and breadth of our platform. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Our Financial Model
Our Revenue Model
From merchants, we earn a fee when we help them convert a sale and facilitate a transaction. While merchant fees depend on the individual arrangement between us and each merchant, and vary based on the terms of the product offering, we generally earn larger merchant fees on 0% APR financing products and financial products with longer term lengths. For the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, 0% APR financing represented 43%, 43%, and 33%, respectively, of total GMV facilitated through our platform.
From consumers, we earn interest income on the simple interest loans that we purchase from our originating bank partners. Interest rates charged to our consumers vary depending on the transaction risk, creditworthiness of the consumer, the repayment term selected by the consumer, the amount of the loan, and the individual arrangement with a merchant. Because our consumers are never charged deferred or compounding interest, late fees, or penalties on the loans, we are not incentivized to profit from our consumers’ hardships.
In order to accelerate our ubiquity, we facilitate the issuance of virtual cards directly to consumers through our app, allowing them to shop with merchants that may not yet be fully integrated with Affirm. When these virtual cards are used over established card networks, we earn a portion of the interchange fee from the transaction.
Our Loan Origination and Servicing Model
When a consumer applies for a loan through our platform, the loan is underwritten using our proprietary risk model. Once approved for the loan, the consumer then selects his/her preferred repayment option. The substantial majority of these loans are funded and issued by our originating bank partners.
A substantial majority of the loans facilitated through our platform are originated through our originating bank partners: Cross River Bank, an FDIC-insured New Jersey state-chartered bank, and Celtic Bank, an FDIC-insured Utah state-chartered industrial bank. These partnerships allow us to benefit from our partners' ability to originate loans under their banking licenses while complying with various federal, state, and other laws. Under this arrangement, we must comply with our originating bank partners' credit policies and underwriting procedures, and our originating bank partners maintain ultimate authority to decide whether to originate a loan. When an originating bank partner originates a loan, it funds the loan out of its own funds and may subsequently offer and sell the loan to us. Pursuant to our agreements with these partners, we are obligated to purchase the loans facilitated through our platform that our partner offers us and our obligation is secured by cash deposits. To date, we have purchased all of the loans facilitated through our platform and originated by our originating bank partners. When we purchase a loan from an originating bank partner, the purchase price is equal to the outstanding principal balance of the loan, plus a fee and any accrued interest. The originating bank partner also retains an interest in the loans purchased by us through a loan performance fee that is payable by us on the aggregate principal amount of a loan that is paid by a consumer. See Note 13. Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities for more information on the performance fee liability.
We are also able to originate loans directly under our lending, servicing, and brokering licenses in Canada and across various states in the U.S. through our consolidated subsidiaries. We started originating loans directly in Canada in October 2019 and, through June 30, 2021, we had originated approximately $257.7 million of loans in Canada. As of June 30, 2021, we had directly originated $336.1 million of loans in the U.S. pursuant to our state licenses.
We act as the servicer on all loans that we originate directly or purchase from our originating bank partners and earn a servicing fee on loans we sell to our funding sources. We do not sell the servicing rights on any of the loans, allowing us to control the consumer experience end-to-end. To allow for flexible staffing to support overflow and seasonal traffic, we partner with several sub-servicers to manage customer care, first priority collections, and third-party collections in accordance with our policies and procedures.
Our Funding Sources
We maintain a capital-efficient model through a diverse set of funding sources. When we originate a loan directly or purchase a loan originated by our originating bank partners, we often utilize warehouse facilities with certain lenders to finance our lending activities or loan purchases. We sell the loans we originate or purchase from our originating bank partners to whole loan buyers and securitization investors through forward flow arrangements and securitization transactions, and earn servicing fees from continuing to act as the servicer on the loans.
Key Operating Metrics
We collect and analyze operating and financial data of our business to assess our performance, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. In addition to revenue, net (loss) income, and other results under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), the following tables set forth key operating metrics we use to evaluate our business.
GMV
We measure gross merchandise volume to assess the volume of transactions that take place on our platform. We define GMV as the total dollar amount of all transactions on the Affirm platform during the applicable period, net of refunds. GMV does not represent revenue earned by us. However, the GMV processed through our platform is an indicator of the success of our merchants, value provided to our consumers, and the strength of our platform. For the year ended June 30, 2021, GMV was $8.3 billion, which represented an increase of approximately 79% as compared to $4.6 billion for the year ended June 30, 2020. For the year ended June 30, 2020, GMV was $4.6 billion, which represented an increase of approximately 77% as compared to $2.6 billion for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. Our acquisitions of PayBright and Returnly contributed an incremental $153.8 million of GMV during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Active Consumers
We assess consumer adoption and engagement by the number of active consumers across our platform. Active consumers are the primary measure of the size of our network. We define an active consumer as a consumer who engages in at least one transaction on our platform during the twelve months prior to the measurement date. As of June 30, 2021, we had 7.1 million active consumers, representing an increase of approximately 97% compared to 3.6 million as of June 30, 2020, and approximately 77% compared to 2.0 million at June 30, 2019. Active consumers include an incremental 1.1 million consumers who engaged in at least one transaction on the PayBright or Returnly platforms during the twelve months prior to the measurement date, including prior to the acquisitions of PayBright and Returnly by Affirm.
Transactions per Active Consumer
We believe the value of our network is amplified with greater consumer engagement and repeat usage, highlighted by increased transactions per active consumer. Transactions per active consumer is defined as the average number of transactions that an active consumer has conducted on our platform during the twelve months
prior to the measurement date. As of June 30, 2021, we had approximately 2.3 transactions per active consumer, representing an increase of 8% as compared to 2.1 as of June 30, 2020 and an increase of 13% compared to June 30, 2019. Transactions per active consumer includes incremental transactions completed by active consumers on the PayBright or Returnly platforms during the twelve months prior to the measurement date and prior to the acquisitions of PayBright and Returnly by Affirm.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Expanding our Network, Diversity, and Mix of Funding Relationships
Our capital efficient funding model is integral to the success of our platform. As we scale the number of transactions on our network and grow GMV, we maintain a variety of funding relationships in order to support our network. Our diversified funding relationships include warehouse facilities, securitization trusts, forward flow arrangements, and partnerships with banks. Given the short duration and strong performance of our assets, funding can be recycled quickly, resulting in a high-velocity, capital efficient funding model. We have continued to reduce the percentage of our equity capital required to fund our total platform portfolio from approximately 9% as of June 30, 2020, to approximately 4% as of June 30, 2021. The mix of on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet funding will also impact our results in any given period.
Mix of Business on Our Platform
The mix of products that our merchants offer and our consumers purchase in any period affects our operating results. The mix impacts GMV, revenue, and the financial results of that period. Differences in product mix relate to different loan durations, APR mix, and varying proportion of 0% APR versus interest-bearing financings. For example, our low AOV products generally benefit from shorter duration, but also have lower revenue as a percentage of GMV when compared to high AOV products. These mix shifts are driven in part by merchant-side activity relating to the marketing of their products, whether the merchant is fully integrated within our network, and general economic conditions affecting consumer demand. In addition, we expect that our commercial agreement with Shopify to offer Shop Pay Installments powered by Affirm and our recent Split Pay offering, a short-term payment plan for purchases under $250 with 0% APR, will increase the mix of our shorter duration, low AOV products. Differences in the mix of high versus low AOV will also impact our results. For example, we expect that transactions per active consumer may increase while revenue as a percentage of GMV may decline in the medium term to the extent that a greater portion of our GMV comes from Split Pay and other low-AOV offerings.
Sales and Marketing Investment
We have historically relied on the strength of our merchant relationships and positive user experience to develop our consumer brand and grow the ubiquity of our platform. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we increased our investment in sales and marketing channels that we believe will drive further brand awareness and preference among both consumers and merchants. Given the nature of our revenue, our investment in sales and marketing in a given period may not impact results until subsequent periods. Additionally, given the increasingly competitive nature of merchant acquisition, we expect that we may make significant investments in retaining and acquiring new merchants. We are focused on the effectiveness of sales and marketing spending and will continue to be strategic in maintaining efficient consumer and merchant acquisition.
Seasonality
We experience seasonal fluctuations in our revenue as a result of consumer spending patterns. Historically, our revenue has been the strongest during the second quarter of our fiscal year due to increases in retail commerce during the holiday season. Additionally, revenue associated with the purchase of home fitness equipment historically has been strongest in the third quarter of our fiscal year. Adverse events that occur during these months could have a disproportionate effect on our financial results for the fiscal year.
Timing of Merchant Transaction Recognition Change
The timing of our revenue recognition is tied to when a merchant captures payment and confirms a transaction financed through our platform, which we refer to as the merchant capture date. If a merchant recognizes the payment collection and confirms the transaction later in their transaction process, we expect that this change would delay the merchant capture date, which would delay our recognition of GMV and revenue related to that merchant’s transactions by a corresponding amount. Such a delay would adversely affect the GMV and revenue that we recognize from such merchant’s transactions in the quarterly period of such change, as the merchant capture date for a portion of such transactions would shift to a future quarterly period. We typically experience small timing differences between the consumer purchase date and the date when a merchant captures payment; however, these differences have historically been immaterial.
In December 2020, the implementation of such a change began with respect to our largest merchant, Peloton, who implemented a change in the timing of when the transaction is considered captured. This resulted in a delay in the recognition of GMV and revenue related to these transactions in the period ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we facilitated $66.3 million more transaction volume on our platform than was captured and confirmed by our merchants, an increase of $54.1 million from the year ended June 30, 2020, during which we facilitated $12.2 million more transaction volume than was captured and confirmed by our merchants. As of June 30, 2021 and over the multi-year life of our merchant partnership with Peloton, we had facilitated approximately $73.5 million more transaction volume than had been captured and confirmed by the merchant. This is an increase of $73.5 million from June 30, 2020 and an increase of $7.8 million from March 31, 2021.
For more information on factors affecting our performance, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and continues to have, a significant impact on the U.S. economy and the markets in which we operate. Our positive performance during this period demonstrates the value and effectiveness of our platform, the resiliency of our business model, and the capabilities of our risk management and underwriting approach. However, some of the COVID-19 related trends underlying this positive performance, in particular the significant revenue generated from certain types of merchants, may not continue at current levels.
Diversified Mix of Merchant Partners
We have a diversified set of merchant partners across industries, which allows us to capitalize on industry tailwinds and changing consumer spending behavior, economic conditions, and other factors that may affect a particular type of merchant or industry. For example, following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, our revenue from merchant partners in the travel, hospitality, and entertainment industries declined significantly, but we saw a significant increase in revenue from merchant partners offering home fitness equipment, home office products, and home furnishings. While we have benefited as a result of such consumer spending trends, there can be no assurance that such trends will continue or that the levels of total revenue and merchant network revenue that we generate from merchants in fitness equipment, home office products, and home furnishings industries will continue; in fact, we have begun to see these trends begin to reverse as access to COVID-19 vaccinations has increased. The decline of sales by our merchants for any reason will generally result in lower credit sales and, therefore, lower loan volume and associated fee income for us. However, the beginnings of economic reopening and recovery present new opportunities for growth in our diverse merchant base, including early indications of strong recovery in the travel and hospitality sectors, in which we believe we are well positioned.
Dynamic Changes to Risk Model
As part of our risk mitigation platform, we closely track data and trends to measure risk and manage exposure, leveraging our flexibility to quickly adjust and adapt. In response to the macroeconomic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we initiated a series of refinements to our risk model based on our real-time data observations
and analysis. We were able to respond, implement, and test the updates to our model quickly due to the adaptability of our infrastructure, underwriting, and risk management models. This resulted in decreases across both charge-offs and delinquencies. As macroeconomic conditions improved, the embedded flexibility of the model allowed our risk tolerances to return closer to pre-pandemic levels while still maintaining low losses. Our proprietary risk model was not designed to take into account the longer-term impacts of social, economic, and financial disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and while we continue to make refinements to our risk model as new information becomes available to us, any changes to our risk model may be ineffective and the performance of our risk model may decline.
Resilient Allowance Model
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, we factored in updated loss multiples using macroeconomic data to reflect stressed expected loss scenarios emerging from forecasted delinquencies and defaults. This stressing of the model resulted in an increase of the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of loans held for investment from 8.9% as of February 29, 2020 to 14.8% as of March 31, 2020. In the months subsequent to this, we have seen stronger than expected repayment history in the portfolio, resulting in a release of the allowance. As of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of loans held for investment was 6% and 9%, respectively. Our allowance for credit losses has declined as a percentage of loans held for investment as we retained a higher portion of longer-term, 0% APR loans on our balance sheet since completing our consolidated 2020-Z1 and 2020-Z2 securitizations during the year ended June 30, 2021. These longer-term, 0% APR loans tend to have lower expected losses than our interest bearing loans and generally carry lower loss reserves as a percentage of initial principal balance. Additionally, improved macroeconomic conditions have resulted in an overall improved credit outlook and reduced expected losses. Should macroeconomic factors or expected losses change, we may increase or decrease the allowance for credit losses.
For more information on the risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business and Industry.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Merchant Network Revenue
Merchant partners are charged a fee on transactions processed through the Affirm platform. The fees vary depending on the individual arrangement between us and each merchant and on the terms of the product offering. The fee is recognized at the point in time the terms of the executed merchant agreement have been fulfilled and the merchant successfully confirms the transaction. We may originate certain loans via our wholly-owned subsidiaries, with zero or below market interest rates. In these instances, the par value of the loans originated is in excess of the fair market value of such loans, resulting in a loss, which we record as a reduction to merchant network revenue when we estimate that these losses will be recoverable over the term of our contract with the merchant. In order to continue to expand our consumer base, we may originate loans under certain merchant arrangements that we do not expect to achieve positive revenue. In these instances, the loss is recorded as sales and marketing expense. During the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated 44%, 50% and 50% of our revenue, respectively, from merchant network fees.
Virtual Card Network Revenue
A smaller portion of our revenue comes from our Virtual Card product. We have agreements with issuer processors to facilitate transactions through the issuance of virtual debit cards to be used by consumers at checkout. Consumers can apply for a virtual debit card through the Affirm app and, upon approval, receive a single-use virtual debit card to be used for their purchase online or offline at a non-integrated merchant. The virtual debit card is funded at the time a transaction is authorized using cash held by the issuer processor in a reserve fund, which is ultimately funded and maintained by us. Our originating bank partner then originates a loan to the consumer once the transaction is confirmed by the merchant. The non-integrated merchants are charged interchange fees by the
issuer processor for virtual debit card transactions, as with all debit card purchases, and the issuer processor shares a portion of this revenue with us. We also leverage this issuer processor as a means of integrating certain merchants. Similarly, for these arrangements with integrated merchants, the merchant is charged interchange fees by the issuer processor and the issuer processor shares a portion of this revenue with us. This revenue is recognized as a percentage of both our loan volume transacted on the payment processor network and net interchange income, and this revenue is presented net of associated processing fees. We generated 6%, 4%, and 3% of our revenue from virtual card network fees for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Interest Income
We also earn revenue through interest earned on loans facilitated by our platform. Interest income includes interest charged to consumers over the term of the consumers’ loans based on the principal outstanding and is calculated using the effective interest method. In addition, interest income includes the amortization of any discounts or premiums on loan receivables created upon either the purchase of a loan from our originating bank partners or the origination of a loan. These discounts and premiums are accreted or amortized over the life of the loan using the effective interest method and represented 31%, 19%, and 18% of total interest income for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. During the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated 37%, 37%, and 45% of our revenue from interest income, respectively.
Gain on Sales of Loans
We sell a portion of the loans we originate or purchase from our originating bank partners to third-party investors. We recognize a gain or loss on sale of such loans as the difference between the proceeds received, adjusted for initial recognition of servicing assets and liabilities obtained at the date of sale, and the carrying value of the loan. During the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated 10%, 6% and 0% of our revenue from gain (loss) on sales of loans, respectively.
Servicing Income
We earn a specified fee from providing professional services to manage loan portfolios on behalf of our third-party loan owners. Under the servicing agreements with our capital markets partners, we are entitled to collect servicing fees on the loans that we service, which are paid monthly based upon an annual fixed percentage of the outstanding loan portfolio balance. During the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated 3%, 3%, and 2% of our revenue from servicing fees, respectively.
We expect our revenue may vary from period to period based on, among other things, the timing and size of onboarding of new merchants, the mix of 0% APR loans versus interest-bearing loans with simple interest, type and mix of products that our merchants offer to their customers, the rate of repeat transactions, transaction volume, and seasonality of or fluctuations in usage of our platform.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of the loss on loan purchase commitment made to our originating bank partners, the provision for credit losses, funding costs, processing and servicing, technology and data analytics, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation expense, comprise a significant component of several of these expense categories. An allocation of overhead, such as rent and other occupancy expenses, is based on employee headcount and included in processing and servicing, technology and data analytics, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses.
As of June 30, 2021, we had 1,641 employees, compared to 893 employees as of June 30, 2020. We increased our headcount and personnel related costs across our business in order to support our growth strategy. We expect headcount to continue to increase during fiscal year 2022 given our focus on growth and expansion.
Loss on Loan Purchase Commitment
We purchase certain loans from our originating bank partners that are processed through our platform and our originating bank partner puts back to us. Under the terms of the agreements with our originating bank partners, we are generally required to pay the principal amount plus accrued interest for such loans. In certain instances, our originating bank partners may originate loans with zero or below market interest rates that we are required to purchase. In these instances, we may be required to purchase the loan for a price in excess of the fair market value of such loans, which results in a loss. These losses are recognized as loss on loan purchase commitment in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. These costs are incurred on a per loan basis.
Provision for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses consists of amounts charged against income during the period to maintain an allowance for credit losses. Our allowance for credit losses represents our estimate of the credit losses inherent in our loans held for investment and is based on a variety of factors, including the composition and quality of the portfolio, loan specific information gathered through our collection efforts, current economic conditions, and our historical net charge-off and loss experience. These costs are incurred on a per loan basis.
Funding Costs
Funding costs consist of the interest expense we incur on our borrowings and amortization of fees and other costs incurred in connection with funding the purchase and origination of loans. Excluding the amortization of debt issuance costs, which totaled $6.4 million, $2.3 million, and $1.7 million for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, we incur an expense per loan pledged to our debt funding sources.
Processing and Servicing
Processing and servicing expense consists primarily of payment processing fees, third-party customer support and collection expense salaries and personnel-related costs of our customer care team, and allocated overhead. Payment processing costs are primarily driven by the number and dollar value of consumer repayments which grow as the number of transactions and GMV processed on our platform increases. Customer care loan servicing costs are primarily staffing costs related to third-party and in-house loan servicing agents, the demand for which generally increases with the number of transactions on our platform. Collection fees are fees paid to agencies as percentages of the dollars of repayment they recuperate from borrowers whose loans had previously been charged off. Processing and servicing expenses are predominantly per transaction processing fees and third-party staffing fees that generally increase with consumer contact.
Technology and Data Analytics
Technology and data analytics expense consists primarily of the salaries, stock-based compensation, and personnel-related costs of our engineering and product employees as well as our credit and analytics employees who develop our proprietary risk model, and totaled $182.2 million, $75.8 million, and $53.2 million for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Additionally, for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, $29.0 million, $17.1 million, and $12.6 million, respectively, of salaries and personnel costs that relate to the development of internal-use software were capitalized into property, equipment and software, net on the consolidated balance sheets, and amortized into technology and data analytics expense over the useful life of the internal-use software. This amortization expense totaled $10.3 million, $5.5 million, and $2.9 million for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Additional technology and data analytics expenses include platform infrastructure and hosting costs, third-party data acquisition expenses, and expenses related to the maintenance of existing technology assets and our technology platform as a whole.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, as well as costs of general marketing and promotional activities, promotional event programs, sponsorships, and allocated overhead. In July 2020, we recognized an asset in connection with a commercial agreement with Shopify in which we granted warrants in exchange for their promotion of the Affirm platform with potential new merchant partners. This asset represents the probable future economic benefit to be realized over the four-year expected benefit period and is valued based on the fair value of the warrants at the grant date. This value is amortized on a straight-line basis over the four-year expected benefit period into sales and marketing expense, due to the nature of the expected benefit.
Additionally, in order to continue to expand our consumer base, we may originate certain loans via our wholly-owned subsidiaries with zero or below market interest rates under certain merchant arrangements that we do not expect to achieve positive revenue. In these instances, losses measured as the difference between the par value and fair market value of such loans are recorded as a sales and marketing expense when the loans are originated. These losses are recorded as sales and marketing expense. These losses totaled $1.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2021. We expect that our sales and marketing expense will increase as a percentage of revenue as we expand our sales and marketing efforts to drive our growth, expansion, and diversification.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of expenses related to our finance, legal, risk operations, human resources, and administrative personnel. General and administrative expenses also include costs related to fees paid for professional services, including legal, tax and accounting services, and allocated overhead.
We expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and professional services. We expect that our general and administrative expense will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows.
Other Income and Expenses
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of interest earned on our money market funds included in cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, gains and losses incurred on both our constant maturity swaps and as related to bifurcated derivatives associated with our convertible debt, and fair value adjustments resulting from changes in the fair value of our contingent consideration liability.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Our income tax (benefit) expense consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and Canadian federal and provincial income taxes. Through June 30, 2021, we had not been required to pay any material U.S. federal, state, or foreign income taxes due to accumulated net operating losses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss data for each of the periods presented in dollars:
(1) Upon purchase of a loan from our originating bank partners at a price above the fair market value of the loan or upon the origination of a loan with a par value in excess of the fair market value of the loan, a discount is included in the amortized cost basis of the loan. For loans held for investment, this discount is amortized over the life of the loan into interest income. When a loan is sold to a third-party loan buyer, the unamortized discount is released in full at the time of sale and recognized as part of the gain or loss on sales of loans. However, the cumulative value of the loss on loan purchase commitment or loss on origination, the interest income recognized over time from the amortization of discount while retained, and the release of discount into gain (loss) on sales of
loans, together net to zero over the life of the loan. The following table details activity for the discount, included in loans held for investment, for the periods indicated:
(2) Amounts include stock-based compensation as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Total Revenue, net
Total Revenue, net for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $360.9 million or 71%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $3,654.8 million or 79% in GMV on our platform, from $4,637.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 to $8,292.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. This increase in GMV was driven by the strong network effects of the expansion of our active merchant base from 5,664 as of June 30, 2020 to 28,995 as of June 30, 2021, growth in active consumers from 3.6 million as of June 30, 2020 to 7.1 million as of June 30, 2021, and an increase in average transactions per consumer from 2.1 as of June 30, 2020 to 2.3 as of June 30, 2021.
Merchant network revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $122.8 million or 48%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Merchant network revenue as a percentage of GMV for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased to 4.6% compared to 5.5% for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Merchant network revenue growth is generally correlated with both GMV growth and the mix of loans on our platform as different loan characteristics are positively or negatively correlated with merchant fee revenue as a percentage of GMV. In particular, merchant network revenue as a percentage of GMV typically increases with the term length and average order value of our loans ("AOV"), and typically decreases in higher APR loans. Specifically, 0% APR loans typically carry higher merchant fees as a percentage of GMV. The increases in merchant network revenue during the year ended June 30, 2021 were primarily driven by growth in GMV, partially offset by reductions in average term length and AOV. For both the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, 0% APR loans accounted for 43% of our total GMV. For the year ended June 30, 2021, loans with a term length greater than 12 months accounted for 29% of GMV, compared with 34% for the year ended June 30, 2020. AOV was lower at $550 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $609 for the year ended June 30, 2020.
These increases were partially offset by a reduction of merchant network revenue of $11.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 associated with the creation of discounts on self-originated loans with a par value in excess of the fair value of such loans. These discounts on certain self-originated loans are amortized into interest income over the life of the loan and were not incurred during the year ended June 30, 2020.
Additionally, during the third fiscal quarter of 2021, we recorded a reduction of merchant network revenue of $3.1 million associated with estimated merchant fees previously earned on the facilitation of transactions related to products involved in a recall announced by our largest merchant partner, Peloton. This estimate was derived in part based on estimates of return rates provided by Peloton for the quarter ended March 31, 2021, in its Form 10-Q. Based on actual return activity observed, we recorded a further reduction of merchant network revenue of $2.3 million during the fourth fiscal quarter, bringing the total reduction of merchant network revenue associated with the recall to $5.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Virtual card network revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $30.5 million or 158%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was driven by an increase in GMV processed through our issuer processor of 148% for the year ended June 30, 2021 due to increased activity on our virtual card-enabled mobile application and growth in existing and new merchants integrated using our virtual card platform, as well as improved economics with our virtual card issuer processor partner.
Interest income for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $139.7 million or 75%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Generally, interest income is correlated with the changes in the average balance of loans held for investment, as we recognize interest on loans held for investment using the effective interest method over the life of the loan. The average balance of loans held for investment increased by 87% to $1,710.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same periods in the prior fiscal year.
As a percentage of average loans held for investment, total interest income decreased slightly from approximately 20% during the year ended June 30, 2020 to 19% during the year ended June 30, 2021. This change was driven by an increase in the average proportion of 0% APR loans being held on our consolidated balance sheet as a percentage of the total loans held for investment, which increased from 29% during the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to 46% during the year ended June 30, 2021. The shift was largely due to strong volume of longer-term 0% APR loans as well as short-term Split Pay loans being held for investment and the addition of our 0% APR 2020-Z1 and 2020-Z2 consolidated securitizations.
While we do recognize interest income on 0% APR loans via the amortization of the loan discount, this is generally earned at a lower rate than consumer interest on interest-bearing loans. The total amortization of discounts on loans held for investment increased by $65.8 million or 187%, for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared with the year ended June 30, 2020, and represented 31% of total interest income for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to 19% for the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase included the amortization of discounts arising from self-originated loans held for investment of $18.2 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, which was nil for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Gain (loss) on sales of loans for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $58.0 million or 182%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. We sold loans with an unpaid balance of $3,232.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 and $2,664.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, for which we retained servicing rights. This increase was primarily due to higher loan sale volume, favorable loan sale pricing terms, and optimizing the allocation of loans to loan buyers with higher pricing terms.
Servicing income for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $9.9 million or 67%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in the average unpaid principal balance of loans owned by third-party loan owners and increases in negotiated servicing rates with new and existing third-party loan owners. Additionally, during the year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized a reduction of servicing income of $1.0 million related to the changes in fair value of servicing assets and liabilities compared with an addition to servicing income of $1.5 million during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Operating Expenses
Loss on Loan Purchase Commitment
Loss on loan purchase commitment for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $85.2 million or 53%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was due to a significant increase in the volume of loans purchased above fair market value, primarily as a result of an increase in purchases of 0% APR loans from our originating bank partners during the period. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we purchased $7.9 billion of loan receivables from our originating bank partners, representing an increase of $3.2 billion or 68%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
Provision for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses generally represents the amount of expense required to maintain the allowance for credit losses on our consolidated balance sheet, which represents management’s estimate of future losses. In the event that our loans outperform expectation and/or we reduce our expectation of credit losses in future periods, we may release reserves and thereby reduce the allowance for credit losses, yielding income in the provision for credit losses. The provision is determined by the change in estimates for future losses and the net charge-offs incurred in the period. We record provision expense for each loan we retain as loans held for investment, whether we originate the loan or purchase it from one of our originating bank partners.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, we factored in updated loss multiples using macroeconomic data to reflect stressed expected loss scenarios emerging from forecasted delinquencies and defaults. This stressing of the model resulted in an increase of the allowance for credit losses up to 14.6% at its peak as of March 31, 2020. In the months subsequent to this, we have seen stronger than expected repayment history in the portfolio, resulting in a release of the allowance over time. While the allowance for credit losses increased by 24% compared to June 30, 2020, the balance of loans held for investment increased 96% compared to the prior period. As of June 30, 2021, the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of loans held for investment decreased to 5.8%, compared to 9.2% as of June 30, 2020.
This decrease in the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of loans held for investment over time was due to a combination of factors. Firstly, continued stronger than expected repayment performance of the portfolio accounted for a decrease of 62% in our net charge-offs as a percentage of our average loans held for investment to 3.0%, compared with 7.9% for the year ended June 30, 2020. Secondly, we began transitioning to a new underlying data model which incorporates internal improvements to our underwriting and collections processes while allowing for a more granular segmentation of the loan portfolio. This change in model resulted in a decrease in the allowance of approximately $48.2 million. These decreases were offset by allowances recognized on new purchases and originations of loans held for investment in the period, though with generally higher credit quality and pledged to securitization trusts. This combination of factors, coupled with the in-period charge-offs and recoveries, resulted in a decrease in the provision for credit losses of $39.2 million compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
Funding Costs
Funding costs for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $20.4 million or 63%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Funding costs for a given period are correlated with the sum of the average balance of funding debt and the average balance of notes issued by securitization trusts. This increase was primarily due to the introduction of notes issued by securitization trusts during the current fiscal year, which bear interest at fixed rates. The average balance of notes issued by securitization trusts during the year ended June 30, 2021 was $747.0 million, which did not exist during the prior year period. The average balance of funding debt for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $38.0 million or 5%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, while the average reference interest rate decreased by 91% during the period.
Processing and Servicing
Processing and servicing expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $23.9 million or 48%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $12.5 million or 57% increased in payment processing fees due to increased servicing activity and payments volume for the year ended June 30, 2021. Additionally, processing fees paid to our customer referral partners increased by $3.4 million or 189% for the year ended June 30, 2021. Personnel costs increased by $6.4 million or 119% for the year ended June 30, 2021 driven by growth in headcount, while third-party loan servicing and collections spend remained flat, increasing only 4% due to vendor cost improvements.
Technology and Data Analytics
Technology and data analytics expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $133.7 million or 109%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $106.4 million or 140%, increase in engineering, product, and data science personnel costs for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, net of capitalized costs for internal-use software, to continue to support our growth and technology platform as a whole. The largest component of these personnel costs was stock-based compensation, which accounted for $71.1 million of the increase compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, largely due to the vesting of RSUs for which the service-based condition had been met prior to the IPO and the performance-based condition was met on the IPO date.
Additionally, there was a $15.1 million or 63%, increase in data infrastructure and hosting costs for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, as well as a $0.9 million or 6%, increase in underwriting data provider costs for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Our data infrastructure and hosting and underwriting and data provider costs all benefited from unit level cost improvements achieved as a result of vendor contract renegotiations.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $159.2 million or 636%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to $64.8 million of expense incurred during the year ended June 30, 2021 associated with the amortization of our commercial agreement asset with Shopify, which was recognized in July 2020. This asset represents the probable future economic benefit to be realized over the four-year expected benefit period and is valued based on the fair value of the warrants granted to Shopify under such commercial agreement at the grant date. This value is amortized on a straight-line basis over the four-year expected benefit period. Additionally, stock-based compensation related to employees in the sales and
marketing functions increased $15.1 million or 375%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, largely due to the vesting of RSUs for which the service-based condition had been met prior to the IPO and the performance-based condition was met on the IPO date.
Furthermore, there was a $32.3 million or 1,154% increase in brand and consumer marketing spend during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, associated with our expanded brand-activation, holiday shopping, lifestyle, and travel marketing campaigns, as well as a $12.4 million or 2,480% increase in business-to-business marketing spend compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Prior to this fiscal year, we had only engaged in very limited marketing efforts, primarily in the form of co-marketing with merchants.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $249.0 million or 205%, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $198.9 million or 263% in personnel costs during the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our finance, legal, operations, and administrative organizations. The largest component of these personnel costs was stock-based compensation, which increased by $169.4 million compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This was primarily due to $83.9 million of expense recognized during the year ended June 30, 2021 based on a long-term, multi-year performance-based stock option award granted to our Chief Executive Officer prior to our IPO, as well as the vesting of RSUs for which the service-based condition had been met prior to the IPO and the performance-based condition was met on the IPO date.
Additionally, professional fees increased by $16.3 million or 133% during the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, to support our initial public offering, acquisitions, international expansion, and regulatory compliance programs.
Other Income, net
For the year ended June 30, 2021, other income (expense), net, was primarily comprised of a loss of $87.2 million recognized based on the change in fair value of the contingent consideration liability associated with our acquisition of PayBright driven by changes in the value of our common stock, and a gain of $30.1 million recognized upon the conversion of convertible notes into shares of Series G-1 preferred stock. The conversion of convertible notes was accounted for as a debt extinguishment since the number of shares of Series G-1 preferred stock issued upon conversion was variable and this gain represented the difference between the carrying value of the debt at the time of extinguishment and the allocated proceeds. Additionally, we recognized a loss of $(1.6) million related to increases in the fair value of investments.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, other income (expense), net was primarily comprised of interest earned on money market funds of $3.9 million, offset by losses on our constant maturity swaps of $4.0 million and a loss of $3.8 million on the extinguishment of our convertible debt derivative liability.
Quarterly Results of Operations and Other Data
The following tables set forth our selected unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the quarters indicated, as well as the percentage that each line item represents of our total revenue for each quarter presented. The information for each quarter has been prepared on a basis consistent with our audited consolidated financial statements and reflect, in the opinion of management, all adjustments which consist only of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for a fair statement of the financial information contained in those financial statements. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future. The following quarterly financial data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Totals may not foot due to rounding.
1 We determined that stock based compensation recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2021 was understated, as the estimated fair value of RSUs granted during the three months ended December 31, 2020 did not reflect an increase in share value due to the anticipated IPO. As a result, the accompanying unaudited interim financial information for the three months ended March 31, 2021 has been adjusted to reflect additional stock based compensation expense of $25.0 million from amounts previously reported.
Operating expenses include stock-based compensation as follows:
The following table presents each line item as a percentage of our total revenue for each quarter presented:
The following table sets forth some of the key operating metrics we use to evaluate our business for each of the periods indicated:
Quarterly Revenue Trends
Total Revenue, net has generally increased sequentially in each of the periods presented due to the continued growth in GMV, increase in active consumers, and expansion of our merchant network. We generally experience seasonality in our business in terms of changes in GMV in accordance with retail and e-commerce trends. We typically see increased revenue in the second fiscal quarter of each year as a result of the increased GMV occurring as a part of the holiday shopping season, which is most evident in merchant network revenue as this revenue is recognized when the terms of the executed merchant agreement have been fulfilled and the merchant successfully confirms the transaction. We believe that this seasonality has affected and will continue to affect our quarterly results; however, to date its effect may have been masked by our rapid growth.
Since we recognize interest income on loans held for investment over the term of the loan, a substantial portion of the revenue we report in each period is attributable to loans created via transactions occurring in prior periods. Consequently, increases or decreases in GMV in one period may not be immediately reflected in our revenue for that period and may positively or negatively affect our revenue in future periods. This effect is lessened by the relatively short duration of loans held for investment but may be increased by shifts in the relative proportion of loans held for investment compared to loans sold to third-party loan buyers.
Quarterly Operating Expense Trends
Operating expenses generally have increased sequentially in each of the periods presented, other than the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 and fourth fiscal quarter of 2021. Quarterly increases in operating expenses are primarily due to increased costs of operations as our GMV and total platform portfolio have grown and due to increased investments in headcount and other related expenses to support our growth. We expect headcount to continue to increase given our focus on growth and expansion.
The provision for credit losses represents the amount of expense required to maintain the allowance of credit losses on our balance sheet which represents management’s estimate of future losses. The provision is determined by the change in estimates for future losses and the net charge offs incurred in the period. Our provision for losses has generally grown in line with the increase in loans held for investment, with the exception of the third and fourth fiscal quarters of 2020 as well as the second and third fiscal quarters of 2021.
In March 2020, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we increased our allowance for loan losses significantly after factoring in updated loss multiples using macroeconomic data to reflect stressed expected loss scenarios emerging from forecasted delinquencies and defaults. This resulted in a significant increase in provision for credit losses during the period. However, during the following quarter ended June 30, 2020, we saw stronger than expected repayment history in the portfolio, resulting in a decrease in these stressed loss multiples and release of the allowance and therefore, a significant decrease in operating expenses.
During the second and third fiscal quarters of 2021, we saw similarly stronger than expected repayment history as well as improving macroeconomic factors resulting in reduced provision expense. Additionally, we began transitioning to a new underlying data model which incorporates internal improvements to our underwriting and collections processes while allowing for a more granular segmentation of the loan portfolio. This change in model resulted in a decrease to the allowance. These decreases were largely offset by allowances recognized on new purchases and originations of loans held for investment in the period with generally higher credit quality and pledged to securitization trusts, however, this combination of factors, coupled with the in-period charge-offs and repayments, resulted in income recognized from the provision for credit losses of during the three months ended March 31, 2021. Should similar macroeconomic or other factors arise that change our loss expectations, we may increase or decrease the allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Funds
We have incurred losses since our inception, accumulating a deficit of $888.4 million and $447.2 million as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. We have historically financed the majority of our operating and capital needs through the private sales of equity securities, borrowings from debt facilities and convertible debt, third-party loan sale arrangements, and cash flows from operations. In September and October 2020, we issued an aggregate of 21,836,687 shares of Series G preferred stock for aggregate cash proceeds of $435.1 million. On January 15, 2021, we closed an initial public offering of our Class A common stock with cash proceeds, before expenses, of $1.3 billion.
As of June 30, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents, available capacity from revolving debt facilities, revolving securitizations, forward flow loan sale arrangements, and certain cash flows from our operations. We believe that our existing cash balances, available capacity under our revolving debt facilities, revolving securitizations and off-balance sheet loan sale arrangements, and cash from operations, are sufficient to meet both our existing operating, working capital, and capital expenditure requirements and our currently planned growth for at least the next 12 months. We cannot provide assurance, however, that our business will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future borrowings will be available to us in an amount sufficient to enable us to fund our liquidity needs. Our ability to do so depends on prevailing economic conditions and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. Our on- and off-balance sheet facilities provide funding subject to various constraining limits on the financed portfolios. These limits are generally tied to loan-level attributes such as loan term, credit quality, and interest rate, as well as borrower- and merchant-level attributes.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of June 30, 2021, we had approximately $1.5 billion of cash to fund our future operations compared to approximately $267.1 million as of June 30, 2020. Our cash and cash equivalents were held primarily for continued investment in our business, for working capital purposes, and to facilitate a portion of our lending activities. Our policy is to invest cash in excess of our immediate working capital requirements in short-term investments and deposit accounts to preserve the principal balance and maintain adequate liquidity.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash consists primarily of: (i) deposits restricted by standby letters of credit for office leases; (ii) funds held in accounts as collateral for our originating bank partners; and (iii) servicing funds held in accounts contractually restricted by agreements with warehouse credit facilities and third-party loan owners. We have no ability to draw on such funds as long as they remain restricted under the applicable arrangements. Our policy is to invest restricted cash held in debt facility related accounts and cash deposited as collateral for leases in investments designed to preserve the principal balance and provide liquidity. Accordingly, such cash is invested primarily in money market instruments that offer daily purchase and redemption and provide competitive returns consistent with our policies and market conditions.
Funding Debt
The following table summarizes our funding debt facilities as of June 30, 2021:
Warehouse Credit Facilities
Through trusts, we entered into warehouse credit facilities with certain lenders to finance the purchase and origination of our loans. These trusts are consolidated variable interest entities (“VIE”), and each trust entered into a credit agreement and security agreement with a commercial bank as administrative agent and a national banking association as collateral trustee and paying agent. Borrowings under these agreements are referred to as funding debt. These credit agreements contain operating covenants, including limitations on the incurrence of certain indebtedness and liens, restrictions on certain intercompany transactions, and limitations on the amount of dividends and stock repurchases. Our funding debt facilities include concentration limits for various loan characteristics including credit quality, product mix, geography, and merchant concentration. As of June 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all applicable covenants in the agreements. Refer to Note 11. Debt of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for additional information.
These revolving facilities mature between 2022 and 2026, and subject to covenant compliance generally permit borrowings up to 12 months prior to the final maturity date. Borrowings under these facilities generally occur multiple times per week, and generally coincide with the purchase of loans from our originating bank partners. We manage liquidity by accessing diversified pools of capital and avoid concentration with any single counterparty; we are diversified across different types of investors including investment banks, asset managers, and insurance companies.
Borrowings under these facilities bear interest at an annual benchmark rate of LIBOR or at an alternative commercial paper rate (which is either (i) the per annum rate equivalent to the weighted-average of the per annum rates at which all commercial paper notes were issued by certain lenders to fund advances or maintain loans, or (ii) the daily weighted-average of LIBOR, as set forth in the applicable credit agreement), plus a spread ranging from 1.70% to 4.00%. Interest is payable monthly. In addition, these agreements require payment of a monthly unused commitment fee ranging from 0.20% to 0.75% per annum on the undrawn portion available.
Other Funding Facilities
Prior to our acquisition of PayBright on January 1, 2021, PayBright entered into various credit facilities utilized to finance the origination of loans in Canada. Similar to our warehouse credit facilities, borrowings under these agreements are referred to as funding debt, and proceeds from the borrowings may only be used for the purposes of facilitating loan funding and origination. These facilities are secured by PayBright loan receivables pledged to the respective facility as collateral, mature in 2022, and bear interest based on a commercial paper rate plus a spread ranging from 1.25% to 4.25%.
Convertible Debt
On April 29, 2020, we entered into a note purchase agreement with various investors and issued convertible notes in an aggregate amount of $75.0 million with a maturity date of April 29, 2021 and bearing interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum.
On September 11, 2020, as part of our Series G equity financing round, the convertible notes issued in April 2020 were fully converted into 4,444,321 shares of Series G-1 preferred stock.
Revolving Credit Facility
On January 19, 2021, we entered into a revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of commercial banks for a $185.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility. This facility bears interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (a) a Eurodollar rate determined by reference to adjusted LIBOR for the interest period, plus an applicable margin of 2.50% per annum or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50% per annum, (ii) the rate last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the U.S. prime rate, and (iii) the one-month adjusted LIBOR plus 1.00% per annum, in each case, plus an applicable margin of 1.50% per annum. The revolving credit agreement has a final maturity date of January 19, 2024. The facility contains certain covenants and restrictions, including certain financial maintenance covenants, and requires payment of a monthly unused commitment fee of 0.35% per annum on the undrawn balance available. There are no borrowings outstanding under the facility at June 30, 2021. Refer to Note 11. Debt.
Securitizations
In connection with asset-backed securitizations, we sponsor and establish trusts to ultimately purchase loans facilitated by our platform. Securities issued from our asset-backed securitizations are senior or subordinated, based on the waterfall criteria of loan payments to each security class. The subordinated residual interests issued from these transactions are first to absorb credit losses in accordance with the waterfall criteria. The assets are transferred into a trust such that the assets are legally isolated from the creditors of Affirm and are not available to satisfy our obligations. These assets can only be used to settle obligations of the underlying trusts. Each securitization trust issued senior notes and residual certificates to finance the purchase of the loans facilitated by our platform. At the closing of each securitization, we contributed loans, facilitated through our technology platform, with an aggregate outstanding principal balance of $1,856.8 million. The 2020-Z1, 2020-Z2, and 2021-Z1 securitizations are secured by static pools of loans contributed at closing, whereas the 2020-A and 2021-A securitizations are revolving and we may contribute additional loans from time to time until the end of the revolving period. Refer to Note 12. Securitizations and Variable Interest Entities.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
(1) Amounts include net cash provided by the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock and convertible debt as follows:
Operating Activities
Our largest sources of operating cash flows are fees charged to merchant partners on transactions processed through our platform and interest income from consumers’ loans. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for general and administrative, technology and data analytics, funding costs, processing and servicing, and sales and marketing expenses.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $193.1 million, an increase of $121.8 million from $71.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. This reflects our net loss of $430.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $332.3 million, net cash outflows of $45.9 million from the purchase and sale of loans held for sale, and net cash inflows of $53.7 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities.
Non-cash charges primarily consisted of: provision for credit losses, which decreased by $39.2 million or 37% due to lower than expected credit losses and improved credit quality of the portfolio; gain (loss) on sales of loans, which increased by $58.0 million from $31.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 due to improved loan sale economics and increased loan sales since the fourth quarter of the prior year; and amortization of premiums and discounts, which increased by $62.8 million or 227% due to increased amortization of discounts related to loans purchased from our originating bank partners at a price above fair market value. Additionally, during the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized a gain of $30.1 million resulting from the conversion of the convertible notes into shares of Series G-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock in September 2020. This gain represented the difference between the carrying value of the debt at the time of extinguishment and the allocated proceeds. We also incurred $69.1 million of amortization expense associated with our commercial agreement assets. None of these non-cash charges were earned or incurred during the year ended June 30, 2020. Furthermore, we incurred $288.0 million of stock-based compensation, up from $29.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2020 due to accelerated vesting of RSUs for which the service-based condition had been met prior to the IPO and the performance-based condition was met on the IPO date, and losses of $87.2 million due to the increase in the fair value of our contingent consideration liability, driven by changes in the value of our common stock.
Our net cash outflows resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities increased to $53.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to cash inflows of $31.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. This shift was primarily due to increases to other assets as a result of the recognition of our Shopify commercial agreement asset, which had a balance of $205.8 million at June 30, 2021, partially offset by increases to accrued expenses and other liabilities associated with our contingent consideration liability, which had a balance of $147.8 million at June 30, 2021.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $1,022.0 million, an increase of $769.0 million from $253.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The main driver of this was $5.9 billion of purchases and origination of loans, representing an increase of $3.1 billion or 108% compared to the prior year, due partly to continued growth in GMV but also due to the establishment of five new securitization trusts during the period in which we purchased loans and contributed approximately $1,856.8 million of loan receivables to the trusts, rather than selling to third-party loan buyers and classifying this activity as an operating activity on the statement of cash flows. Additionally, we recorded cash outflows of approximately $222.4 million related to cash consideration for acquisitions, net of cash and restricted cash acquired. These cash outflows were partially offset by $4,324.6 million of repayments of loans and other servicing activity, representing an increase of $2,029.8 million, or 88%, compared to the prior year, due to a higher average balance of loans held for investment and generally increasing credit quality of the portfolio.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $2,577.8 million, an increase of $2,283.1 million from $294.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. A main driver of this was the issuance of common stock upon our initial public offering in January 2021 for $1,305.2 million, net of issuance costs, and issuances of Series G redeemable convertible preferred stock in September 2020 and October 2020 for $434.5 million, net of issuance costs. Additionally, the issuance of notes by our newly formed securitization trusts during the year ended June 30, 2021 resulted in net cash inflows of $1,185.5 million, net of in-period principal repayments. Each of these cash inflows represented new financing activities compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 but were partially offset by $222.8 million of net cash outflows from funding debt as principal repayments on debt exceeded proceeds from draws on these revolving credit facilities. The net cash outflows from funding debt are in contrast to net cash inflows from funding debt of $250.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The shift between periods is largely due to the availability of new funding sources in our securitization trusts. Additionally, we recorded payments of approximately $158.3 million for tax withholding associated with stock-based compensation during the year ended June 30, 2021 which did not occur in prior periods, as the vesting of RSUs was triggered by the initial public offering in January 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Risks and Requirements
There are numerous risks to our financial results, liquidity, capital raising, and debt refinancing plans, some of which may not be quantified in our current liquidity forecasts. The principal factors that could impact our liquidity and capital needs are customer delinquencies and defaults, a prolonged inability to adequately access capital market funding, declines in loan purchases and therefore revenue, fluctuations in our financial performance, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products, and the continuing market adoption of our platform. We intend to support our liquidity and capital position by pursuing diversified debt financings (including new securitizations and revolving debt facilities) and extending existing secured revolving facilities to provide committed liquidity in case of prolonged market fluctuations.
We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing in connection with those efforts. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. Additionally, as a result of any of these actions, we may be subject to restrictions and covenants in the agreements governing these transactions that may place limitations on us, and we may be required to pledge additional collateral as security. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations, and financial condition. It is also possible that the actual outcome of one or more of our plans could be materially different than expected or that one or more of our significant judgments or estimates could prove to be materially incorrect.
Concentrations of Revenue
For the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019 approximately 20%, 28%, and 20% of total revenue, respectively, was driven by one merchant partner, Peloton. We believe we have a strong relationship with Peloton and, in September 2020, we entered into a renewed merchant agreement with Peloton with an initial three-year term ending in September 2023, which automatically renews for additional and successive one-year terms until terminated. While we believe our growth will facilitate both revenue growth and merchant diversification as we continue to integrate with a wide range of merchants, our revenue concentration may cause our financial performance to fluctuate significantly from period to period based on the revenue from such merchant partner.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of June 30, 2021:
(1)Consists of payment obligations under our office leases.
(2)In May 2020, we entered into an addendum to our agreement with our cloud computing web services provider which included annual spending commitments, as further described below.
(3)Refer to Note 6. Balance Sheet Components for a description of the contingent consideration liability and commercial agreement liability, each recorded as a component of accrued expenses and other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts.
In February 2012, we entered into an agreement with a third-party cloud computing web services provider for our cloud computing and hosting services. In May 2020, we entered into an addendum to our agreement with our cloud computing web services provider which included annual spending commitments for the period between May 2020 and April 2023 with an aggregate committed spend of $120.0 million during such period. Our agreement with our cloud computing web services provider will continue indefinitely until terminated by either party. Our cloud-computing web services provider may terminate the customer agreement for convenience with 30 days prior written notice and may, in some cases, terminate the agreement immediately for cause upon notice. If we fail to meet the minimum purchase commitment during any year, we may be required to pay the difference. We pay our cloud-computing web services provider monthly, and we may pay more than the minimum purchase commitment to our cloud-computing web services provider based on usage.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet loans relate to unconsolidated securitization transactions and loans sold to third-party investors for which we have some form of continuing involvement, including as servicer. For an off-balance sheet
loan where servicing is the only form of continuing involvement, we would only experience a loss if we were required to repurchase such a loan due to a breach in representations and warranties associated with our loan sale or servicing contracts. As of June 30, 2021, the aggregate outstanding balance of loans held by third-party investors or off-balance sheet VIEs was $2.5 billion. As of June 30, 2021, we had one off-balance sheet VIE, the 2021-Z1 securitization. In the unlikely event principal payments on the loans backing any off-balance sheet securitization are insufficient to pay senior note holders, including any retained interest, then any amounts the Company contributed to the securitization reserve accounts may be depleted. See Note 12. Securitizations and Variable Interest Entities of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because certain of these accounting policies require significant judgment, our actual results may differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future consolidated financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We evaluate our significant estimates on an ongoing basis, including, but not limited to, estimates related to merchant network revenue, loss on loan purchase commitment, allowance for credit losses, stock-based compensation, and income taxes. We believe these estimates have the greatest potential effect on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information, all of our significant accounting policies, including recent accounting pronouncements, are described in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Merchant Network Revenue
Merchant network revenue consists primarily of merchant fees. Merchants are charged a fee on each transaction processed through the Affirm platform. The fees range depending on the individual arrangement between us and each merchant and vary based on the terms of the product offering. The fee is recognized as earned when the terms of the executed merchant agreement have been fulfilled and the merchant successfully confirms the transaction. We present our transaction with the merchant separate from our transactions with our originating bank partners. Except where we originate certain loans via our wholly-owned subsidiaries, our bank partners are the originator of the loan extended to the merchant’s customer, and accordingly we account for the loan separate from the fee received from the merchant.
When we originate loans via our wholly-owned subsidiaries, certain loans may have zero or below market interest rates. In these instances, the par value of the loans originated is in excess of the fair market value of such loans, resulting in a loss, which we record as a reduction to merchant network revenue when we estimate that these losses will be recoverable over the term of our contract with the merchant. In order to continue to expand our consumer base, we may originate loans under certain merchant arrangements that we do not expect to achieve positive revenue. In these instances, the loss is recorded as sales and marketing expense.
Loss on Loan Purchase Commitment
We purchase loans from our originating bank partners that are facilitated through our platform. Under the terms of the agreement, we are generally required to pay the principal amount plus accrued interest for such loans. In certain instances, our originating bank partner may originate loans with zero or below market interest rates that we are required to purchase. In these instances, we may be required to purchase the loan for a price in excess of the fair market value of such loans, which results in a loss on loan purchase and is recognized as loss on loan purchase commitment in our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value is determined by taking the difference
between the estimated fair value of the loan and the anticipated purchase price. When the loan is purchased, the liability is included in the amortized cost basis of the purchased loan as a discount, which is then amortized into interest income over the life of the loan.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses on loans held for investment is determined based on management’s current estimate of expected credit losses over the remaining contractual term, historical credit losses, consumer payment trends, estimates of recoveries, and future expectations on individual loans as of each balance sheet date. We immediately recognize an allowance for expected credit losses upon origination of a loan. Adjustments to the allowance each period for changes in our estimate of lifetime expected credit losses are recognized in earnings through the provision for credit losses presented on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We have made an accounting policy election to not measure an allowance for credit losses for accrued interest receivables. Previously recognized interest receivable from charged-off loans that is accrued but not collected from the consumer is reversed.
In estimating the allowance for credit losses, management utilizes a migration analysis of delinquent and current loan receivables. Migration analysis is a technique used to estimate the likelihood that a loan receivable will progress through various stages of delinquency and to charge-off. The analysis focuses on the pertinent factors underlying the quality of the loan portfolio. These factors include historical performance, the age of the receivable balance, seasonality, customer credit-worthiness, changes in the size and composition of the loan portfolio, delinquency levels, bankruptcy filings, actual credit loss experience, and current economic conditions. We also take into consideration certain qualitative factors where we adjust our quantitative baseline using our best judgement to consider the inherent uncertainty regarding future economic conditions and consumer loan performance. For example, the Company considers the impact of current economic and environmental factors at the reporting date that did not exist over the period from which historical experience was used. As of June 30, 2021, we have considered the impact of government intervention and legislation in the form of stimulus checks, extended unemployment benefits, and small business relief on loan repayment and consumer behavior patterns.
When available information confirms that specific loans or portions thereof are uncollectible, identified amounts are charged against the allowance for credit losses. Loans are charged-off in accordance with our charge-off policy, as the contractual principal becomes 120 days past due. Subsequent recoveries of the unpaid principal balance, if any, are credited to the allowance for credit losses.
The underlying assumptions, estimates, and assessments we use to provide for losses are updated periodically to reflect our view of current conditions, which can result in changes to our assumptions. Changes in such estimates can significantly affect the allowance and provision for credit losses. It is possible that we will experience loan losses that are different from our current estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee, consultant, and non-employee director stock option awards and restricted stock units ("RSUs"), is measured and recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on fair value. The fair value of each equity-classified option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black Scholes option-pricing model. Expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award based on the estimated portion of the award that is expected to vest.
Our option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Additionally, we have granted stock option awards with service-based and performance-based vesting conditions, with market-based conditions that are incorporated into the grant date fair value. We determined the grant date fair value of these awards by utilizing a Monte Carlo simulation model that incorporates the possibility that the market-based conditions may not be satisfied. The Monte Carlo simulation also incorporates assumptions including expected stock price volatility, expected term, and risk-free interest rates. We estimate the volatility of common stock on the date of grant based on the weighted-average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly-traded companies in our industry group. We estimate the expected term of the award based on various exercise scenarios. The risk-free interest rate is determined using a U.S. Treasury rate for the period that coincides with the expected term set forth.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Income Taxes
We report income taxes in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (“FASB ASC”) 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which requires an asset and liability approach in accounting for income taxes. Under this method, the deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance reduces the deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex federal and state tax laws and regulations. ASC 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of the technical merits.
We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available.
We assess the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit the use of existing deferred tax assets. A significant piece of objective negative evidence evaluated was the cumulative loss incurred for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019. Such objective evidence limits the ability to consider other subjective evidence, such as our projections for future growth. On the basis of this evaluation, as of June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, a full valuation allowance has been recorded against our gross deferred tax asset, net of future reversing deferred tax liabilities. The amount of the deferred tax assets considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of the future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or increased or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as our projections for growth.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.