Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. These historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this filing, particularly in “Risk Factors.”
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) permits an “emerging growth company” such as AgeX to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, we elected to comply with newly adopted or revised accounting standards when they become applicable to public companies because our financial statements were consolidated with those of Lineage, which is not an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act and is therefore not permitted to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that become applicable to public companies. This election under the JOBS Act to not delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards is irrevocable.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics targeting human aging and degenerative diseases. Our initial discovery and preclinical programs focus on utilizing brown adipose tissue in targeting diabetes, obesity, and heart disease; and induced tissue regeneration in utilizing the human body’s own abilities to scarlessly regenerate tissues damaged from age or trauma. We may also pursue other early-stage pre-clinical programs.
Since inception, our operations have focused on building our technology platform, identifying potential product candidates, establishing and protecting our intellectual property and raising capital. Prior to our disposition of LifeMap Sciences during March 2021, our revenues were principally derived from subscription and advertising revenue from LifeMap Sciences’ online databases based upon applicable subscription or advertising periods. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and we will need to obtain additional financing in order to continue our operations, including our research and development programs. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a discussion of our available capital resources and our need for financing. Our operating losses were $10.7 million and $12.6 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $97.1 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have identified below our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe require the greatest amount of judgment. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are subject to significant judgment including those related to going concern assessment of consolidated financial statements, allocations and adjustments necessary for carve-out basis of presentation, including the separate return method for income taxes, useful lives associated with long-lived assets, including evaluation of asset impairment, allowances for uncollectible accounts receivables, loss contingencies, deferred income taxes and tax reserves, including valuation allowances related to deferred income taxes, and assumptions used to value stock-based awards, or other equity instruments. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates compared to historical experience and trends, which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future consolidated financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Principles of consolidation - AgeX’s consolidated financial statements include the accounts of its subsidiaries and certain research and development departments, including former Lineage personnel, transferred from Lineage to AgeX in connection with the Asset Contribution Agreement described in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements. AgeX consolidated its direct and indirect wholly-owned or majority-owned subsidiaries because AgeX has the ability to control their operating and financial decisions and policies through its ownership, and the noncontrolling interest is reflected as a separate element of stockholders’ equity (deficit) on AgeX’s consolidated balance sheets.
As of, and for the year ended, December 31, 2020, AgeX consolidated ReCyte Therapeutics, LifeMap Sciences and its Israeli subsidiary LifeMap Sciences, Ltd. and included the historical expenses of certain former Lineage research and development departments (see Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements).AgeX disposed of its interest in LifeMap Sciences and its Israeli subsidiary through a cash-out merger during March 2021.
Going concern assessment - We assess going concern uncertainty for our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued or are available to be issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by FASB’s ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, among other factors, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15, if necessary.
Related party transactions - Shared Facilities and Services Agreement - As more fully described in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report, Lineage provided us with the use of Lineage facilities and services under a Shared Facilities and Services Agreement (the “Shared Facilities Agreement”). Accordingly, Lineage allocated expenses such as salaries and payroll related expenses incurred and paid on our behalf based on the amount of time that particular employees devote to AgeX affairs. Other expenses such as legal, accounting and financial reporting, marketing, and travel expenses were allocated to us to the extent that those expenses were incurred by or on behalf of AgeX. Lineage also allocated certain overhead expenses such as rent and utilities, property taxes, insurance, laboratory expenses and supplies, telecommunications and other indirect expenses. These allocations were made based upon activity-based allocation drivers such as time spent, percentage of square feet of office or laboratory space used, headcount and percentage of personnel devoted to our operations or management. Management evaluated the appropriateness of the allocations on a periodic basis and believes that this basis for allocation was reasonable. The Shared Facilities Agreement terminated on September 30, 2019 and Lineage will not be providing us with further services or use of its facilities.
Related party transactions - allocated expenses from Lineage - Consistent with the principles of carve-out financial statements and presentation discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, certain expenses were allocated by Lineage and included in our consolidated statements of operations and consolidated statements of stockholders’ equity (deficit) as a contribution by Lineage. Research and development expenses include allocations from Lineage primarily attributable to certain former Lineage research departments contributed to us. Those expenses are primarily comprised of former Lineage personnel and related expenses, including stock-based compensation, and other outside expenses relevant to the nature of the research projects that were contributed to us pursuant to the Asset Contribution Agreement discussed in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. Management considers the allocation methodologies used to allocate expenses as reasonable and appropriate based on historical Lineage expenses attributable to us and our operations for purposes of the standalone, carve-out consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. The expenses reflected in the consolidated financial statements may not be indicative of expenses that we will incur in the future.
Research and development - Research and development expenses include both direct expenses incurred by us or our subsidiaries and indirect overhead costs allocated by Lineage that benefited or supported our research and development functions. Direct research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, amortization of intangible assets, outside consultants and suppliers, and license fees paid to third parties to acquire patents or licenses to use patents and other technology. Indirect research and development expenses include overhead expenses allocated to us by Lineage discussed under Related party transactions - Shared Facilities and Services Agreement above. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses incurred and reimbursed by grants from third parties or governmental agencies, including service revenues from co-development projects with customers, if any and as applicable, approximate the respective revenues recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
General and administrative - General and administrative expenses include both direct expenses incurred by us and indirect overhead costs allocated by Lineage that benefited or supported our general and administrative functions. Direct general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, for executive and corporate personnel, and professional and consulting fees. Indirect general and administrative expenses include overhead expenses allocated to us by Lineage discussed under Related party transactions - Shared Facilities and Services Agreement above.
Income taxes - For Federal and California purposes, AgeX’s activity through August 30, 2018 was included in Lineage’s federal consolidated and California combined tax returns. For those periods, the income tax provision was prepared in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, using the separate return method to determine the tax provision of AgeX for carve-out presentation purposes of its consolidated financial statements. The separate return method, amongst other things, requires that the amount of current and deferred tax expense for a group that files a consolidated income tax return be allocated among the members of that group as if each group member were a separate taxpayer. As a result, the provision for income taxes has been presented as if AgeX had filed a separate federal consolidated tax return and a California combined tax return for the periods presented. In using the separate return method, the sum of the amounts allocated to the members of the income tax return group may not equal the consolidated amount. If tax attributes recorded in the carve-out consolidated financial statements are materially different from the actual tax attributes pertaining to us or our legal entities and our subsidiaries, or to Lineage and its subsidiaries, those differences are identified and disclosed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in the Report. Accordingly, depending on our future legal structure and related tax elections that may be taken by us, our effective tax rate in future years could vary materially from our historical effective tax rates. The historical deferred tax assets, including the operating losses and credit carryforwards generated by certain research and development departments that operated within Lineage and were transferred to us on August 17, 2017, have been presented as our tax attributes consistent with the principles of the separate return method described above.
As of December 31, 2020, the deferred tax assets and liabilities presented in Note 7 included elsewhere in this Report, including net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits, represent the tax attributes of AgeX and its subsidiaries. However, the net operating losses and research and development credits generated before August 17, 2017 with respect to Lineage research departments that were transferred to us on that date will remain as tax attributes of Lineage.
In general, net operating losses and other tax credit carryforwards generated by legal entities in a consolidated federal tax group or a combined state tax group, collectively “the tax group”, are available to other members of the tax group depending on the nature of the transaction that a member may enter into while still in the tax group. However, under the Tax Matters Agreement between Lineage and AgeX entered into on August 17, 2017, any use of a member’s net operating loss and other tax credit carryforwards by the other member is subject to reimbursement by the benefiting member for the actual tax benefit realized. Since the August 30, 2018 deconsolidation of AgeX and to date, neither Lineage nor AgeX has used the tax attributes of the other.
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, which prescribes the use of the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax asset or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and enacted rates in effect. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our judgments, estimates and projections regarding future taxable income may change over time due to changes, among other factors, in market conditions, changes in tax laws, and tax planning strategies. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates change in the future, the valuation allowance may be increased or decreased, which may have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
The guidance also prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not sustainable upon examination by taxing authorities. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No unrecognized tax benefits have been recorded and no amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. We do not expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months. We are currently unaware of any tax issues under review.
On December 22, 2017, the United States enacted major federal tax reform legislation, Public Law No. 115-97, commonly referred to as the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“2017 Tax Act”), which enacted a broad range of changes to the Internal Revenue Code. Changes to taxes on corporations impacted by the 2017 Tax Act include, but not limited to, lowering the U.S. federal tax rates to a 21 percent flat tax rate, eliminating the corporate alternative minimum tax (“AMT”), imposing additional limitations on the deductibility of interest and net operating losses, allowing any net operating loss (“NOLs”) generated in tax years ending after December 31, 2017 to be carried forward indefinitely and generally repealing carrybacks, reducing the maximum deduction for NOL carryforwards arising in tax years beginning after 2017 to a percentage of the taxpayer’s taxable income, and allowing for additional expensing of certain capital expenditures. The 2017 Tax Act also puts into effect a number of changes impacting operations outside of the United States including, but not limited to, the imposition of a one-time tax “deemed repatriation” on accumulated offshore earnings not previously subject to U.S. tax, and shifts the U.S taxation of multinational corporations from a worldwide system of taxation to a territorial system. ASC 740 requires the effects of changes in tax rates and laws on deferred tax balances (including the effects of the one-time transition tax) to be recognized in the period in which the legislation is enacted. Future guidance from the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities may affect certain aspects of the 2017 Tax Act, for example, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“CAA”) modified certain provisions of the 2017 Tax Act. In addition, it is uncertain if and to what extent various states will conform to the 2017 Tax Act, the CARES Act or the CAA.
On December 22, 2017, the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (“SAB 118”) to provide guidance for companies that are not able to complete their accounting for the income tax effects of the 2017 Tax Act in the period of enactment. SAB 118 allows us to record provisional amounts during a measurement period not to extend beyond one year of the enactment date. We applied the guidance in SAB 118 when accounting for the enactment-date effects of the 2017 Tax Act during the year ended December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2018, we completed the accounting for all the enactment-date income tax effects of the 2017 Tax Act as further discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Stock-based compensation - We recognize compensation expense related to employee stock option grants and other equity based awards, if any, in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”).
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model for estimating the fair value of options granted under our 2017 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Plan”). The fair value of each restricted stock or restricted stock unit grant, if any, is determined based on the value of the common stock granted or sold. We have elected to treat stock-based awards with time-based service conditions as a single award and recognize stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
Compensation expense for non-employee stock-based awards is recognized in accordance with ASC 718. Stock option awards issued to non-employees, principally consultants or outside contractors, as applicable, are accounted for at fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Management believes that the fair value of the stock options can more reliably be measured than the fair value of services received. We record compensation expense based on the then-current fair values of the stock options at the grant date in accordance with ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which simplifies the accounting for non-employee share-based payment transactions. We adopted ASU 2018-07 on January 1, 2019. As we had one stock option grant issued to a nonemployee as of the adoption date and one additional stock option grant during 2019 to the same nonemployee, the application of the new standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Compensation expense for non-employee grants is recorded on a straight-line basis in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make certain assumptions including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term, the expected volatility, the risk-free interest rate and the dividend yield.
The fair value of the shares of common stock underlying the stock options has historically been determined by our Board of Directors. Because there was no public market for our common stock prior to November 29, 2018, our Board of Directors determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of the grant of options prior to that date by considering a number of objective and subjective factors including contemporaneous sales of our common stock to investors, valuation of comparable companies, operating and financial performance and general and industry-specific economic outlook, amongst other factors. The fair value was determined in accordance with applicable elements of the practice aid issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants titled Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Since our common stock began publicly trading on the NYSE American, the fair value of our common stock underlying stock options has been valued based on prevailing market prices.
The expected term of employee stock options represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to remain outstanding. We estimate the expected term of options granted based upon the “simplified method” provided under Staff Accounting Bulletin, Topic 14, or SAB Topic 14.
Because our common stock had no publicly traded history prior to November 29, 2018, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we estimated the expected volatility using our own stock price volatility to the extent applicable or a combination of our stock price volatility and the stock price volatility of peer companies, for a period equal to the expected term of the options. The peer companies used include selected public companies within the biotechnology industry with comparable characteristics to AgeX, including similarity in size, lines of business, market capitalization, revenue and financial leverage.
The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates on the United States government securities appropriate for the expected term of our stock options.
The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of dividend payouts. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
All excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies from stock-based compensation awards accounted for under ASC 718 are recognized as an income tax benefit or expense, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations. An excess income tax benefit arises when the tax deduction of a share-based award for income tax purposes exceeds the compensation cost recognized for financial reporting purposes, and a tax deficiency arises when the compensation cost exceeds the tax deduction.
Stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consists of stock-based compensation under the AgeX 2017 Equity Incentive Plan, and stock-based compensation of AgeX’s subsidiaries that have their own stock option plans.
Certain of our consolidated subsidiaries have their own share-based compensation plans. For share-based compensation awards granted by those privately-held consolidated subsidiaries under their respective equity plans, we determine the fair value of the options granted under those plans using similar methodologies and assumptions we used for our stock options discussed above.
Although the fair value of stock options is determined in accordance with FASB guidance, changes in the assumptions and allocations can materially affect the estimated value and therefore the amount of compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements.
Long-lived intangible assets - Long-lived intangible assets, consisting primarily of acquired patents, acquired in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) with alternative future uses, patent applications, and licenses to use certain patents, are stated at acquired cost, less accumulated amortization. Amortization expense is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, generally over 10 years.
Impairment of long-lived assets - Long-lived assets, including long-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. If the assets are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets. Through December 31, 2020, there have been no such impairment losses.
Revenue recognition - During the first quarter of 2018, we adopted FASB ASU 2014-09, Revenues from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which created a single, principle-based revenue recognition model that supersedes and replaces nearly all existing U.S. GAAP revenue recognition guidance. We adopted ASU 2014-09 using the modified retrospective transition method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of the adoption date. Results for reporting periods beginning on January 1, 2018 and thereafter are presented under Topic 606.
We recognize revenue in a manner that depicts the transfer of control of a product or a service to a customer and reflects the amount of the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for such product or service. In doing so, We follow a five-step approach: (i) identify the contract with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the customer obtains control of the product or service. We consider the terms of a contract and all relevant facts and circumstances when applying the revenue recognition standard. We apply the revenue recognition standard, including the use of any practical expedients, consistently to contracts with similar characteristics and in similar circumstances.
In the applicable paragraphs below, we have summarized our revenue recognition policies for various revenue sources in accordance with Topic 606.
Subscription and advertisement revenues. Through March 15, 2021, we consolidated LifeMap Sciences. LifeMap Sciences sells subscription-based products, including research databases and software tools, for biomedical, gene, and disease research. LifeMap Sciences sells these subscriptions primarily through the internet to biotech and pharmaceutical companies worldwide. LifeMap Sciences’ principal subscription product is the GeneCards® Suite, which includes the GeneCards® human gene database, and the MalaCards™ human disease database.
LifeMap Sciences’ performance obligations for subscriptions include a license of intellectual property related to its genetic information packages and premium genetic information tools. We deemed these licenses to be functional licenses that provide customers with a “right to access” to LifeMap Sciences’ intellectual property during the subscription period and, accordingly, revenue was recognized over a period of time, which was generally the subscription period. Payments were typically received at the beginning of a subscription period and revenue was recognized according to the type of subscription sold. For subscription contracts in which the subscription term commenced before a payment was due, LifeMap Sciences recorded an accounts receivable as the subscription was earned over time and billed the customer according to the contract terms.
LifeMap Sciences’ deferred subscription revenues primarily represent subscriptions for which cash payment has been received for the subscription term, but the subscription term had not been completed as of the balance sheet date reported. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, LifeMap Sciences recognized $1.3 million in each year in subscription and advertisement revenues. As of December 31, 2020, there was $275,000 included in deferred revenues in the consolidated balance sheets which was expected to be recognized as subscription revenue over the next twelve months and $64,000 included in other noncurrent liabilities which was expected to be recognized as subscription revenues in the period thereafter.
LifeMap Sciences has licensed from third parties the databases and software it commercializes and has a contractual obligation to pay royalties to the licensor on subscriptions sold. These costs were included in cost of sales on the consolidated statements of operations when the cash was received and the royalty obligation was incurred, as the royalty payments do not qualify for capitalization of costs to fulfill a contract under ASC 340-40, Other Assets and Deferred Costs - Contracts with Customers.
LifeMap Sciences did not generate sufficient revenues to meet its operating expenses. On March 15, 2021, LifeMap Sciences was acquired by a third party in a cash-out merger. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Grant revenues. In applying the provisions of Topic 606, we have determined that government grants are out of the scope of Topic 606 because the government entities do not meet the definition of a “customer”, as defined by Topic 606, as there is not considered to be a transfer of control of good or services to the government entities funding the grant. We account for grants received to perform research and development services in accordance with ASC 730-20, Research and Development Arrangements, which requires an assessment, at the inception of the grant, of whether the grant is a liability or a contract to perform research and development services for others. If we or a subsidiary receiving the grant is obligated to repay the grant funds to the grantor regardless of the outcome of the research and development activities, then we are required to estimate and recognize that liability. Alternatively, if we or a subsidiary receiving the grant is not required to repay, or if it is required to repay the grant funds only if the research and development activities are successful, then the grant agreement is accounted for as a contract to perform research and development services for others, in which case, grant revenue is recognized when the related research and development expenses are incurred.
In September 2018, we were awarded a grant of up to approximately $225,000 from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The NIH grant provides funding for continued development of our technologies for treating osteoporosis. Grant funds were made available by the NIH as allowable expenses were incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred approximately $25,000 and $180,000, respectively, of allowable expenses under the NIH grant and recognized a corresponding amount of grant revenues. As of March 31, 2020, we expended the full amount available under the grant.
On April 8, 2020, we were awarded a grant of up to approximately $386,000 from the NIH. The NIH grant provides funding for continued development of AgeX’s technologies for treating stroke. The grant funds will be made available by the NIH to AgeX as allowable expenses are incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $282,000 of allowable expenses under the NIH grant and recognized a corresponding amount of grant revenues.
Arrangements with multiple performance obligations. Future contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we will allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine or estimate standalone selling prices based on the prices charged, or that would be charged, to customers for that product or service. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not have significant arrangements with multiple performance obligations.
Impact of COVID-19 pandemic
The recent global outbreak of the coronavirus COVID-19, and the various attempts throughout the world to contain it, have created significant volatility, uncertainty and disruption. In response to government directives and guidelines, health care advisories and employee and other concerns, we have altered certain aspects of our operations. A number of our employees have had to work remotely from home and those on site have had to follow our social distance guidelines, which could impact their productivity. COVID-19 could also disrupt our operations due to absenteeism by infected or ill members of management or other employees, or absenteeism by members of management and other employees who cannot effectively work remotely but who elect not to come to work due to the illness affecting others in our office or laboratory facilities, or due to quarantines. COVID-19 illness could also impact members of our Board of Directors resulting in absenteeism from meetings of the directors or committees of directors, and making it more difficult to convene the quorums of the full Board of Directors or its committees needed to conduct meetings for the management of our affairs.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the various responses might impact our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we will not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; and the availability and cost to access COVID-19 tests, vaccines and therapies. Due to the uncertain scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and uncertain timing of any recovery or normalization, we are currently unable to estimate the resulting impacts on our operations and financial results. We will continue to actively monitor the issues raised by the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our operations, as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, any customers and stockholders. It is not clear what the potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our financial results.
Financial Operations Overview
To date, our revenues were principally derived from subscription and advertising revenues from LifeMap Sciences’ online databases based upon applicable subscription or advertising periods. LifeMap Sciences was acquired by a third party through a cash-out merger during March 2021 and as a result of that merger transaction we no longer own interest in LifeMap Sciences and will no longer recognize any post-merger revenues attributable to LifeMap Sciences’ business. We do not have any therapeutic products approved for sale and have generated insignificant revenues from commercialized product sales, and we do not expect to generate any significant revenues from product sales for the foreseeable future.
Our operating expenses consist of research and development expenses primarily from our pre-clinical programs and general and administrative expenses. As a result of the layoffs of mostly research personnel in April 2020 research and development work have been scaled back and contracted out to third party service providers within the newly imposed budgetary constraints under the 2020 Loan Agreement. Accordingly, the historical amounts of expense presented and discussed in this Report are likely not going to be indicative of expenses during future periods.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues and Cost of Sales
The amounts in the table below show our consolidated revenues by source and cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands).
(1) A reclassification of $37,000 was made from subscription and advertisement revenues to other revenues to conform to current period presentation.
Our revenues were primarily generated by LifeMap Sciences, as subscription and advertising revenues from its GeneCards® online database. We disposed of our interest in LifeMap Sciences through a cash-out merger during March 2021 and no longer own an interest in LifeMap Sciences and will no longer recognize any post-merger revenues attributable to LifeMap Sciences’ business.
We recognized income of approximately $307,000 during 2020 and approximately $180,000 during 2019 from grants awarded by the NIH. We expended the full amount available under one of the NIH grants as of March 31, 2020. Research and development expenses related to grant revenues are reported in operating expenses.
Other revenues of $296,000 and $253,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were generated primarily from other service revenues associated with LifeMap Sciences’ online database business.
Operating Expenses
We have made certain adjustments to our operating plans and budgets to reduce our cash expenditures in order to extend the period over which we can continue our operations with our available cash resources. These adjustments entailed a staff force reduction, primarily research and development personnel effective May 1, 2020. As a result of those staff reductions and related adjustments to our operating budgets we expect that our operating expenses, particularly those related to research and development, for periods after May 1, 2020 will be lower than our expenses for the corresponding periods of 2019. However, we paid approximately $105,000 in accrued payroll and unused paid time off and other benefits, and we recognized approximately $194,800 in restructuring charges in connection with the reduction in staffing, consisting of contractual severance, which have been reflected in our operating results for 2020.
The following table shows our consolidated operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands).
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $0.9 million to $5.0 million in 2020 as compared to $5.9 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the following reductions: $0.8 million in personnel-related expenses as result of our layoff of 11 employees in May 2020; $0.7 million in shared facilities and services fees to Lineage following the termination of the Shared Facilities and Services Agreement on September 30, 2019; $0.2 million in laboratory expense and supplies; and $0.2 million in outside research and services allocable to research and development expenses. These decreases were offset to some extent by an increase of $0.6 million in depreciation and amortization of laboratory equipment and improvements which included accelerated depreciation of lab equipment of $0.2 million; $0.3 million in severance expenses allocable to research and development with the layoff of certain employees in May 2020; and $0.1 million in laboratory facilities and equipment related expenses. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
The following table shows the amounts and percentages of our total research and development expenses, allocated to our primary research and development programs during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively (amounts in thousands).
(1) Amount includes direct expenses incurred by us or the named subsidiary and for 2019 indirect overhead costs allocated by Lineage that benefited or supported our research and development programs. See Notes 2 and 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
General and administrative expenses
The following table shows the amount and percentages of our consolidated general and administrative expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively (amounts in thousands).
(1) Amount includes direct expenses incurred by us or the named subsidiary and indirect overhead costs allocated by Lineage during 2019 that benefited or supported our general and administrative functions. See Notes 2 and 4 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $0.7 million to $7.4 million as compared to $8.1 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to the following decreases in expenses: $0.9 million of noncash stock-based compensation expense; $0.4 million in general office and facilities related expenses; $0.2 million in shared facilities and services fees from Lineage following the termination of the Shared Facilities and Services Agreement on September 30, 2019; $0.2 million in travel and lodging expenses; $0.1 million in professional fees for accounting services; and $0.1 million in investor and public relations related expenses. These decreases were offset to some extent by an increase of $0.6 million in professional fees for general and patent related legal services; $0.3 million in personnel and related costs resulting from the employment of AgeX’s own finance team commencing October 1, 2019; $0.2 million in consulting fees; and $0.1 million in insurance premiums.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net, in 2020 and 2019 consist primarily of proceeds from the sale of intangible assets offset by net foreign currency transaction gains and losses recognized by LifeMap Sciences for intercompany payables and receivables denominated in currency other than United States dollars, and interest income and interest expense, net.
Income taxes
For Federal and California purposes, our activity through August 30, 2018 was included in Lineage’s federal consolidated and California combined tax returns. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the provision for income taxes has been presented on a separate federal consolidated tax return and a California combined tax return using the separate return method, as we will file separately from Lineage for periods after August 30, 2018, the date in which Lineage deconsolidated AgeX as discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Beginning in 2018, the 2017 Tax Act subjects a U.S. stockholder to tax on Global Intangible Low Tax Income “GILTI” earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. In general, GILTI is the excess of a U.S. shareholder’s total net foreign income over a deemed return on tangible assets. The provision further allows a deduction of 50% of GILTI, however this deduction is limited to the company’s pre-GILTI U.S. income. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our foreign income inclusion was immaterial. For the year ended December 31, 2020, AgeX’s foreign entity operated at a book loss. However, for GILTI purposes, US tax laws are applied to the foreign activity and as a result there was an immaterial amount included in income for 2020. Current interpretations under ASC 740 state that an entity can make an accounting policy election to either recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or to provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred as a period expense. We have elected to account for GILTI as a current period expense when incurred.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced a domestic loss from continuing operations and a foreign loss. Although we did not record a domestic provision or benefit, we did record a foreign benefit for income taxes, due to an adjustment in the prior year's foreign tax provision reported.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $49.2 million for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Of this amount, $8.9 million is attributable to LifeMap Sciences, which includes $2.7 million in NOLs generated while it was included in the consolidated tax group and would be available to offset income of AgeX in the future. The remaining LifeMap Sciences NOLs of $6.2 million are attributable to NOLs generated for the tax years during which LifeMap Sciences filed a separate federal income tax return and, accordingly, those NOLs are available only to LifeMap Sciences’ taxable income and will not be available within AgeX in future years. In general, NOLs and other tax credit carryforwards generated by legal entities in a consolidated federal tax group are available to other members of the tax group depending on the nature of the transaction that a member may enter into while still in the consolidated federal tax group. However, under the Tax Matters Agreement between Lineage and AgeX, any use of a member’s NOLs and other tax credit carryforwards by the other member is subject to reimbursement by the benefiting member for the actual tax benefit realized. Since the August 30, 2018 deconsolidation of AgeX, and to date, neither Lineage nor AgeX has used the tax attributes of the other.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating losses of approximately $41.0 million for California purposes. As we and our subsidiaries have been included in the combined California tax return with Lineage, up to the date of deconsolidation on August 30, 2018, those state net operating losses will remain with AgeX.
Federal net operating losses generated on or prior to December 31, 2017, expire in varying amounts between 2028 and 2037, while federal net operating losses generated after December 31, 2017, carryforward indefinitely. The state net operating losses expire in varying amounts between 2028 and 2040.
As of December 31, 2020, AgeX had research and development tax credit carryforwards for federal and state tax purposes of $1.3 million and $1.0 million, respectively. Although this LifeMap Sciences credit has been included as part of the AgeX credit carryforwards, LifeMap Sciences filed a separate federal income tax return prior to January 1, 2018 and its prior research credit carryforwards cannot be used to offset federal taxable income of AgeX. As AgeX and its subsidiaries were included in the California combined return with Lineage, these credits noted above will remain with AgeX. The federal tax credits expire between 2028 and 2040, while the state tax credits have no expiration date.
A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We established a full valuation allowance for all periods presented due to the uncertainty of realizing future tax benefits from our net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Losses and Going Concern Considerations
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $97.1 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows.
We have made certain adjustments to our operating plans and budgets to reduce our projected cash expenditures in order to extend the period over which we can continue our operations with our available cash resources. These adjustments entailed down-sizing of our leased office space effective January 1, 2021, a staff force reduction during 2020, primarily impacting research and development personnel, and the elimination of our leased laboratory facility, that will require the deferral of certain work on the development of our product candidates and technologies. We incurred certain expenses arising from the staff reduction, including severance expenses as disclosed in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. However, notwithstanding those adjustments, based on our most recent projected cash flows, and not taking account of the scheduled maturity of loan balances under the 2019 Loan Agreement during February 2022, our cash and cash equivalents and potential additional loans that may become available to us from Juvenescence under the 2019 Loan Agreement and the 2020 Loan Agreement, and the proceeds of up to $12.6 million we may receive from the sale of our common stock in “at-the-market” transactions through a Sales Agreement with Chardan Capital, LLC as a sales agent, would not be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated operating and other funding requirements for the next twelve months from the date of filing of this Report. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. See Notes 4 and 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information about our loan agreements with Juvenescence. We will need to raise additional capital in the near term to be able to meet our operating expenses.
Through March 26, 2021, we had borrowed a total of $9.5 million under the 2019 Loan Agreement and 2020 Loan Agreement, but all additional loans to us from the $4.5 million in total of credit amounts that remained available as of March 26, 2021 under those loan agreements are subject to Juvenescence’s discretion, and accordingly there is no assurance that we will be able to borrow additional funds from Juvenescence when we need funding for our operations. The 2020 Loan Agreement prohibits us and our subsidiaries ReCyte Therapeutics and Reverse Bio from borrowing funds from other lenders or engaging in certain other transactions without the consent of Juvenescence unless we repay all amounts owed to Juvenescence under the 2019 Loan Agreement and 2020 Loan Agreement. Under the 2020 Loan Agreement, Juvenescence may require AgeX and the Guarantor Subsidiaries to grant Juvenescence a security interest and lien on substantially all of our respective assets. These factors and the impact of potential dilution through the issuance of shares of our common stock upon the conversion of the Juvenescence loans into AgeX common stock and the exercise of warrants issued to Juvenescence under the 2019 Loan Agreement and 2020 Loan Agreement could make AgeX less attractive to new equity investors and could impair our ability to finance our operations or the operations of our subsidiaries unless Juvenescence agrees, in its discretion, to lend us funds.
During March 2021, in connection with the disposition of our interest in LifeMap Sciences through a cash-out merger, we received $250,000 from LifeMap Sciences as a repayment of a portion of inter-company indebtedness from us. We received gross proceeds of approximately $466,400 from the disposition of our interest in LifeMap Sciences through the cash-out merger.
We may sell up to $12.6 million of common shares in “at-the-market” transactions through a Sales Agreement with Chardan Capital, LLC as a sales agent. We do not have any other committed sources of funds for additional financing.
The availability of financing for AgeX also may be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which could continue to depress national and international economies and disrupt capital markets, supply chains, and aspects of our operations. The extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately impact our business, results of operations, financial condition, or cash flows is highly uncertain and difficult to predict because it will depend on many factors that are outside our control. The unavailability or inadequacy of financing to meet future capital needs could force us to modify, curtail, delay, or suspend some or all aspects of planned operations.
To the extent that we are able to raise additional capital through the sale of AgeX equity or convertible debt securities or the sale of equity or convertible debt securities of any of our subsidiaries, the ownership interest of our present stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of any securities we or our subsidiaries issue may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, and may involve the issuance of convertible debt or stock purchase warrants that would dilute the equity interests of our stockholders. If we raise funds through additional strategic partnerships or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our total research and development expenses were $5.0 million and our general and administrative expenditures were $7.4 million. Net loss attributable to us for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $10.9 million. Net cash used in operating activities during this period amounted to $7.8 million. The difference between the net loss attributable to us and net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following: $2.2 million in depreciation and amortization; $0.9 million in stock-based compensation expense; and $0.1 million in foreign currency remeasurement. These expenses were offset to some extent by $0.1 million in net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest and $62,000 net change in working capital from operating activities.
Cash used in investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $20,000, which was paid entirely for the purchase of laboratory equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities amounted to $6.0 million, which was attributable to the draw of the remaining $0.2 million from the $2.0 million loan facility under the 2019 Loan Agreement, $5.5 million drawn against the $8.0 million line of credit under the 2020 Loan Agreement, and $0.4 million of Paycheck Protection Program loan proceeds. These proceeds were offset by $157,000 used to pay for debt related costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a) (4) (ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.