ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. As disclosed in Note 24 - Correction of Prior Period Errors of the audited consolidated financial statements, the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019, and the Company’s unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements for each of the interim and year-to-date periods ended March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020, and September 30, 2020 have been revised to give effect to the correction of certain errors we identified during the current year-end financial reporting process. As a result, the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Company’s Financial Condition and Results of Operation set forth below has been revised to give effect to the correction of these accounting errors.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) contains the financial measures EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are not presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). These non-GAAP financial measures are being presented because management believes that they provide readers with additional insight into the Company’s operational performance relative to earlier periods and relative to its competitors and they are key measures used by the Company to evaluate its performance. The Company does not intend for these non-GAAP financial measures to be a substitute for any GAAP financial information. Readers of this MD&A should use these non-GAAP financial measures only in conjunction with the comparable GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP measure is provided in this MD&A.
Business Overview
AgroFresh is a global leader in delivering innovative food preservation and waste reduction solutions for fresh produce. The Company is empowering the food industry with a range of integrated solutions designed to help growers, packers and retailers improve produce freshness and quality while reducing waste. AgroFresh has key products registered in over 50 countries, and supports customers by protecting over 25,000 storage rooms globally. AgroFresh’s solutions range from near-harvest with HarvistaTM and LandSpringTM to its flagship post-harvest SmartFreshTM Quality System. Additional post-harvest freshness solutions include fungicides that can be applied to meet various customer operational requirements, in either a foggable (ActiMist™) or liquid (ActiSeal™) delivery form. To supplement our near- and post-harvest product solutions, our FreshCloud™ digital technology platform includes analytical, diagnostic and tracking services that provide a range of value-added capabilities to help customers optimize the quality of their produce. Beyond apples, SmartFresh technology can provide ready-to-eat freshness for other fruits and vegetables including avocados, bananas, melons, tomatoes, broccoli and mangos. AgroFresh is also providing customers with packaging-based advisory services and custom packaging solutions under the RipeLock brand, which focuses on packaging-based freshness technology solutions for fruits and vegetables.
In December 2017, AgroFresh acquired a controlling interest in Tecnidex. With this acquisition, AgroFresh expanded its industry-leading post-harvest presence into additional crops and increased its penetration of the produce market in southern Europe, Latin America and Africa. For over 35 years, Tecnidex has been helping fruit and vegetable producers offer clean, safe and high-quality products to its regional customers in 18 countries. Through a portfolio of post-harvest fungicides, coatings and disinfectants, packinghouse equipment and associated consulting and after-sale services, Tecnidex improves the quality and value of our customers’ fruit and vegetables while respecting the environment. Tecnidex further diversified AgroFresh’s revenue by allowing the Company to provide solutions and service to the citrus industry.
Freshness is the most important driver of consumer satisfaction when it comes to produce and, at the same time, food waste is a major issue in the industry. About one third of the total food produced worldwide is lost or wasted each year. Nearly 45% of all fresh fruits and vegetables, 40% of apples and 20% of bananas, are lost to spoilage. AgroFresh plays a key role in the value chain by offering products and services that maintain produce freshness and reduce waste.
AgroFresh’s flagship SmartFresh Quality System regulates the post-harvest ripening effects of ethylene, the naturally occurring plant hormone that triggers ripening in certain fruits and vegetables. SmartFresh is naturally biodegradable, leaves no detectable residue and has been approved for use by many domestic and global regulatory organizations. Harvista extends the Company’s proprietary technology into the field, including treatment of cherries early in the growing season and near-harvest management of apples, pears and blueberries. FreshCloud™ is our digital technology services platform, which continues to expand. Launched in 2020, FreshCloud Quality Inspection is a proprietary cloud-based mobile quality management service that digitizes what was formerly a manual quality control process and captures, organizes and analyzes quality metrics in real time. LandSpringTM is an innovative 1-MCP technology targeted to transplanted vegetable seedlings. It is currently registered for use
on tomatoes, peppers and 14 other crops in the US. It reduces transplant shock, resulting in less seedling mortality and faster crop establishment, which leads to a healthier crop and improved yields.
AgroFresh’s business is highly seasonal, driven by the timing of the apple and pear harvests in the northern and southern hemispheres. The first half of the year is when the southern hemisphere harvest occurs, and the second half of the year is when the northern hemisphere harvest occurs. Since the northern hemisphere harvest of apples and pears is typically larger, a significant portion of our sales and profits are historically generated in the second half of the year. In addition to this seasonality, factors such as weather patterns may impact the timing of the harvest within the two halves of the year.
On July 31, 2015 (the “Closing Date”), we consummated a business combination (the “Business Combination”) pursuant to a Stock Purchase Agreement, dated April 30, 2015 (the “Purchase Agreement”), with Dow, providing for the acquisition by us of the AgroFresh business from Dow. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, we entered into a tax receivables agreement (the "TRA"), as amended in April 2017, pursuant to which Dow was entitled to receive 50% of the tax savings, if any, that the Company realized as a result of the increase in the tax basis of assets acquired pursuant to the Business Combination. The TRA was terminated in December 2019. Also in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, AgroFresh entered into a transition services agreement with Dow. Under the agreement, Dow provided AgroFresh a suite of services for a period of time ranging from six months to five years depending on the service. While most of the Dow-provided services were complete as of December 31, 2018, certain services continued through 2020.
Factors Affecting the Company’s Results of Operations
The Company’s results of operations are affected by a number of external factors. Some of the more important factors are briefly discussed below.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a National Public Health Emergency which continues to spread throughout the world and has adversely impacted global activity and contributed to significant declines and volatility in financial markets. The outbreak could have a continued material adverse impact on economic and market conditions and trigger a period of global economic slowdown. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a significant adverse impact on our results of operations. However, there were numerous obstacles presented and some localized financial impacts of the pandemic, including fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and customer demand and spending pattern changes. While we are following the requirements of governmental authorities and taking additional preventative and protective measures to ensure the safety of our workforce, including implementing remote working arrangements and varying procedures for essential workforce, we cannot be 100% certain that there will not be any incidents across our global operations that may cause service interruptions. The rapid development and fluidity of this situation precludes any prediction as to the ultimate impact of the coronavirus outbreak, although the Company operates in an industry that thus far has not been as severely impacted as others. Nevertheless, the outbreak presents some uncertainty and risk with respect to the Company and its performance and financial results.
Demand for the Company’s Offerings
The Company sells to customers in approximately 50 countries and derives its revenue by assisting growers and packers to optimize the value of their crops primarily in the near and post-harvest periods. The Company’s products and services add value to customers by reducing food spoilage and extending the life of perishable fruits. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has estimated that a growing global population will require a near doubling of food production in developing countries by 2050 to meet the expected demand of a worldwide population expected to reach 9 billion people.
This global trend, among others, creates demand for the Company’s solutions. The Company’s offerings are currently protected by patent filings in 51 countries.
The global produce market is a function of both the size and the yield of the crop harvested; variations in either will affect total production. Given the nature of the agricultural industry, weather patterns may impact total production and the Company's resulting commercial opportunities. The Company supports a diverse customer base whose end markets vary due to the type of fruit and quality of the product demanded in their respective markets. Such variation across end markets also affects demand for the Company’s services.
Customer Pricing
The Company’s offerings are priced based on the value they provide to the Company’s customers. From time to time, the Company adjusts the pricing of its offerings to address market trends. The Company does not typically price its products in relation to any underlying cost of materials or services; therefore, its margins can fluctuate with changes in these costs. The Company’s pricing may include rebate arrangements with customers in exchange for mutually beneficial long-term relationships and growth.
Integrated Service Model
AgroFresh offers the Company’s commercially available products, including SmartFresh and Harvista, primarily through a direct service model. Sales and sales support personnel maintain face-to-face relationships with customers year round. Technical sales and support personnel work with customers to provide value-added advisory services regarding the application of SmartFresh. The actual application of SmartFresh is performed by service providers that are typically third-party contractors. Harvista is applied through both aerial and ground application, which is administered by third-party service providers or made by our customers directly.
Most of the Company’s service providers are operating under multi-year contracts. Management believes the quality and experience of its service providers deliver clear commercial benefits.
Seasonality
The Company’s operations are subject to seasonal variation due to the timing of the growing seasons around the world. For our core crops of apples and pears, northern hemisphere growers harvest from August through November, and southern hemisphere growers harvest from late January to early May. For citrus crops, there are seasonal variations in this business due to the northern hemisphere citrus harvest, which spans from October to March. Since the majority of the Company’s sales are in northern hemisphere countries, a proportionately greater share of its revenue is realized during the second half of the year. There are also variations in the seasonal demands from year to year depending on weather patterns and crop size. This seasonality and variations in seasonal demand could impact the ability to compare results between periods.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
With a global customer base and geographic footprint, the Company generates revenue and incurs costs in a number of different currencies, with the Euro comprising the most significant non-U.S. currency. Fluctuations in the value of these currencies relative to the U.S. dollar can increase or decrease the Company’s overall revenue and profitability as stated in U.S. dollars, which is the Company’s reporting currency. In certain instances, if sales in a given geography have been adversely impacted on a long-term basis due to foreign currency depreciation, the Company has been able to adjust its pricing so as to mitigate the impact on profitability.
Domestic and Foreign Operations
The Company has both domestic and foreign operations. Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, regional growth-related spending in R&D and marketing expenses, and changes in local selling prices, among other factors, may impact the profitability of foreign operations in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition are based upon our financial statements. These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experiences and assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and re-evaluate them on an ongoing basis. Actual results could differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies, which may be affected by our estimates and assumptions, are more fully described in Note 2 to the audited consolidated financial statements.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the
financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect its most significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Goodwill
As discussed in Note 2- Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the audited consolidated financial statements, the Company tests goodwill and identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment as of December 31 of each year. Intangibles are tested for impairment using a quantitative impairment model. We test goodwill for impairment by either performing a qualitative evaluation or a two-step quantitative test.
The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is subjective because it requires the use of estimates and assumptions as to our future cash flows, discount rate commensurate with the risks involved in the asset, future economic and market conditions, as well as other key assumptions. The amounts recorded in the financial statements related to goodwill are based on the best estimates and judgments of the Company’s management, although actual outcomes could differ from our estimates. The Company recorded goodwill with a carrying value of $6.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The estimated fair value of the Tecnidex reporting unit as of December 31, 2020 is approximately 19% greater than the carrying value of the reporting unit. A 1% increase in the assumed discount rate would not cause an impairment of goodwill.
Other intangible assets
We conduct our annual indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment assessment as of December 31 of each year unless conditions arise that would require a more frequent evaluation. In assessing the recoverability of indefinite-lived intangible assets, projections regarding estimated discounted future cash flows and other factors are made to determine if impairment has occurred. If we conclude that there has been impairment, we will write down the carrying value of the asset to its fair value. Each year, we evaluate those intangible assets with indefinite lives to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support the indefinite useful lives. When testing indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. Such qualitative factors may include the following:
•Macroeconomic conditions
•Industry and market considerations
•Cost factors
•Overall financial performance; and
•Other relevant entity-specific events
Based on the results of our annual impairment reviews, management recorded an impairment charge of $2.6 million on its SmartFresh trade name for the year ended December 31, 2018. In determining the fair value of the trade names, the Company applied the relief from royalty methodology, which is based on the assumption that without ownership of the assets, the user of the trade names would have to make a stream of payments to the owner of the trade names in return for the rights to use the trade names. By acquiring the trade name, the user avoids those payments. The Company has three trade name assets, AgroFresh, SmartFresh, and Tecnidex, totaling $27.3 million, which passed the impairment test as of December 31, 2020 by 13%, 41% and 21%, respectively. A 1% increase in the discount rate would not cause an impairment of any of the trade names.
Definite-lived intangible assets, such as technology, customer relationships and software are amortized over their estimated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 4 to 24 years. We assess the reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets regularly. Our assessment is based on a number of factors including competitive environment, product history, underlying product life cycles, operating strategy and the macroeconomic environment of the countries in which the products are sold. The impairment of definite-lived intangible assets is tested annually or more frequently when factors or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value has declined below its carrying value. If any factors that could result in future impairment charge have occurred, a recoverability test is performed in which the undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group are compared to the carrying value. If the cash flows are not sufficient to recover the carrying value, then a fair value estimate is made of the asset or asset group to determine the amount of impairment, if any. Once these assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the balance sheet. The Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 associated with Verigo software. In 2019, the Company recognized accelerated amortization expense of $34.0 million related to developed RipeLock technology based on the Company’s change in strategy for the RipeLock product. The accelerated amortization expense is included in amortization of intangibles in the consolidated statements of (loss) income.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenues are generated from the application of our products to fruits and vegetables either before or after harvesting. Revenue is recognized at the time the product is applied to the fruits or vegetables as this represents the point at which our performance obligation to the customer has been completed.
On January 1, 2018, the Company began to account for revenue in accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which requires revenue recognized to represent the transfer of promised goods or services to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration which is expected to be received in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for the arrangements that the Company determines are within the scope of Topic 606, the Company performs the following 5 steps: (1) identify the contracts with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. Revenue is presented in our consolidated statements of (loss) income, net of estimated rebates and discounts.
See Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Accounting for Business Combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. This method requires the recording of acquired assets, including separately identifiable intangible assets and assumed liabilities at their acquisition date fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, royalty rates and asset lives, among other items.
The fair values of intangible assets were estimated using an income approach, either the excess earnings method (customer relationships) or the relief from royalty method (technology and trademarks). Under the excess earnings method, an intangible asset’s fair value is equal to the present value of the incremental after-tax cash flows attributable solely to the intangible asset over its remaining useful life. Under the relief from royalty method, fair value is measured by estimating future revenue associated with the intangible asset over its useful life and applying a royalty rate to the revenue estimate. These intangible assets enable us to secure markets for our products, develop new products to meet evolving business needs and competitively produce our existing products.
The fair values of property, plant and equipment, other than real properties, were based on the consideration that unless otherwise identified, they will continue to be used “as is” and as part of the ongoing business. The determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed involves assessing factors such as the expected future cash flows associated with individual assets and liabilities and appropriate discount rates at the date of the acquisition.
The fair values of the various contingent consideration components were measured using the following valuation models. The fair value of the tax amortization benefit contingency was measured using an income approach based on the Company’s best estimate of the undiscounted cash payments to be made, tax effected and discounted to present value utilizing an appropriate market discount rate. The fair value of the earnout payment was measured using a Monte Carlo pricing model and based on the Company’s best projection of the Company’s revenues over the three-year period from January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2020.
See Note 3 - Business Combination to the audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Determining the fair value of share-based payment awards requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our share-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. See Note 17 - Stock Compensation to the audited consolidated financial statements contained in this report for further detail on stock-based compensation.
Income taxes
The provision for income taxes was determined using the asset and liability approach of accounting for income taxes. Under this approach, deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and liabilities are recovered or paid. The provision for income taxes represents income taxes paid or payable for the current year plus the change in deferred taxes during the period. Deferred taxes result from differences between the financial and tax basis of our assets and liabilities and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when changes are enacted. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates applicable in the years in which they are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax law is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Income tax related penalties are included in the provision for income taxes. In evaluating the ability to realize deferred tax assets, the Company relies on taxable income in prior carryback years, the future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income and tax planning strategies.
The breadth of our operations and the global complexity of tax regulations require assessments of uncertainties and judgments in estimating taxes we will ultimately pay. The final taxes paid are dependent upon many factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in various jurisdictions, outcomes of tax litigation and resolution of disputes arising from federal, state and international tax audits in the normal course of business. A liability for unrecognized tax benefits is recorded when management concludes that the likelihood of sustaining such positions upon examination by taxing authorities is less than "more likely than not."
Recently Issued Accounting Standards and Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements and our expectations of their impact, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the results of operations:
Comparison of Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Sales
Net sales were $157.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net sales of $170.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The impact of the change in foreign currency exchange rates compared to 2019 reduced revenue by $1.9 million. Excluding this impact, revenue decreased approximately 6.2%. The decrease in net sales was primarily due to lower volume of SmartFresh sales on a smaller crop size and a decrease in EthylBloc sales due to COVID-19 impacts, partially offset by growth in fungicides, Harvista and diversification strategies.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $42.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit margin was 73.2% in 2020 versus 73.5% in 2019. Despite a decrease in sales and related fixed costs leverage impact, margin was relatively consistent due to the positive effects of supply chain cost optimization initiatives.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in research and development expenses was driven by the timing of projects.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $53.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 9.4%. Included in selling, general and administrative expenses were $4.1 million in 2020 and $8.8 million in 2019 of costs associated with non-recurring items that include M&A and
litigation along with severance. Excluding these items, selling general and administrative expenses decreased approximately 1.8% from 2019 to 2020, driven by ongoing cost optimization initiatives.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles was $43.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in amortization is primarily due to accelerated RipeLock amortization of $34.0 million and software additions during 2019.
Impairment of Assets
During the year ended December 31, 2020, there was no impairment charge. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $11.4 million, consisting of $1.0 million associated with Verigo software following a partnership agreement with a new technology provider, $10.0 million on investments and $0.4 million of other assets.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
The Company recorded no gain or loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the change in the fair value of contingent consideration, as compared to a $0.3 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2019. As discussed in Note 3 - Business Combination to the audited consolidated financial statements, pursuant to the Business Combination, the Company entered into various forms of contingent consideration, including the deferred payment and the tax amortization benefit contingency. These liabilities are measured at fair value each reporting date and any mark-to-market fluctuations are recognized in earnings.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized the deferred payment gain of $0.4 million and a tax amortization benefit contingency loss of $0.1 million. In 2019, the TRA was terminated, and the Company paid to Dow an aggregate of $16 million in settlement of all past and estimated future liabilities that would have been owed under the TRA.
Grant Income
The Company recorded income of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Pursuant to the CARES Act, the Company received a Paycheck Protection Program loan to offset eligible costs incurred during the period. As the Company believes it is in compliance with the forgiveness criteria under this loan program, the full amount was recognized as grant income.
Other Income
Other income was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $0.0 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company received $1.6 million in cash from settlement of a litigation matter during 2020.
Debt Modification and Extinguishment Expenses
The Company recognized debt modification and extinguishment expenses of $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of closing the Restated Term Facility as discussed in Note 11 - Debt of the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements below. There was no such expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss on foreign currency
Loss on foreign currency was $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The losses in both years were primarily due to hyperinflationary accounting in Argentina.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $23.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to $7.1 million lower interest on long-term debt due to a lower variable rate and principal balance and lower accretion on the TRA of $3.5 million due to settlement in December 2019.
Income Tax Provision
Our effective tax rate was (145.3)% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 31.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our tax rate is affected by recurring items, such as tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred current unbenefited losses related to limitations under Section 382 of the IRC due to the July 2020 ownership change. After the annual limitation was determined in a Section 382 study completed by the Company, the Company did not have sufficient evidence to support the future taxable income to realize U.S. deferred tax assets. In addition to the income tax expense associated with the increase in U.S. valuation allowance, the Company incurred a smaller pre-tax loss in 2020, reducing the overall tax benefit.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2018.
Net Sales
Net sales were $170.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to net sales of $178.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The impact of the change in foreign currency exchange rates compared to 2018 reduced revenue by $3.3 million. Excluding this impact, revenue decreased approximately 3.0%.
The remaining decrease in net sales was due to increased competition and decreased pear crop size in Europe. Tecnidex sales decreased 4.7% on an absolute basis and decreased 0.1% on a constant currency basis versus the prior year period. Offsetting these decreases was growth in SmartFresh in Latin America, sales of Harvista in North America and Latin America and new revenue associated with FreshCloud.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $45.0 million for the year ended year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $46.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Gross profit margin was 73.5% in 2019 versus 74.1% in 2018. The margin was relatively stable and in line with our expectations.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in research and development expenses is primarily related to $0.5 million of severance costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $65.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of 9.6%. Included in selling, general and administrative expenses were $8.8 million in 2019 and $9.0 million in 2018 of costs associated with non-recurring items that include M&A and litigation along with severance. Excluding these items, selling general and administrative expenses decreased approximately 10.7% from 2018 to 2019, driven by ongoing cost optimization initiatives.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles was $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $45.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in amortization is due to accelerated RipeLock amortization of $34.0 million and software additions during 2019.
Impairment of Assets
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.0 million associated with Verigo software following a partnership agreement with a new technology provider and an impairment of $10.1 million on investments and $0.4 million of other assets. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $2.6 million related to the estimated decline in the fair value of the SmartFresh trade name.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The Company recorded a $0.3 million gain in the year ended December 31, 2019 related to a change in the fair value of contingent consideration, as compared to a $3.0 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2018. As discussed in Note 3 - Business Combination to the audited consolidated financial statements, pursuant to the Business Combination, the Company entered into various forms of contingent consideration, including the deferred payment and the tax amortization benefit contingency. These liabilities are measured at fair value each reporting date and any mark-to-market fluctuations are recognized in earnings. For the year ended December 31, 2018, the deferred payment and the tax amortization benefit contingency mark-to-market gains were $0.3 million and $2.8 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized a deferred payment gain of $0.4 million and a tax amortization benefit contingency loss of $0.1 million. In December 2019, the TRA was terminated, and the Company paid to Dow an aggregate of $16 million in settlement of all past and estimated future liabilities that would have been owed under the TRA.
Other Income
Other income was $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $0.4 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Loss Foreign Currency
Loss on foreign currency was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to a loss of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The loss was primarily due to inflation in Argentina during 2019, as compared to 2018, when translation losses were included in equity until July 1, 2018.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $34.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by lower accretion on the TRA of $0.3 million, increase in the recognition of the gain on hedging activity of $1.1 million and increase of interest income of $0.5 million, which was partially offset by higher interest on our credit facility of $1.5 million.
Income Tax Provision
Our effective tax rate was 31.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to (6.5)% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our tax rate is affected by recurring items, such as tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions. It is also affected by discrete items that may occur in any given year. On December 22, 2017 the TCJA was enacted in the U.S. The TCJA significantly revised the U.S. federal corporate income tax by, among other things, lowering the corporate income tax rate to 21%, implementing a territorial tax system, imposing a limitation on tax deductibility of U.S. interest expense and the inclusion of “global intangible low-taxed income” (“GILTI”).
During the year ended December 31, 2019, certain income was recognized that did not receive a tax cost related to the elimination of intercompany profit in inventory. In addition, there was a valuation allowance increase in the U.S. offset by valuation allowance decreases in Japan, Netherlands and Turkey.
Non-GAAP Measures
The following table sets forth the non-GAAP financial measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. The Company believes these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful supplemental information as they are used by the Company’s management to evaluate the Company’s performance (including incentive bonuses and for bank covenant reporting), are more indicative of future operating performance of the Company, and facilitate a better comparison among fiscal periods. These non-GAAP results are presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for the financial information presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following is a reconciliation between the non-GAAP financial measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net loss:
(1) Interest on debt, accretion for debt discounts, debt issuance costs and contingent consideration.
(2) Severance costs related to ongoing cost optimization initiatives.
(3) Costs related to certain professional and other infrequent or non-recurring fees, including those associated with litigation and M&A related fees.
(4) Loss on foreign currency exchange relates to net losses and gains resulting from transactions denominated in a currency other than the Company's functional currency.
(5) Non-cash adjustment to the fair value of contingent consideration, including the TRA and contingent payment related to the Tecnidex acquisition.
(6) Impairment of assets related to software and investments.
The following is a reconciliation between net sales on a non-GAAP constant currency basis to GAAP net sales:
(1) The company provides net sales on a constant currency basis to enhance investors’ understanding of underlying business trends and operating performance, by removing the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. The impact from foreign currency, calculated on a constant currency basis, is determined by applying prior period average exchange rates to current year results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
Cash provided by operating activities was $26.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $20.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income before non-cash items was $27.2 million. Included in this amount is depreciation and amortization of $47.0 million, deferred income taxes of $29.3 million and other non-cash items of $4.0 million. Additionally, the change in net operating assets was ($0.5) million in 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net income before non-cash items was $20.5 million. Included in this amount is the impairment of intangible assets of $11.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $83.5 million, change in the fair value of contingent consideration (including accretion) of $3.1 million, deferred income taxes of ($29.0) million and other non-cash items of $5.6 million. Additionally, the change in net operating assets was ($0.4) million in 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net income before non-cash items was $32.0 million. Included in this amount is impairment of intangible assets of $2.6 million depreciation and amortization of $47.6 million, change in the fair value of contingent consideration (including accretion) of $0.8 million, deferred income taxes of $1.2 million, cash received on interest rate swap termination of $3.7 million and other non-cash items of $6.5 million. Additionally, the change in net operating assets was ($29.0) million in 2018.
Cash used in investing activities was ($2.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to ($4.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and ($5.8) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Cash used in investing activities in 2020 was the purchase of fixed assets and leasehold improvements of ($2.4) million. Cash used in investing activities in 2019 was for the purchase of fixed assets and leasehold improvements of ($4.2) million and other investment of ($0.3) million. Cash used in investing activities in 2018 was for the asset acquisition of Verigo of ($1.6) million, and the purchase of fixed assets and leasehold improvements of ($4.2) million.
Cash used in financing activities was ($4.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to ($22.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and ($22.2) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Cash used in financing activities in 2020 was for the repayment of debt in the amount of ($132.4) million, payment of deferred financing costs of ($8.0) million, payment of preferred stock costs ($7.0) million of and payment of dividends of ($5.2) million, offset by proceeds from the issuance of convertible preferred stock of $145.5 million, proceeds from long term debt of $2.0 million and proceeds from issuance of stock of $0.3 million. Cash used in financing activities in 2019 was for the settlement the payment of the TRA of ($16.0) million and the repayment of debt in the amount of ($6.3) million, offset by proceeds from the issuance of stock of $0.2 million. Cash used in financing activities in 2018 was for the payment of Dow liabilities of ($10.0) million, repayment of debt in the amount of ($6.1) million and payment of contingent consideration of ($6.1) million.
Restated Credit Facility
On July 27, 2020, the Company completed a comprehensive refinancing (the “Refinancing”) by (i) entering into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Restated Credit Agreement”) with the other loan parties party thereto, Bank of Montreal, as administrative agent and the lenders party thereto, and (ii) consummating the issuance and sale to PSP of 150,000 shares of convertible preferred stock pursuant to the terms of the Investment Agreement (as defined below). The Restated Credit Agreement amends and restates in its entirety the Prior Credit Facility (defined below).
The Restated Credit Agreement provides for a $25.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Restated Revolving Loan”), which matures on June 30, 2024, and a $275.0 million term credit facility (the “Restated Term Loan” and, together with the Restated Revolving Loan, the “Restated Credit Facility”), which matures on December 31, 2024. The Restated Credit Facility includes a $5.0 million swingline commitment and a $10.0 million letter of credit sub-limit. Loans under the Restated Term Loan bear interest at a rate equal to, at the Company’s option, either the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate for the interest period in effect for such borrowing plus an Applicable Rate of 6.25% per annum, or the Alternate Base Rate plus an Applicable Rate of 5.25% per annum. Loans under the Restated Revolving Loan bear interest at a rate equal to, at the Company’s option, the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate for the interest period in effect for such borrowing plus the Applicable Rate ranging from 6.25% to 6.0% per annum, based on certain ratios. The interest rate for the Restated Credit Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 7.25% The Company is also required to pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the Restated Revolving Loan at a rate ranging from 0.5% to 0.375%, based on certain ratios. The Company is required to make mandatory prepayments of outstanding indebtedness under the Restated Credit Agreement under certain circumstances.
The obligations of AgroFresh Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and the borrower under the Restated Credit Facility, are initially guaranteed by the Company and the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, AF Solutions Holdings LLC (together with AgroFresh Inc. and the Company, the “Loan Parties”) and may in the future be guaranteed by certain other domestic subsidiaries of the Company. The obligations of the Loan Parties under the Credit Agreement and other loan
documents are secured, subject to customary permitted liens and other agreed upon exceptions, by a perfected security interest in all tangible and intangible assets of the Loan Parties, except for certain excluded assets, and equity interests of certain foreign subsidiaries of the Loan Parties held by the Loan Parties (subject to certain exclusions and limitations).
At December 31, 2020, there was $274.3 million outstanding under the Restated Term Loan and no balance outstanding under the Restated Revolving Loan. At December 31, 2020, the Company evaluated the amount recorded under the Restated Term Loan and determined that the fair value was approximately $271.6 million. The fair value of the debt is based on quoted inactive market prices and is therefore classified as Level 2 within the valuation hierarchy.
Certain restrictive covenants are contained in the Restated Credit Agreement, and the Company was in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Tecnidex Debt
On March 23, 2020, Tecnidex entered into a €1.0 million loan agreement with Banco Santander, S.A., which provides funding through March 2023 at a 1.5% interest rate. In May 2020, Tecnidex entered into a €0.3 million loan agreement with BBVA, which provides funding through May 2025 at a 2.2% interest rate. In July 2020, Tecnidex entered into a €0.6 million loan agreement with Banco Santander, S.A., which provides funding through July 2025 at a 2.5% interest rate.
Preferred Stock Financing
On June 13, 2020, the Company entered into an Investment Agreement (the “Investment Agreement”) with PSP, an affiliate of Paine Schwartz Partners, LLC, pursuant to which, subject to certain closing conditions, PSP agreed to purchase in a private placement an aggregate of $150,000,000 of convertible preferred equity of the Company. The transaction closed on July 27, 2020, and a total of 150,000 shares of the Company’s newly-designated Series B-1 Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Series B-1 Preferred Stock”) were purchased in such transaction (the “Private Placement”). On September 22, 2020, following the approval of the transactions contemplated by the Investment Agreement by the necessary regulatory body, the Company issued to PSP, for no additional consideration, a total of 150,000 shares of the Company’s newly-designated Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Series B-2 Preferred Stock”). On September 25, 2020 (the "Exchange Date"), PSP elected to exchange the shares of the Company’s Series B-1 Convertible Preferred Stock and Series B-2 Preferred Stock held by it for a total of 150,000 shares of the Company’s newly-designated Series B Preferred Stock. Accordingly, effective as of the Exchange Date, the Company issued 150,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, to PSP and all of the shares of Series B-1 Preferred Stock and Series B-2 Preferred Stock held by PSP were cancelled. No shares of Series B-1 Preferred Stock or Series B-2 Preferred Stock are outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The Series B Preferred Stock ranks senior to the shares of the Company’s common stock with respect to dividend rights and rights on the distribution of assets on any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the affairs of the Company. The Series B Preferred Stock has a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share (the “Stated Value”). Holders of the Series B Preferred Stock are entitled to a cumulative dividend at a rate of 16% per annum, of which 50% will be payable in cash and 50% will be payable in kind until the first anniversary of the Closing Date, after which 50% will be payable in cash, 37.5% will be payable in kind, and the remaining 12.5% will be payable in cash or in kind, at the Company’s option, subject in each case to adjustment under certain circumstances. Dividends on the Series B Preferred Stock are cumulative and payable quarterly in arrears. All dividends that are paid in kind will accrete to, and increase, the Stated Value. The applicable dividend rate is subject to increase by 2% per annum during any period that the Company is in breach of certain provisions of the applicable Certificate of Designation of the Preferred Stock. The Series B Preferred Stock has been classified as temporary equity as it may be contingently redeemable in the event of a change of control, which is outside of the Company's control.
Associated with the Series B Preferred Stock, the Company paid $10.5 million of total dividends, of which $5.2 million were in additional preferred shares and $5.2 million were in cash, for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company paid no dividends. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no accrued dividends.
The Series B Preferred Stock is convertible into Common Stock at the election of the holder at any time at an initial conversion price of 5.00 (“Conversion Price”). The Conversion Price is subject to customary adjustments, including for stock splits and other reorganizations affecting the Common Stock and pursuant to certain anti-dilution provisions for below market issuances. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the maximum number of shares of common stock that could be issued upon conversion of the outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock was 31,048,800 and 0 shares, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations. We have not guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities or entered into any options on non-financial assets.