Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, whose actual outcomes involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those stated in or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Statement regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this report.
As described elsewhere in this report, all share and per share amounts set forth below have been presented on a retroactive basis to reflect a 1-for-1.580814 reverse stock split of our outstanding common stock implemented on January 12, 2021.
Overview
We are a developer of highly advanced and proprietary precision hardware and software grow solutions for the indoor agriculture marketplace. We believe we are the only company with an automated and fully integrated grow solution in the industry. We believe our Agrify “Precision Elevated™” cultivation solution is vastly differentiated from anything else on the market in that it combines our seamlessly integrated hardware and software offerings with a wide range of associated services such as consulting, engineering, and construction to form what we believe is the most complete solution available from a single provider. The totality of our product mix and service capabilities form an unrivaled ecosystem in what has historically been an extremely fragmented market. As a result, we believe we are well situated to create a dominant market position in the indoor agriculture sector.
We had limited revenues from operations in each of the last two fiscal years. Through 2019, we concentrated our business with TriGrow Systems, Inc. (“TriGrow”), acting as our exclusive distributor. During January 2020, we acquired TriGrow. and began selling our products directly to end customers. In July 2020, we acquired HMH, a company that has been producing and assembling many of our products.
Recent Events
Public Offerings
Initial Public Offering
On January 27, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Maxim Group LLC, as representative of the underwriters named therein, in connection with our initial public offering (the “IPO”). On January 27, 2021, we announced the pricing of our IPO of 5,400,000 shares of common stock for a price of $10.00 per share, less certain underwriting discounts and commissions. We also granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 810,000 additional shares of our common stock on the same terms and conditions for the purpose of covering any over-allotments in connection with the IPO.
The IPO closed on February 1, 2021. Subsequently, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option, and on February 4, 2021, we closed on the sale of an additional 810,000 shares of common stock for a price of $10.00 per share, less a 7% underwriting commission. The exercise of the over-allotment option brings the total number of shares of common stock sold by us in connection with our IPO to 6,210,000 shares and the total net proceeds received in connection with the IPO to approximately $57 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses.
Subsequent Public Offering
On February 16, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Maxim Group LLC, as representative of the underwriters named therein, in connection with an underwritten public offering (the “February Offering”). On February 16, 2021, we announced the pricing of the February Offering of 5,555,555 shares of common stock for a price of $13.50 per share, less certain underwriting discounts and commissions. We also granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 833,333 additional shares of our common stock on the same terms and conditions for the purpose of covering any over-allotments in connection with the February Offering. The February Offering closed on February 19, 2021. Subsequently, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option, and on March 22, 2021, we closed on the sale of an additional 833,333 shares of common stock for a price of $13.50 per share, less a 7% underwriting commission. The exercise of the over-allotment option brings the total number of shares of common stock sold by us in connection with our February Offering to 6,388,888 shares and the total net proceeds received in connection with the February Offering to approximately $80 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses.
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we issued an aggregate of 60,000 shares of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, or Series A Preferred Stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $6,000,000. In May 2020, we completed our offering of Series A Preferred with the issuance of an additional 40,000 shares of Series A Preferred for an aggregate purchase price of $4,000,000. All outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock automatically converted immediately prior to the closing of our IPO into 1,373,038 shares of common stock at a conversion price of $7.72 per share.
Acquisition of TriGrow
On January 22, 2020 we completed the acquisition of all outstanding shares of TriGrow. TriGrow is an integrator and exclusive distributor of our premium indoor grow solutions for the indoor controlled agriculture marketplace. As part of the acquisition, we received TriGrow’s 75% interest in Agrify Brands, LLC (formerly TriGrow Brands, LLC), a licensor of an established portfolio of consumer brands that utilize our grow technology. The license of these brands is ancillary to the sale of our AVFUs and provides a means to differentiate customers’ products in the marketplace. It is not a material aspect of our business and we have not realized any royalty income. Accordingly, we are currently evaluating whether to continue this legacy business from an operational standpoint, as well as from a legal and regulatory perspective. In consideration of TriGrow’s shares, we issued to TriGrow’s shareholders 595,552 shares of common stock. In addition, the closing conditions included the assumption of TriGrow’s outstanding obligation to invest $1,140,000 (the “Funding Amount”) in a form of a so called “Profit Interest” investment in CCI Finance, LLC (“CCI”). We included this investment as part of the consideration for the acquisition. We satisfied this obligation and made payment of the Funding Amount on January 24, 2020 pursuant to a Profits Interest Agreement with CCI. Under the Profits Interest Agreement, in return for our investment of the Funding Amount, CCI is obligated to share with us 28.5% of the net revenue generated from its equipment lease agreement with its customer, payable at least annually by CCI to us. The revenue sharing percentage is reduced from 28.5% to 20% once we have received payments equaling an 18% Internal Rate of Return on the Funding Amount (the “Preferred Return”) prior to the fifth anniversary of the agreement. The revenue sharing terminates upon the later of five years, or our attainment of the Preferred Return. To date, no revenue has been generated and shared with us under this agreement. Assuming a five-year payback, the annual payments required to reach the Preferred Return would be $364,500. Assuming a seven-year payback, the annual payments required to reach the Preferred Return would be $299,000.
As part of the acquisition of TriGrow, we made available 121,539 shares of our common stock for issuance to certain executives of TriGrow upon TriGrow’s and/or our receipt of $10,000,000 of accumulative purchase orders for TriGrow and/or our equipment, products, and services, for the period from November 21, 2019 through June 30, 2020 as a result of the efforts of the TriGrow executives. Such shares of common stock are to be distributed by us in our sole discretion to certain executives responsible for achievement of such milestone. We concluded that the earn-out, if materialized, will be considered as post combination services. Additionally, we concluded that the value associated with the earn-out to be de minimis. No earn-out was earned through June 30, 2020.
The purchase price for TriGrow was allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition dates, with the remaining unallocated purchase prices recorded as goodwill. The fair value assigned to identifiable intangible assets acquired was determined primarily by using the income approach, which discounts expected future cash flows to present value using estimates and assumptions determined by our management.
Transaction and related costs, consisting primarily of professional fees, directly related to the acquisition, totaled $45,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. All transaction and related costs were expensed as incurred and are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
The purchase price allocation for the business combination has been prepared on a preliminary basis and changes to those allocations may occur as additional information becomes available during the respective measurement period (up to one year from the acquisition date). Fair value still under review include values assigned to identifiable intangible assets and goodwill.
The following table sets forth the components and the allocation of the purchase price for the business combination:
Brand rights and Customer relationships were assigned estimated useful lives of ten years and nine years, respectively, the weighted average of which is approximately 9.5 years.
The amount of revenue of TriGrow included in our consolidated statement of operations from the acquisition date of January 22, 2020 to December 31, 2020 was $4,000,000.
Acquisition of Harbor Mountain Holdings, LLC
In July 2020, we acquired all the outstanding shares of Harbor Mountain Holdings, LLC (“HMH”), located in the Atlanta, GA area, that has been producing and assembling many of our products. As part of the acquisition we waived net receivable owed amounting to $214,000 and assumed lease liabilities for existing equipment and premises. As part of the acquisition of HMH, we may issue stock options or shares of common stock (at our discretion), at a value of up to $100,000, to an executive of HMH upon achievement of certain milestones from the acquisition date through March 31, 2021, as a result of the efforts of the HMH executive. We concluded the earn-out, if materialized, will be considered as post business combination services. Additionally, we concluded that the value associated with the earn-out to be de minimis. No earn-out was earned through December 31, 2020.
The purchase price for this business combination was allocated by us to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on its book value which estimated the fair values on the acquisition date, with the remaining unallocated purchase price recorded as goodwill.
Transaction and related costs, consisting primarily of professional fees, directly related to the acquisition, totaled $35,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. All transaction and related costs were expensed as incurred and are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
The following table sets forth the components and the allocation of the purchase price for the business combination:
The amount of revenue of HMH included in our consolidated statement of operations from the acquisition date of July 22, 2020 to December 31, 2020 was $0.
The following pro forma financial information summarizes the combined results of operations for us, TriGrow and HMH, as though the acquisition of TriGrow and HMH occurred on January 1, 2019.
The unaudited pro forma financial information was as follows:
The pro forma financial information for all periods presented above has been calculated after adjusting the results of TriGrow and HMH to reflect the business combination accounting effects resulting from these acquisitions, including acquisition costs and the amortization expense from acquired intangible assets as though the acquisition occurred on January 1, 2019. The historical consolidated financial statements have been adjusted in the pro forma combined financial statements to give effect to pro forma events that are directly attributable to the business combination.
The pro forma financial information is for informational purposes only and is not indicative of the results of operations that would have been achieved if the acquisition had taken place on January 1, 2019.
Impact of coronavirus pandemic (“COVID-19”)
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus a global pandemic. This outbreak is causing major disruptions to businesses and markets worldwide as the virus continues to spread. A number of countries as well as certain states and cities within the United States have enacted temporary closures of businesses, issued quarantine or shelter-in-place orders and taken other restrictive measures in response to COVID-19.
To date, although all of our operations are operating, COVID-19 has caused some disruptions to our business, such as some temporary delays in the delivery of our inventory, although recently we are no longer experiencing such delays. Although the ability of our suppliers to timely ship their goods has affected some of our deliveries, currently the difficulties experienced by our suppliers have not yet materially impacted our ability to deliver products to our customers and we do not significantly depend on any one supplier. However, if this continues, it may negatively affect any inventory we may have and more significantly delay the delivery of merchandise to our customers, which in turn will adversely affect our revenues and results of operations.
The extent to which COVID-19 and the related global economic crisis, affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic and any recovery period, future actions taken by governmental authorities, central banks and other third parties (including new financial regulation and other regulatory reform) in response to the pandemic, and the effects on our produce, clients, vendors and employees. We continue to service our customers amid uncertainty and disruption linked to COVID-19 and we are actively managing our business to respond to its impact.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
On May 7, 2020, we entered into a Loan Agreement and Promissory Note (collectively, the “PPP Loan”) with Bank of America pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the recently enacted Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). We received total proceeds of $779,000 from the unsecured PPP Loan. The PPP Loan is scheduled to mature on May 7, 2022 and has an interest rate of 1.00% per annum and is subject to the terms and conditions applicable to loans administered by the SBA under the CARES Act. The PPP Loan may be prepaid at any time prior to its maturity with no prepayment penalties.
The PPP Loan contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties. Subject to certain conditions, the PPP Loan may be forgiven in whole or in part by applying for forgiveness pursuant to the CARES Act and the PPP. The amount of loan proceeds eligible for forgiveness is based on a formula based on a number of factors, including the amount of loan proceeds used by us for certain eligible expenses, including payroll costs, rent payments on certain leases and certain qualified utility payments, provided that, among other things, at least 60% of the loan amount is used for eligible payroll costs, the employer maintaining or rehiring employees and maintaining salaries at certain level. In accordance with the requirements of the CARES Act and the PPP, we have used all of the proceeds from the PPP Loan primarily for payroll costs. We have not yet applied for forgiveness of this loan. We believe that we will be eligible for full forgiveness under the program, but there is no assurance that the full loan amount will be forgiven and we cannot anticipate the timing of any such forgiveness. If the principal amount is not forgiven in full, we would be obligated by May 7, 2022 to repay any principal amount not forgiven and interest accrued from May 7, 2020.
On July 27, 2020, Agrify Brands, LLC received a PPP Loan from Bank of America for total proceeds of $44,410. The PPP Loan is scheduled to mature on July 27, 2025, has an interest rate of 1.00% per annum and is subject to the terms and conditions mentioned above.
Convertible Promissory Notes and Warrants
On August 14, 2020, our board of directors approved the issuance of (i) convertible promissory notes (the “Notes”) in the aggregate principal amount of $5,000,000 with an initial maturity date of one year following issuance, subject to a one-year extension and (ii) five year warrants to purchase a number of shares of common stock equal to 10% of the principal amount of Notes purchased by the purchasers at an exercise price per share equal $0.01. The Notes provided for conversion at our option or the holder of the Notes upon an initial public offering or public listing into a number of fully paid and non-assessable shares of common stock equal to the quotient of (i) the outstanding principal amount of the Notes together with all accrued and unpaid interest hereunder immediately prior to such Public Transaction divided by (ii) a conversion price of $7.72.
On September 30, 2020, our board of directors approved an increase to the maximum aggregate offering amount of the Notes to $10,000,000. On November 23, 2020, our board of directors approved a further increase to the maximum aggregate offering amount of the Notes to $13,500,000.
As of December 31, 2020, a total of $13,100,000 of Notes and warrants to purchase 828,173 shares of common stock were subscribed. Through December 31, 2020, the aggregate relative fair value of the warrants of $2,427,000 was recorded as debt discount at issuance and is being amortized over the term of the respective Notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we determined that the Notes contained variable-share settlement features that represented derivative liabilities and contingent BCFs. The aggregate issuance date fair value of the variable-share settlement features was $2,769,000, which was recorded at issuance as a debt discount and is being amortized over the terms of the respective Notes. See the paragraph below - Derivative Liabilities - for additional details. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the contingently adjustable non-bifurcated, beneficial conversion features associated with the Notes were not resolved. Upon resolving such contingency we will estimate the intrinsic value of the beneficial conversion features based upon the difference between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the Note transaction and the adjusted conversion price embedded in the Notes.
On November 30, 2020, we modified the conversion terms of the then outstanding notes which resulted in a change in fair value of the new conversion features as compared to the conversion features immediately prior to the modification that exceeded 10% of the carrying amount of the debt, and as a result, the note modifications were accounted for as extinguishments. Accordingly, we recognized an aggregate loss on extinguishment of $5,618,000 for the difference between the net carrying amount of the extinguished debt of $10,038,000 (inclusive of $11,800,000 of principal, $4,170,000 of debt discount and $2,408,000 of derivative liabilities) and the reacquisition price of the debt in the same aggregate principal amount of $11,800,000, plus the fair value of the new notes’ conversion features of an aggregate of $3,856,000.
All of the outstanding Notes converted into an aggregate of 1,697,075 shares of our common stock on February 1, 2021, the closing date of our IPO.
Derivative Liabilities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded Level 3 derivative liabilities that were measured at fair value at issuance in the aggregate amount of $2,769,000 related to the variable-share settlement features of certain convertible notes payable. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we modified the conversion terms of certain notes which resulted in the recognition of an additional $1,448,000 of Level 3 derivative liabilities, with a corresponding debit to loss on extinguishment. See previous paragraph- Convertible Promissory Notes for additional details. On December 31, 2020, we recomputed the fair value of the variable-share settlement features recorded as derivative liabilities to be $7,141,000. The loss of $2,924,000 on the change in fair value between the issuance date and December 31, 2020 was recorded to interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. Upon conversion of our outstanding Notes on February 1, 2021, the closing date of our IPO, all of the outstanding derivative liabilities were cancelled.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include assumptions about collection of accounts and notes receivable, the valuation and recognition of stock- based compensation expense, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and useful life of fixed assets and intangible assets.
Financial Overview
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial position and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimate, which include estimates related to accruals, stock-based compensation expense, and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from those estimates or assumptions.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with Topic 606, we account for a customer contract when both parties have approved the contract and are committed to perform their respective obligations, each party’s rights can be identified, payment terms can be identified, the contract has commercial substance, and it is probable that we will collect substantially all of the consideration to which we are entitled. Revenue is recognized when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of a promised product or service to a customer.
We generate revenue from the following sources: (1) equipment sales and (2) services sales. We sell our equipment and services to customers under a combination of a contract and purchase order.
Equipment revenue includes sales from proprietary products designed and engineered by us such as vertical farming units, integrated grow racks, and LED grow lights, and non-proprietary products designed, engineered, and manufactured by third parties such as air cleaning systems and pesticide-free surface protection. For proprietary products, the transaction price is generally in the form of a fixed fee at contract inception and variable consideration in the form of royalties based on contractual percentage of the net selling price of any proprietary product sold by our customers. For non-proprietary products, the transaction price is generally in the form of a fixed fee at contract inception and variable consideration in the form of revenue share based on a contractual percentage of gross margin of any non-proprietary product sold by our customers. We do not offer a right of return for sales of equipment.
Service revenue includes sales from cloud-based solutions that allow customers to use hosted software over the contract period without taking possession of the software and are provided on a subscription basis with technical support. The transaction price is variable consideration in the form of a monthly fee determined at contract inception based on the total number of active software users. We offer service credits in those instances where software uptime does not meet predetermined performance thresholds.
Variable consideration in the form of royalties, revenue share, monthly fees, and service credits are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each reporting period if additional information becomes available. Variable consideration is typically not subject to constraint. Changes to variable consideration were not material for the periods presented.
We typically satisfy our performance obligations for equipment sales when equipment is made available for shipment to the customer. We typically satisfy our performance obligations for services sales as services are rendered to the customer.
We enter contracts that can include various combinations of equipment and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations.
We allocate total contract consideration to each distinct performance obligation in an arrangement on a relative standalone selling price basis. The standalone selling price reflects the price we would charge for a specific piece of equipment or service if it was sold separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers.
Other Policies and Judgments - We have elected to treat shipping and handling activities after the customer obtains control of the goods as a fulfilment cost and not as a promised good or service. Accordingly, we will accrue all fulfilment costs related to the shipping and handling of consumer goods at the time of shipment. We have payment terms with our customers of one year or less and has elected the practical expedient applicable to such contracts not to consider the time value of money. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
Contract Balances - We receive payment from customers based on specified terms that are generally less than 30 days from the satisfaction of performance obligations. There are no contract assets related to performance under the contract. The difference in the opening and closing balances of our deferred revenue primarily results from the timing difference between our performance and the customer’s payment. We fulfil our obligations under a contract with a customer by transferring products and services in exchange for consideration from the customer. Accounts receivable are recorded when the customer has been billed or the right to consideration is unconditional. We recognize deferred revenue when we have received consideration or an amount of consideration is due from the customer and we have a future obligation to transfer certain proprietary products.
We generally provide a one-year warranty on its products for materials and workmanship but may provide multiple year warranties as negotiated, and will pass on the warranties from its vendors, if any, which generally covers this one-year period. In accordance with ASC 450-20-25, we accrue for product warranties when the loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2020, we had no product warranty accrual our de minimis historical financial warranty experience.
Accounting for Business Combinations
We allocated the purchase price of acquired company to the tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development assets, and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. These fair values are typically estimated with assistance from independent valuation specialists. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, contractual support obligations assumed, contingent consideration arrangements, and pre-acquisition contingencies.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
● future expected cash flows from software license sales, support agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts, and acquired developed technologies;
● expected costs to develop in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed;
● the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio;
● cost of capital and discount rates; and
● estimating the useful lives of acquired assets as well as the pattern or manner in which the assets will amortize.
The fair value assigned to identifiable intangible assets acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020, was determined primarily by using the income approach, which discounts expected future cash flows to present value using estimates and assumptions determined by our management.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes pursuant to the provisions of ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” which requires, among other things, an asset and liability approach to calculating deferred income taxes. The asset and liability approach requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance is provided to offset any net deferred tax assets for which management believes it is more likely than not that the net deferred asset will not be realized.
We follow the provisions of ASC 740-10-25-5, “Basic Recognition Threshold.” When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that some positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. In accordance with the guidance of ASC 740-10-25-6, the benefit of a tax position is recognized in the consolidated financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above should be reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits in the accompanying balance sheets along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination. We believe our tax positions are all highly certain of being upheld upon examination. As such, we have not recorded a liability for unrecognized tax benefits.
We recognize the benefit of a tax position when it is effectively settled. ASC 740-10-25-10, “Basic Recognition Threshold” provides guidance on how an entity should determine whether a tax position is effectively settled for the purpose of recognizing previously unrecognized tax benefits. ASC 740-10-25-10 clarifies that a tax position can be effectively settled upon the completion of an examination by a taxing authority. For tax positions considered effectively settled, we recognize the full amount of the tax benefit.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
We follow the provisions of ASC Topic 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” ASC Topic 718 establishes standards surrounding the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods or services. ASC Topic 718 focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an entity obtains employee services in share-based payment transactions, such as options issued under our Stock Option Plans.
The fair value of each option is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. This model incorporates certain assumptions for inputs including a risk-free market interest rate, expected dividend yield of the underlying common stock, expected option life and expected volatility in the market value of the underlying common stock.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options, which have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. In addition, option valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions including the expected stock price volatility. Because our stock options and warrants have characteristics different from those of its traded stock, and because changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate, in management’s opinion, the existing models do not necessarily provide a reliable single measure of the fair value of such stock options. The risk-free interest rate is based upon quoted market yields for United States Treasury debt securities with a term similar to the expected term. The expected dividend yield is based upon our history of having never issued a dividend and management’s current expectation of future action surrounding dividends. We calculate the expected volatility of the stock price based on the corresponding volatility of our peer group stock price for a period consistent with the underlying instrument’s expected term. The expected lives for such grants were based on the simplified method for employees and directors.
In arriving at stock-based compensation expense, we estimate the number of stock-based awards that will be forfeited due to employee turnover. Our forfeiture assumption is based primarily on its turn-over historical experience. If the actual forfeiture rate is higher than the estimated forfeiture rate, then an adjustment will be made to increase the estimated forfeiture rate, which will result in a decrease to the expense recognized in our financial statements. If the actual forfeiture rate is lower than the estimated forfeiture rate, then an adjustment will be made to lower the estimated forfeiture rate, which will result in an increase to expense recognized in our financial statements. The expense we recognize in future periods will be affected by changes in the estimated forfeiture rate and may differ significantly from amounts recognized in the current period.
It is important that the discussion of our operating results that follows be read in conjunction with the critical accounting policies disclosed above.
Fair value of common stock
Historically, for all periods prior to our IPO, the fair values of the shares of common stock underlying our share-based awards were determined on each grant date by our board of directors. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including our stage of development; the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; our financial condition and operating results, including our levels of available capital resources; equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; general U.S. market conditions; and the lack of marketability of our common stock. Valuations of our common stock were prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
For our valuation performed on September 30, 2019, March 20, 2020 and September 14, 2020, we used the income and market methods to estimate our enterprise value under various financing scenarios based on the discounted cash flow approach and a market approach of comparable peer public companies. The estimated enterprise value under each method was then allocated to the common stock, discount for lack of marketability was applied, and the resulting value of common stock was probability-weighted across the various financing scenarios to determine the fair value of common stock.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimate, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
Our goal is to provide our customers with a variety of products to address their entire needs. Our core product offering includes our Agrify Vertical Farming Units and Agrify Integrated Grow Racks with our Agrify Insights™ software, which in 2020 are supplemented with environmental control products, grow lights, and facility build-out services.
During the first quarter of 2020 and in parallel with the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus, we experienced a disruption in the supply chain that delay the delivery of several components necessary to the manufacturing of our Agrify Vertical Farming Units (or AVFUs) and as a result, delivery of several AVFUs was delayed to April 2020.
We generate revenue from sales of cultivation solutions, including ancillary products and services, Agrify Insights™ software and facility build-outs. We believe that our product mix form an integrated ecosystem which allows us to be engaged with our potential customers from early stages of the grow cycle - first during the facility build-out, to the choice of cultivation solutions and then running the grow business with our Agrify Insight software. We believe that delivery of each solution in the grow cycle will generate sales of additional solutions and services.
The following table provides a breakdown of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue from cultivation solutions and ancillary products for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were generated mainly from the delivery of 179 AVFUs to a customer in Washington state and 135 AVFUs to customers in Colorado and Nevada states, respectively. Revenue from delivery of cultivation solutions is one-time in nature and the number of AVFUs we delivered to each customer is ordered by the customer and designed to maximize its grow space.
With the formation of our joint venture with Valiant-America in December 2019 through Agrify-Valiant, we added the facility build-outs to our products and services offering. We generated revenue from facility build-out services starting in the second quarter of 2020. We believe that combining facility build-out services with our other products will enhance the productivity of our AVFUs and benefit our customers.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of goods sold include direct cost of parts and outsourced assembly and installation services that are necessary for delivery of our products.
The following table provides a breakdown of our cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
During the first six months of 2020, we outsourced the manufacturing of our AVFUs to HMH, which we acquired in July 2020. Although the primary reason we acquired HMH was to expand our research, development and testing capabilities, the acquisition will also provide us with internal capabilities to manufacture small quantities of AVFUs and to reduce our cost of manufacturing. In addition, in December 2020, we entered into a five year supply agreement with Mack Molding Co. (“Mack”) pursuant to which Mack will become a key supplier of our AVFUs. We believe the supply agreement with Mack will provide us with increased scaling capabilities and the ability to more efficiently meet the potential future demand of our customers. The supply agreement contemplates that, following an introductory period, we will negotiate a minimum percentage of our AVFU requirements that we will purchase from Mack each year based on the agreed upon pricing formula. The introductory period is not time-based but rather refers to the production of an initial number of units after which the parties have rights to adjust pricing and negotiate a certain minimum requirements percentage. We believe this approach will result in both parties making a more informed decision with respect to the pricing and other terms of the supply agreement with Mack.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit represents total revenue less the cost of goods sold, and gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our gross profit was $570,000 compared to a loss of $245,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in gross profit was primarily related to (i) the aforementioned increase in net sales and (ii) a significant increase in our gross profit margin percentage (gross profit as a percentage of net sales). Our gross profit margin percentage increased to 4.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of 6.0% in the same period in 2019. The higher gross profit margin percentage is primarily due to higher negotiated prices on our products and a more favorable sales mix of proprietary and exclusive branded products. The acquisition of TriGrow in January 2020 allows us to sell our products directly to end customers and to generate higher gross profits. We expect that our marketing efforts aimed at driving demand and expanding our customer base, combined with our cost reduction initiatives, will result in higher gross margins in the future.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consisted primarily of costs incurred for the development of Agrify Insight and next generation VFUs, which includes:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and travel;
● expenses incurred by subcontractor under agreements to provide engineering work related to the development of our next generation VFUs;
● expenses related to our facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies.
We did not have any significant research and development operation during the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expenses were $3,354,000 and $109,000, respectively. The increase of $3,245,000 is primarily attributable to payroll and related expenses of approximately $1,284,000, consulting fees of $468,000, and to halted development of hardware solution for deployment of rapid grow solution of $824,000, discarded research and development center in Colorado of $107,000, expenses related to grant of stock options in the amount of $291,000 and increase in hired employees and consultants for research and development activities.
As a percentage of net revenue, research and development expenses represented were 27.7% from total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect to continue to invest in future developments of our AVFUs and Agrify Insights™. In the coming years, we believe that research and development expenses measured as percentage of revenue will decrease due to an increase in our total revenue.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses, in selling, executive and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, consulting and accounting services as well as facility related costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative expenses were $9,832,000 and $2,737,000, respectively. The increase is attributable mainly to payroll and related expenses of approximately $2,878,000, grant of stock options in the amount of $1,429,000, expenses of $856,000 related to our efforts to become publicly listed, professional service fees of approximately $443,000, depreciation and amortization expenses of approximately $389,000, rent and utilities expenses of approximately $234,000, insurance expenses of approximately $97,000, travel and entertainment expenses of approximately $67,000, allowance for doubtful accounts of approximately $54,000, legal expenses of approximately $214,000 and legal costs related to our merger and acquisition activity of $80,000. The remaining increase is attributable to other administration expenses. To support our long-term growth plan and our initial public offering, we undertook several initiatives in the second half of 2019 and early 2020 which resulted in higher compensation costs, consulting fees and audit/legal fees, including, but not limited to, the hiring of executives such as our new Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Operating Officer and General Counsel, and engaging new professionals such as an auditor, law firm and several accounting and audit-related consultants.
We have granted stock options to officers, directors and employees which have several vesting conditions, including an event-based vesting acceleration (defined as a change in control, including an initial public offering). A change in control, including the consummation of a public offering, would trigger a significant event-based stock compensation charge in the quarter during which that offering is completed.
Other (income) expense, net
Interest expense was $481,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $49,000 interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase of $530,000. The increase in interest expense is attributable mainly to the amortization of debt discount related to the issuance of convertible promissory notes in the amount of $419,000 and interest-bearing accounts in the amount of $62,000.
Loss on extinguishment of notes payable was $5,618,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to null for the year ended December 31, 2019. In November 2020, the conversion terms of the outstanding convertible notes were modified which resulted in an aggregated loss on extinguishment of $5,618,000.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities was $2,924,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to null for the year ended December 31, 2019. The fair value of the variable-share settlement features was computed to be $7,141,000, which resulted with a loss of $2,924,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss attributable to non-controlling interest
We consolidate the results of operations of two less than wholly-owned entities into our consolidated results of operations. On December 8, 2019, we formed Agrify Valiant LLC, a joint-venture limited liability company in which we are 60% majority owner and Valiant-America, LLC owns 40%. Agrify Valiant LLC started its operations during the second quarter of 2020. On January 22, 2020, as part of the acquisition of TriGrow, we received TriGrow’s 75% interest in Agrify Brands, LLC (formerly TriGrow Brands, LLC), a licensor of an established portfolio of consumer brands that utilize our grow technology. The license of these brands is ancillary to the sale of our AVFUs and provides a means to differentiate customers’ products in the marketplace. It is not a material aspect of our business and we have not realized any royalty income. Accordingly, we are currently evaluating whether to continue this legacy business from an operational standpoint, as well as from a legal and regulatory perspective.
Loss attributable to non-controlling interest represents the portion of profit (or loss) that are attributable to non-controlling interest calculated as a product of the net income of the entity multiplied by the percentage of ownership held by the non-controlling interest.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to raise additional capital and implement our business plan until we generate sufficient cash from operating activities to support our investment and financing needs. Prior to our IPO, we were funded by revenues from operations and investments in our company. Upon the closing of the February Offering, we had approximately $139 million in cash and cash equivalents. We believe such amount, together with cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to support our planned operations for at least the next 12 months. Our current working capital needs are to support accounts receivable growth, manage inventory to meet demand forecasts and support operational growth. Our long-term financial needs primarily include working capital requirements and capital expenditures. There are many factors that may negatively impact our available sources of funds in the future, including the ability to generate cash from operations, raise debt capital and raise cash from the issuance of our securities. The amount of cash generated from operations is dependent upon factors such as the successful execution of our business strategy and general economic conditions.
We may opportunistically raise debt capital, subject to market and other conditions. Additionally, as part of our growth strategies, we may also raise debt capital for strategic alternatives and general corporate purposes. If additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise such capital on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition may be adversely affected.
Indebtedness
We received two PPP Loans with Bank of America pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act administered by the SBA. We received total proceeds of $823,410 from the unsecured PPP Loans which are scheduled to mature during 2022 and 2025. Subject to certain conditions, the PPP Loan may be forgiven in whole or in part by applying for forgiveness pursuant to the CARES Act and the PPP. We have not yet applied for forgiveness of the PPP Loan and although we believe that we will be eligible for full forgiveness under the PPP, there is no assurance that the full PPP Loan amount will be forgiven and we cannot anticipate the timing of any such forgiveness. If the principal amount is not forgiven in full, we would be obligated to repay any principal amount not forgiven and interest accrued thereon.
Cashflows
The following table presents the major components of net cash flows from and used in operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019:
Cashflow from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $21,617,000, which includes non-cash expenses of $5,618,000 related to extinguishment of notes payable, $2,924,000 due to change in fair value of derivative liabilities, $407,000 related to depreciation and amortization, $1,921,000 in connection with the issuance of stock options, non-cash interest expenses of $447,000 related to the issuance of notes payable, provision of $54,000 for doubtful accounts and $120,000 from the disposal of fixed assets, partially offset by loss attributed to non-controlling interest in the amount of $22,000. Net cash was reduced by a $3,709,000 increase in accounts receivable, a $2,941,000 increase in prepaid inventory due to demand forecast, a $2,249,000 decrease in deferred revenue, partially offset by $4,780,000 increase in accrued expenses, a $12,000 decrease in prepaid expenses, and a $527,000 decrease in accounts payable.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred a net loss of $3,042,000, which includes non-cash expenses of $10,000 related to depreciation and amortization, and $109,000 in connection with issuance of stock options. Net cash was reduced by a $369,000 increase in inventory due to demand forecast, a $366,000 increase in prepaid expenses and other receivables, and an $833,000 decrease in accounts payable, partially offset by a $355,000 increase in accrued expenses, and a $695,000 increase in deferred revenue.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, depreciation and amortization expense was $407,000, and $10,000, respectively. The increase in Depreciation and amortization expenses is related to assets acquired from HMH. We anticipate that our depreciation and amortization expense will increase in fiscal 2021 due to expected capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 on property and equipment to expand research, development and testing capabilities.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, compensation in connection with issuance of stock options was $1,921,000 and $109,000, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, there was $3,914,000 of total unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested options granted under our options plans, which will be expensed through fiscal 2024.
To support our long-term growth plan and our proposed initial public offering, during fiscal years 2019 and 2020, we hired employees and executives, invested in research and development and sales and marketing activities, and increased our inventory. While these activities will increase our expenses, create a net loss and negative cash flow from operations, these activities laid the foundation that resulted in our current sales backlog and qualified pipeline.
Cashflow from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities relates to capital expenditures to support growth and investment in property and equipment, to expand research, development and testing capabilities, and to a lesser extent, the replacement of existing equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $1,228,000, which includes $1,092,000 paid in connection with the acquisition of TriGrow and $136,000 cash outflow for purchasing computer equipment and small machinery.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $184,000 and consisted of a $143,000 investment in our website domain and trademark, and a $41,000 cash outflow for purchasing computer equipment and small machinery.
Cashflow from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $23,915,000, primarily attributable to the $10,000,000 proceeds from the issuance of our Series A Preferred Stock, $13,100,000 proceeds from the issuance of notes payable and the $823,000 PPP Loan under the CARES Act.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $3,746,000, consisting of $3,879,000 in capital contributions resulting from the issuance of our common stock to an investor, partially offset by a $133,000 repayment of a loan from a related party.
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations were as follows:
Our purchase obligations are associated with agreements for purchases of goods or services generally including agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transactions. Agreements to purchase goods or services that have cancellation provisions with no penalties are excluded from these purchase obligations. Upon the closing of our IPO, the notes payable were converted into shares of our common stock.