Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report including, without limitation, statements under this “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this annual report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this annual report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on October 2, 2019 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from October 2, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the Company’s search for a target business with which to complete a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $154,520, which consisted of operating costs of $673,625, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $519,105.
For the period from October 2, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of $67,402, which consisted of operating costs of $103,585 and an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $13,602, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $49,785.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have principally financed our operations from the sale of equity securities. As of December 31, 2020, we had $135,975 held outside of the Trust Account. On July 31, 2020, the Sponsor committed to provide an aggregate of $250,000 in loans to us. The loans shall be non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the consummation of a Business Combination. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account to the extent such funds are available. Otherwise, all amounts loaned to us would be forgiven.
We have incurred a net loss of $7,625,397 during the year ended December 31, 2020 and have a working capital deficit of $196,438. Cash used in operating activities was $353,141 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The aforementioned factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the issuance date of the financial statements.
On December 13, 2019, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 7,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $70,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 2,575,000 Private Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $2,575,000.
On December 18, 2019, as a result of the underwriters’ election to fully exercise their over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 1,050,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, and the sale of an additional 236,250 Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $10,736,250.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $80,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $2,256,347 in transaction costs, including $1,811,250 of underwriting fees and $445,097 of other costs from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $353,141. Net loss of $154,520 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $519,105 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $320,484 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from October 2, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $84,321. Net loss of $67,402 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $49,785, an unrealized loss on marketable securities of $13,602 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided of $19,264 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $81,055,288. We may withdraw interest to pay our income taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $135,975. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
Other than as described below, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant unit at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants.
Through March 29, 2021, the Sponsor has committed to providing us with an aggregate of $650,000 in loans. The loans shall be non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the consummation of a Business Combination. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account to the extent such funds are available. Otherwise, all amounts loaned to us would be forgiven.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account to the extent such funds are available. Otherwise, all amounts loaned to us would be forgiven. Based on the foregoing, we believe we have sufficient cash to meet our needs through the earlier of consummation of a Business Combination or September 10, 2021, the date that we will be required to cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, and administrative and support services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on December 10, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
We engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with our Business Combination to assist in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with our initial Business Combination, assist in obtaining shareholder approval for the Business Combination and assist with press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial Business Combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $2,817,500 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 25% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other FINRA members that assisted in identifying and consummating an initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per ordinary share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to ordinary shares subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.