Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is designed to provide a reader of AGNC Investment Corp.'s consolidated financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our MD&A is presented in eight sections:
•Executive Overview
•Financial Condition
•Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
•Aggregate Contractual Obligations
•Forward-Looking Statements
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a leading provider of private capital to the U.S. housing market, enhancing liquidity in the residential real estate mortgage markets and, in turn, facilitating home ownership in the U.S. We invest primarily in Agency RMBS on a leveraged basis. These investments consist of residential mortgage pass-through securities and collateralized mortgage obligations for which the principal and interest payments are guaranteed by a U.S. Government-sponsored enterprise, such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, or by a U.S. Government agency, such as Ginnie Mae. We may also invest in other assets related to the housing, mortgage or real estate markets that are not guaranteed by a GSE or U.S. Government agency.
We are internally managed with the principal objective of providing our stockholders with attractive risk-adjusted returns through a combination of monthly dividends and tangible net book value accretion. We generate income from the interest earned on our investments, net of associated borrowing and hedging costs, and net realized gains and losses on our investment and hedging activities. We fund our investments primarily through collateralized borrowings structured as repurchase agreements. We operate in a manner to qualify to be taxed as a REIT under the Internal Revenue Code.
The size and composition of our investment portfolio depends on the investment strategies we implement, availability of attractively priced investments, suitable financing to appropriately leverage our investment portfolio and overall market conditions. Market conditions are influenced by a variety of factors, including interest rates, prepayment expectations, liquidity, housing prices, unemployment rates, general economic conditions, government participation in the mortgage market, regulations and relative returns on other assets.
Trends and Recent Market Impacts
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic triggered one of the most severe and sudden financial market downturns in U.S. history. As the U.S and the world grappled with the rapidly deteriorating public health situation late in the first quarter, financial markets experienced historically rapid and severe liquidity shortfalls and declined precipitously. The Fed and the U.S. Treasury, together with their global counterparts, took decisive actions to allay the global financial crisis in late March and early April, which stabilized the financial markets and ultimately drove a recovery throughout the remainder of the year. In the U.S., the Fed's unprecedented monetary accommodation, which included substantial outright purchases of U.S. Treasury and Agency RMBS securities and a near-zero interest rate policy, and a massive fiscal stimulus package drove a rebound across substantially all asset categories. By year-end, U.S. Treasury and Agency RMBS markets had fully stabilized, equity markets had rebounded to new highs, and credit spreads had tightened to pre-COVID levels as a result of the ongoing monetary and fiscal stimulus and optimism regarding vaccine efficacy, the combination of which boosted prospects for a broad-based economic recovery that is expected to gain significant momentum in the latter half of 2021.
In response to the Pandemic and resulting market disruptions and volatility, we took early action to strengthen our liquidity position and mitigate risk across our portfolio. We repositioned the portfolio and increased more efficient funding sourced from our captive broker-dealer subsidiary, benefiting AGNC’s overall liquidity position and, in turn, avoiding the need to make significant portfolio sales at distressed levels to meet margin calls. As a result, after experiencing a significant book
value decline in the first quarter of 2020, resulting in an economic loss for the quarter of -20.2%, AGNC posted three straight quarters of substantial economic returns: 12.2%, 8.8%, and 7.5%, respectively. This strong performance drove a full year 2020 economic return of 3.5%, comprised of $1.56 in cash dividends per common share and a ($0.95) per share decline in tangible net book value per common share. Considering the extraordinarily difficult market conditions in the first quarter, these results demonstrate the importance and value of AGNC's disciplined investment framework and risk management practices. Moreover, the experience of 2020 clearly illustrates the unique value of a predominately Agency RMBS portfolio. In times of significant market stress, the Fed has repeatedly shown a commitment to supporting and stabilizing the U.S. housing finance system because of the significant impact this market has on the broader social and economic well-being of the country. 2020 was no exception, as the Fed purchased $1.5 trillion of Agency RMBS during the year and held approximately 30% of all outstanding Agency RMBS at year end. Our portfolio management throughout the year, coupled with the Fed's continued support of the RMBS market, ultimately facilitated AGNC's recovery of substantially all of the tangible net book value decline experienced in the first quarter. Importantly, the Fed has signaled that it intends to maintain its accommodative monetary policy stance until its objectives of maximum employment and long-term average inflation targets are achieved and that it expects to continue to increase its holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and Agency RMBS until substantial further progress has been made toward achieving these goals.
The Fed's actions and strong demand for Agency RMBS drove primary mortgage rates to historic lows during the year and triggered the largest mortgage refinance wave in almost 20 years. To manage the risk of increased prepayments on our portfolio, we shifted the composition of our portfolio to include a greater share to lower coupon 30 and 15-year TBA securities, while maintaining our higher coupon holdings concentrated in high quality, specified Agency RMBS pools. In this elevated prepayment environment, our higher coupon specified pools performed considerably better than more generic RMBS, while our lower coupon holdings benefited from the extremely favorable funding conditions in the TBA dollar roll market, a result of significant new Agency RMBS issuance and the Fed's high level of participation.
As of December 31, 2020, our investment portfolio totaled $97.9 billion, consisting of $65.1 billion Agency RMBS, $31.5 billion TBA securities, and $1.3 billion of CRT and non-Agency securities. Our "at risk" leverage, as of December 31, 2020, was 8.5x our tangible equity, and our liquidity position, consisting of unencumbered Agency RMBS and cash, was $5.4 billion, which excludes unencumbered credit assets and assets held at our broker-dealer subsidiary. The average prepayment rate on our Agency RMBS holdings during the year peaked at an annualized rate of 27.6% for the fourth quarter, significantly below speeds for similar coupon generic securities. As of December 31, 2020, our Agency RMBS had an average remaining life CPR forecast of 17.6%.
Our interest rate exposure remained limited throughout the year despite significant movements in interest rates as we actively managed the size and composition of our interest rate hedge position in response to changing market conditions. In the fourth quarter, we increased our interest rate hedge ratio to 80% of our funding liabilities (compared to our intra-year low of 66% at the end of the second quarter) as the macroeconomic outlook became more favorable and the risk of higher longer term interest rates increased. Our duration gap, which is a measure of the difference between the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities, inclusive of our interest rate hedges, was -0.5 years as of December 31, 2020, consistent with the reduction of our asset durations and our bias in the current environment to operate with incrementally more up-rate protection.
The funding environment for Agency RMBS remained favorable throughout the year. The Agency MBS repo market remained highly liquid and functioned normally, even during the broad financial market turmoil experienced in March. Our average funding cost moved steadily lower over the course of the year as the Fed acted quickly to reduce the Fed Funds rate to the zero bound range early in the crisis. As of December 31, 2020, our average repo rate was 0.24%, down substantially from 2.17% at the start of the year. These favorable repo rates, even lower implied financing rates in the TBA dollar roll market, and reduced interest rate swap costs collectively drove a substantial improvement in our aggregate cost of funds, which declined to 0.05% in the fourth quarter from 1.67% in the first quarter. This very favorable funding dynamic more than offset the decline in asset yields on our portfolio and drove a significant improvement in our net interest spread. As a result of our materially higher net interest spread, net spread and dollar roll income (a non-GAAP measure) totaled $2.70 per common share, excluding "catch-up" amortization cost, for the year. (Refer to Results of Operations below for further information regarding non-GAAP measures.)
Looking ahead, valuations of all financial assets have become elevated and, in many cases, are now above pre-COVID levels. With Agency RMBS valuations similarly elevated, the expected return profile on new investments has correspondingly declined. As a result, the net interest spread on our investment portfolio is likely to compress moderately as asset cash flows are reinvested at lower prevailing asset yields and the implied funding advantage of TBAs reverts to more historical norms. Nevertheless, we believe Agency RMBS remain attractive on a relative basis for levered investors given the dual benefits of low funding costs and the likelihood of ongoing Fed purchases. We believe that the near zero short-term interest rate environment is likely to remain in place through at least 2023, the Fed is unlikely to begin tapering its Agency RMBS purchases before 2022, and any such tapering will likely be gradual over a multi-month period. Although any decisions by the Fed to taper
its investments in Agency RMBS could occur earlier or later than our current expectation, the Fed has indicated that it will seek to communicate its intentions well in advance of taking any such action so as to reduce market uncertainty. Importantly, even after the Fed completes the taper process, it has indicated an intention to continue to reinvest portfolio paydowns for an extended period of time, likely until it begins to raise the Federal Funds target.
Nonetheless, we may experience periods of increased volatility as markets begin to price in an eventual shift in the Fed's monetary policy. In the current environment with asset valuations elevated, we may choose to operate at comparatively lower leverage for periods of time to mitigate the potential downside risk to our tangible net book value associated with a reduced Fed presence, as well as to afford us the ability to increase leverage opportunistically when expected return levels are more favorable. That said, the recent increase in longer term interest rates, if it continues, should ultimately lead to a more benign prepayment environment for mortgage assets. Although Agency RMBS valuations have increased along with the vast majority of financial assets over the past several quarters, we believe significant ongoing Fed purchases, potentially slower prepayments, and attractive funding levels should continue to be positive factors for AGNC.
Net Interest Spread Information
The following table summarizes the components of our average net interest spread the four quarters ended December 31, 2020:
________________________________
1.The average implied asset yield for TBA dollar roll transactions is extrapolated by adding the average TBA implied funding cost (benefit) (Note 3) to the net dollar roll yield. The net dollar roll yield is calculated by dividing dollar roll income by the average net TBA balance (cost basis) outstanding for the period. Dollar roll income represents the price differential, or "price drop," between the TBA price for current month settlement versus the TBA price for forward month settlement. Amount includes dollar roll income (loss) on long and short TBA securities. Amount excludes TBA mark-to-market adjustments.
2.Amount calculated on a weighted average basis based on average balances outstanding during the period and their respective asset yield/funding cost.
3.The implied funding cost/(benefit) of TBA dollar roll transactions is determined using the "price drop" and market based assumptions regarding the "cheapest-to-deliver" collateral that can be delivered to satisfy the TBA contract, such as the anticipated collateral’s weighted average coupon, weighted average maturity and projected 1-month CPR. The average implied funding cost/benefit for all TBA transactions is weighted based on the daily average TBA balance outstanding for the period.
4.Represents interest rate swap periodic cost/(income) measured as a percent of total mortgage funding (Agency repurchase agreements, other debt and net TBA securities). Amount excludes interest rate swap termination fees and mark-to-market adjustments.
5.Cost of funds excludes other supplemental hedges used to hedge a portion of the Company's interest rate risk (such as swaptions and U.S. Treasury positions) and U.S. Treasury repurchase agreements.
Market Information
The following table summarizes interest rates and prices of generic fixed rate Agency RMBS as of each date presented below:
________________________________
1.Price information is for generic instruments only and is not reflective of our specific portfolio holdings. Price information is as of 3:00 p.m. (EST) on such date and can vary by source. Prices in the table above were obtained from Barclays. Interest and LIBOR rates were obtained from Bloomberg.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our investment portfolio consisted of $66.4 billion and $100.4 billion of investment securities, at fair value, respectively, and $31.5 billion and $7.4 billion of TBA securities, at fair value, respectively. The following table is a summary of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
________________________________
1.TBA securities are presented net of long and short positions. For further details of our TBA securities refer to Note 5 of our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K..
TBA securities are recorded as derivative instruments in our accompanying consolidated financial statements, and our TBA dollar roll transactions represent a form of off-balance sheet financing. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our TBA positions had a net carrying value of $275 million and $25 million, respectively, reported in derivative assets /(liabilities) on our accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The net carrying value represents the difference between the fair value of the underlying Agency security in the TBA contract and the contract price to be paid or received for the underlying Agency security.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the weighted average yield on our investment securities (excluding TBA securities) was 2.33% and 3.07%, respectively.
The following tables summarize certain characteristics of our fixed rate Agency RMBS portfolio, inclusive of TBAs, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in millions):
________________________________
1.Specified pools include pools backed by lower balance loans with original loan balances of up to $200K, HARP pools (defined as pools that were issued between May 2009 and December 2018 and backed by 100% refinance loans with original LTVs ≥ 80%), and pools backed by loans 100% originated in New York and Puerto Rico. As of December 31, 2020, lower balance specified pools had a weighted average original loan balance of $117,000 and $117,000 for 15-year and 30-year securities, respectively, and HARP pools had a weighted average original LTV of 126% and 137% for 15-year and 30-year securities, respectively.
2.WAC represents the weighted average coupon of the underlying collateral.
3.Portfolio yield incorporates a projected life CPR based on forward rate assumptions as of December 31, 2020.
________________________________
1.See Note 1 of preceding table for specified pool composition. As of December 31, 2019, lower balance specified pools had a weighted average original loan balance of $115,000 and $118,000 for 15-year and 30-year securities, respectively, and HARP pools had a weighted average original LTV of 119% and 136% for 15-year and 30-year securities, respectively.
2.WAC represents the weighted average coupon of the underlying collateral.
3.Portfolio yield incorporates a projected life CPR based on forward rate assumptions as of December 31, 2019.
For additional details regarding our CRT and non-Agency securities, including credit ratings, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, please refer to Note 3 of our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
SUMMARY OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our critical accounting estimates involve estimates that require management to make judgments that are subjective in nature. We rely on our experience and analysis of historical and current market data to arrive at what we believe to be reasonable estimates. Under different conditions, we could report materially different amounts based on such estimates. For additional information regarding our significant accounting policies please refer to Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest Income
The effective yield on our Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities of high credit quality is highly impacted by our estimate of future prepayments. We accrue interest income based on the outstanding principal amount and contractual terms of these securities, and we amortize or accrete premiums and discounts associated with our purchase of these securities into interest income over their projected lives, taking into account scheduled contractual payments and estimated prepayments, using the interest method. The weighted average cost basis of our securities as of December 31, 2020 was 104.0% of par value; therefore, faster actual or projected prepayments than our estimates could significantly reduce the yield on our assets.
Future prepayment rates are difficult to predict, and we rely on a third-party service provider and our experience and analysis of historical and current market data to arrive at what we believe to be reasonable estimates. Our third-party service provider estimates prepayment speeds using models that incorporate the forward yield curve, current mortgage rates, mortgage
rates on the outstanding loans, age and size of the outstanding loans, loan-to-value ratios, interest rate volatility and other factors. We review the prepayment speeds estimated and compare the results to market consensus prepayment speeds, if available. We also consider historical prepayment speeds and current market conditions to validate the reasonableness of the third-party estimates and, based on our judgment, we may adjust the estimates.
We review our actual and anticipated prepayment experience on at least a quarterly basis, and effective yields are recalculated when differences arise between (i) our previous estimate of future prepayments and (ii) actual prepayments to date and current estimates of future prepayments. If the actual and estimated future prepayment experience differs from our prior estimate of prepayments, we are required to record an adjustment in the current period to the amortization or accretion of premiums and discounts for the cumulative difference in the effective yield through the reporting date.
The most significant factor impacting prepayment rates on our securities is changes to long-term interest rates. Prepayment rates generally increase when interest rates fall and decrease when interest rates rise. However, there are a variety of other factors that may impact the rate of prepayments on our securities. Consequently, under different conditions, we could report materially different amounts.