ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
We use the terms “Athena,” “we,” “our,” and “us” to refer to Athena Gold Corporation and its consolidated subsidiary, Athena Minerals, Inc (“AMI”).
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this Report. The discussion of results, causes and trends should not be construed to imply any conclusion that these results or trends will necessarily continue into the future.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some of the information presented in this Form 10-K constitutes “forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements that include terms such as “may,” “will,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “continue,” “believe,” “plan,” or the like, as well as all statements that are not historical facts. Forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations. Although we believe our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions within the bounds of our knowledge of our business and operations, there can be no assurance that actual results will not differ materially from expectations.
All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to update such statements to reflect events that occur or circumstances that exist after the date on which they are made.
Business Overview
We were incorporated on December 23, 2003, in Delaware and our principal business is the acquisition and exploration of mineral resources.
In January 2021, the company’s Board of Directors approved a name change from Athena Silver Corporation, to Athena Gold Corporation. Athena Gold Corporation (“we,” “our,” “us,” or “Athena”) is engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral resources. We began our mining operations in 2010.
In December 2009, we formed and organized a new wholly-owned subsidiary, Athena Minerals, Inc. (“Athena Minerals”) which owned and operated our mining interests and properties in California. On December 31, 2020 we sold the subsidiary to Tripower Resources Inc., a company controlled by Mr. John Gibbs, a related party, in a non-cash exchange which is discussed further below and in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report.
Effective December 15, 2020, Athena entered into a definitive Property Option Agreement with Nubian Resources Ltd. (“Nubian”) (TSXV: NBR), pursuant to which Athena acquired a 10% interest in Nubian’s Excelsior Springs exploration project located in Esmeralda County, Nevada and has an option to acquire the remaining 90% held by Nubian.
The Option is exercisable in two tranches: the first tranche was exercised immediately pursuant to which the Company acquired a 10% interest in Excelsior Springs in consideration of issuing to Nubian an aggregate of 5,000,000 shares of Athena Gold Corporation common stock. On December 15, 2020 the company issued the 5,000,000 shares of its common stock valued at $0.03 per share totaling $150,000. The second tranche is exercisable on or before December 31, 2021 to purchase an additional 90% interest in Excelsior Springs in consideration of issuing to Nubian an additional 45 million shares of Athena common stock. Should both options be exercised, Nubian will hold 50 million shares of Athena common stock, which will be subject to a six-month lockup.
Athena’s agreement with Nubian includes 100% of the 140 unpatented claims at Excelsior Springs with two additional patented claims held under a lease option that are subject to a 2% net smelter returns royalty on gold production. Under the terms of the Option Agreement, Nubian will retain a 1% net smelter returns royalty (“NSR Royalty”) on the Excelsior Springs Project if Athena fully exercises the option. Athena will have the right to purchase 0.5% (being one half) of the NSR Royalty for CAD $500,000 and the remaining 0.5% of the NSR Royalty at fair market value.
Athena plans make Excelsior Springs its flagship project and has recently completed a N.I. 43-101 Technical Report to support its planned listing on a Canadian Stock Exchange that details past work and drill programs and highlight future exploration plans to advance the Property.
We have not presently determined whether our mineral properties contain mineral reserves that are economically recoverable.
Our primary focus going forward will be to continue evaluating our properties, as well as possible acquisitions of additional mineral rights and exploration, all of which will require additional capital.
Sale of Athena Minerals, Inc.
Effective December 31, 2020, Athena Gold Corp entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with TriPower Resources, Inc., a company controlled by Mr. John Gibbs, a related party and control person, pursuant to which TriPower agreed to purchase 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of Athena Minerals, Inc., in exchange for full satisfaction of the Company’s indebtedness to John Gibbs under the 2012 Credit Agreement. The outstanding principal at the time of the transaction was $1,929,870. All accrued and unpaid interest due under the Credit Agreement totaling $668,012 was waived as part of the transaction.
Athena Minerals Inc. owns the mineral and real estate interests in San Bernardino County, California, including the unpatented mining claims in the Langtry Mining District. As a result of this transaction, Athena no longer owns any assets in California.
The transaction netting $2,025,013 was accounted for as an addition to capital rather than a gain due to the purchaser being a related party and control person.
Results of Operations:
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A summary of our results from operations is as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net loss was $410,068 as compared to a net loss of $266,246 during the same period in 2019. The $143,822 increase in our loss was mainly attributable to an increase in our exploration costs associated with the Excelsior Springs project, as well as increased legal and professional fees associated with the acquisition of Excelsior Springs and the sale of Athena Minerals, Inc.
Operating expenses:
Our total operating expenses increased $121,840 from $155,266 to $277,106 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Effective December 15, 2020, Athena entered into a definitive Property Option Agreement with Nubian Resources Ltd., pursuant to which Athena acquired a 10% interest in Nubian’s Excelsior Springs exploration project located in Esmeralda County, Nevada and has an option to acquire the remaining 90% held by Nubian. The Excelsior Springs project consists of multiple unpatented BLM mining claims that are currently not operational. We have begun the preliminary work program and as of December 31, 2020 we have expensed approximately $90,000 of initial exploration costs generally representing Bureau of Land Management and county renewal fees totaling approximately $26,000, $10,000 associated with the acquisition of the option, and other direct costs totaling approximately $55,000 including geologic mapping and sampling of selected areas of the project and the development of technical reports.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $40,000 of exploration costs representing the total annual lease option obligations for the Langtry project interests owned by Athena Minerals, Inc. The Langtry lease was not renewed in 2020 and there was no lease expense on the project in 2020.
Our general and administrative expenses increased by $72,290, from $115,266 to $187,556 for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. The increase is primarily attributed to increases in legal and other professional services associated with the Excelsior Springs acquisition and the sale of Athena Minerals, Inc.
Other income and expense:
Our total other expenses, net was $132,962 during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to total other expenses, net of $110,980 during the year ended December 31, 2019, all of which consists of interest expense on the convertible credit facility and the convertible note payable.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 interest expense includes $112,140 of related party interest associated with the convertible credit facility, and $20,822 of interest expense associated with the convertible note payable which includes $14,649 of interest expense resulting from the amortization of the note discount. For the year ended December 31, 2019 interest expense includes $106,954 associated with our related party convertible credit facility, and $4,026 of interest expense associated with the convertible note payable
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
Going Concern
Our interim consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will be able to meet our obligations and continue our operations during the next fiscal year. Asset realization values may be significantly different from carrying values as shown in our consolidated financial statements and do not give effect to adjustments that would be necessary to the carrying values of assets and liabilities should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
At December 31, 2020, we had not yet achieved profitable operations and we have accumulated losses of $9,988,885 since our inception. We expect to incur further losses in the development of our business, all of which raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends on our ability to generate future profits and/or to obtain the necessary financing to meet our obligations arising from normal business operations when they come due.
We anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of additional equity financing from the sale of our common stock, and loans from officers, directors or significant shareholders. In October 2020 the Company authorized the sale of up to 25,000,000 shares of its common stock at $0.03 per share in private placements. Currently, there are no other arrangements in place for new loans or lending facilities.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had $8,986 of cash and negative working capital of $235,696. This compares to cash on hand of $117 and negative working capital of $2,980,090 at December 31, 2019. The change is working capital is primarily the result of the sale of Athena Minerals, Inc. on December 31, 2020.
We had a Credit Agreement with a significant shareholder which provided us with an unsecured credit facility in the maximum borrowing amount of $2,400,000. Upon the sale of Athena Minerals, Inc., the Credit Agreement and all obligations thereunder were cancelled.
We anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of additional equity financing from the sale of our common stock, and loans from officers, directors or significant shareholders. In October 2020 the Company authorized the sale of up to 25,000,000 shares of its common stock at $0.03 per share in private placements. Currently, there are no arrangements in place for new loans or lending facilities.
Cash Flows
A summary of our cash provided by and used in operating, investing and financing activities is as follows:
Net cash used in operating activities:
Net cash used in operating activities was $197,436 and $140,824 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily attributed to our $410,068 net loss. In addition, we amortized $14,649 of note discount to interest expense, and paid director fees due a director by issuing 300,000 shares of common stock valued at $0.045 per share totaling $13,500. We also realized increases in accounts payable of $33,051, related party accrued interest of $112,140, accrued and other liabilities of $14,292 and a $25,000 deferred option revenue associated with Athena Minerals, Inc. operations.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily attributed to our $266,246 net loss. We also realized increases in accounts payable of $442, accrued interest on our notes payable of $106,954, and other accrued liabilities of $18,026.
Net cash provided by financing activities:
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $208,884 compared to cash provided by financing activities of $136,950 during the same period in 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 certain related parties made cash advances to the Company totaling $59,226, and were repaid a total of $41,778. We also realized $26,686 from sales of our common stock and paid $10,000 that was due on June 1st on our deed amendment liability associated with Athena Minerals, Inc. In addition, we received $132,000 of proceeds from sales of commons stock to related parties. Total borrowings under the credit facility were $42,750 during the year.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 borrowings under our convertible credit facility were $142,500. Also, during the year ended December 31, 2019 the Company’s President had advanced a total of $31,100, of which $26,650 was repaid during the period. In addition, in August we paid the $10,000 on the deed amendment liability.
Subsequent Events
Change of Name and Authorized Capital: On January 15, 2021 the Company changed its name from Athena Silver Corporation to Athena Gold Corporation. Concurrently, the Company increased its authorized common stock to 250,000,000 with a par value of $0.0001. No change was made to the authorized preferred stock.
Conversion of Accrued Management Fees: On January 1, 2021 the Company agreed to convert outstanding management fees due Mr. Power totaling $96,500 into shares of common stock at a price of $0.045, resulting in the issuance of 2.144,444 shares of the Company’s common stock.
Sales of Common Stock: In October 2020 the Company authorized the sale of up to 25,000,000 shares of its common stock at $0.03 per share in private placements. In January and February 2020, the Company has completed the sale of 5,000,000 shares of its common stock in this private placement to six third parties, resulting in total gross proceeds of $150,000.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements:
We do not have and never had any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not expect the adoption of recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flow.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements. The accounting positions described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates.
We believe that the significant estimates, assumptions and judgments used when accounting for items and matters such as capitalized mineral rights, asset valuations, recoverability of assets, asset impairments, taxes, and other provisions were reasonable, based upon information available at the time they were made. Actual results could differ from these estimates, making it possible that a change in these estimates could occur in the near term.
Mineral Rights
We have determined that our mining rights meet the definition of mineral rights, as defined by accounting standards, and are tangible assets. As a result, our direct costs to acquire or lease mineral rights are initially capitalized as tangible assets. Mineral rights include costs associated with: leasing or acquiring patented and unpatented mining claims; leasing mining rights including lease signature bonuses, lease rental payments and advance minimum royalty payments; and options to purchase or lease mineral properties.
If we establish proven and probable reserves for a mineral property and establish that the mineral property can be economically developed, mineral rights will be amortized over the estimated useful life of the property following the commencement of commercial production or expensed if it is determined that the mineral property has no future economic value or if the property is sold or abandoned. For mineral rights in which proven and probable reserves have not yet been established, we assess the carrying values for impairment at the end of each reporting period and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
The net carrying value of our mineral rights represents the fair value at the time the mineral rights were acquired less accumulated depletion and any impairment losses. Proven and probable reserves have not been established for mineral rights as of December 31, 2020.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate that our carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including mineral rights, may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess the recoverability of long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through their undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount of these assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets.
Exploration Costs
Mineral exploration costs are expensed as incurred. When it has been determined that it is economically feasible to extract minerals and the permitting process has been initiated, exploration costs incurred to further delineate and develop the property are considered pre-commercial production costs and will be capitalized and included as mine development costs in our consolidated balance sheets.
Share-based Payments
We measure and recognize compensation expense or professional services expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees, directors and non-employee consultants based on estimated fair values. We estimate the fair value of stock options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model, which includes assumptions for expected dividends, expected share price volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected life of the options. Our expected volatility assumption is based on our historical weekly closing price of our stock over a period equivalent to the expected life of the options.
We expense share-based compensation, adjusted for estimated forfeitures, using the straight-line method over the vesting term of the award for our employees and directors and over the expected service term for our non-employee consultants. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from our estimates. Our excess tax benefits, if any, cannot be credited to stockholders’ equity until the deduction reduces cash taxes payable; accordingly, we realized no excess tax benefits during any of the periods presented in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes through the use of the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, and for income tax carry-forwards. A valuation allowance is recorded to the extent that we cannot conclude that realization of deferred tax assets is more likely than not. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
We follow a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring tax benefits associated with uncertain tax positions taken, or expected to be taken in a tax return. The first step is to determine if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to uncertain tax positions in our provision for income taxes in the consolidated statements of operations. To date, we have not recognized any tax benefits from uncertain tax positions.