ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans, and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading "Risk Factors" under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this report to "C3.ai," “C3 AI,” the “Company”, "we," "our," "us," or similar terms refer to C3.ai, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to our fiscal years ended April 30 and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended April 30, 2019 can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Final Prospectus dated December 8, 2020 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on December 9, 2020.
Overview
C3 AI is an Enterprise AI software company.
We provide software-as-a-service, or SaaS, applications that enable the rapid deployment of enterprise-scale AI applications of extraordinary scale and complexity that offer significant social and economic benefit.
The C3 AI Suite, C3 AI Applications, and our patented model-driven architecture enable organizations to simplify and accelerate Enterprise AI application development, deployment, and administration. Our software C3 AI Suite enables developers to rapidly build applications by using conceptual models of all the elements required by an Enterprise AI application instead of having to write complex, lengthy, structured programming code to define, control, and integrate the many requisite data and microservices components to work together. We significantly reduce the effort and complexity of the AI software engineering problem.
We have built an integrated family of software applications that enables our customers to rapidly develop, deploy, and operate large-scale Enterprise AI applications across any infrastructure. Customers can deploy C3 AI solutions on all major public cloud infrastructures, private cloud or hybrid environments, or directly on their servers and processors. We provide four primary families of software solutions:
•The C3 AI Suite, our core technology, is a comprehensive application development and runtime environment that is designed to allow our customers to rapidly design, develop, and deploy Enterprise AI applications of any type.
•C3 AI Applications, built using the C3 AI Suite, include a large and growing family of industry-specific and application-specific turnkey AI solutions, ready for installation and deployment.
•C3 AI Ex Machina, our no-code solution that provides secure, easy access to analysis-ready data, and enables business analysts without data science training to rapidly perform data science tasks such as building, configuring, and training AI models.
•C3 AI CRM is a new family of fully AI-enabled, industry-specific CRM solutions that combine the CRM technology leadership and market reach of our partner ecosystem. The C3 AI CRM product family will include sales, marketing, and customer service functionality. The products will be available in vertical market-specific offerings specifically designed to meet the needs of industries such as financial services, healthcare, telecommunications, oil and gas, manufacturing, utilities, aerospace, automotive, public sector, defense, and intelligence.
Initial Public Offering and Concurrent Private Placements
In December 2020, we completed our initial public offering, or IPO, in which we issued and sold 17,825,000 shares of our Class A common stock at $42.00 per share, which included 2,325,000 shares issued upon the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase additional shares. We received net proceeds of $694.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses.
We also completed a concurrent private placement immediately subsequent to the closing of the IPO, in which we issued and sold 2,380,952 and 1,190,476 shares of our Class A common stock at $42.00 per share to Spring Creek Capital LLC, an affiliate of Koch Industries, Inc., and Microsoft Corporation, respectively. We refer to these sales as the Concurrent Private Placement. We received aggregate proceeds of $150.0 million and did not pay underwriting discounts with respect to the shares of Class A common stock that were sold in the Concurrent Private Placement.
How We Generate Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from the sale of subscriptions, which accounted for 86%, 86% and 85% of our total revenue in the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cloud-native software offerings allow us to manage, update, and monitor the software regardless of whether the software is deployed in our public cloud environment, in our customers’ self-managed private or public cloud environments, or in a hybrid environment. Our subscription contracts are generally non-cancelable and non-refundable.
We commonly enter into enterprise-wide agreements with entities that include multiple operating units or divisions. For the purpose of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, we use the term customer to mean each distinct division, department, business unit, or group within an entity. As of April 30, 2021, we had 89 customers.
We generally invoice our customers annually in advance and primarily recognize revenue over the contract term on a ratable basis. In addition, customers typically pay a usage-based runtime fees for production use of the C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications, which is either paid in advance for specified levels of capacity or paid in arrears based on actual usage. Customers who choose to run the software in our cloud environment pay the hosting costs charged by our cloud providers. Our subscriptions also include our maintenance and support services. Additionally, we offer premium stand-ready support services through our C3 Center of Excellence, or COE, which are included as part of the subscription when purchased.
We also generate revenue from professional services, which consist primarily of fees associated with our implementation services for new customer deployments of C3 AI Applications. Professional services revenue represented 14%, 14% and 15% for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our professional services are provided both onsite and remotely, and can include training, application design, project management, system design, data modeling, data integration, application design, development support, data science, and application and C3 AI Suite administration support. Professional services fees are based on the level of effort required to perform the specified tasks and the services are typically provided under a fixed-fee engagement with defined deliverables and a duration of less than 12 months. We recognize revenue for our professional services over the period of delivery as services are performed.
We are growing rapidly, with total revenue of $183.2 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, representing a 17% increase compared to the prior fiscal year. Our subscription revenue grew to $157.4 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, representing a 16% increase compared to the prior fiscal year.
Go-to-Market Strategy
Our go-to-market strategy is focused on large organizations recognized as leaders in their respective industries or public sectors, and who are attempting to solve complicated business problems by digitally transforming their operations. These large organizations, or lighthouse customers, include companies and public agencies within the oil and gas, power and utilities, aerospace and defense, industrial products, life sciences, and financial services industries, among others. This has resulted in C3 AI powering some of the largest and most complex Enterprise AI applications worldwide. These lighthouse customers serve as proof points for other potential customers in their particular industries. Today, we have a customer base of a relatively small number of large organizations that generate high average total subscription contract value, but we expect that, over time, as more customers adopt our technology based on the proof points provided by these lighthouse customers, the revenue
represented by these customers will decrease as a percentage of total revenue. As our C3 AI Suite is industry agnostic, we also expect to expand into other industries as we grow.
Acquiring new customers and expanding our business with our existing customers is the intent of our go-to-market effort and drivers of our growth. Making new and existing customers successful is critical to our long-term success. After we help our customers solve their initial use cases, they typically identify incremental opportunities within their operations and expand their use of our products by either purchasing additional C3 AI Applications or by subscribing to the C3 AI Suite to develop their own AI applications.
The size and sophistication of our customers’ businesses demonstrate the flexibility, speed, and scale of our products, and maximize the potential value to our customers. To be a credible partner to our customers, who often are industry leaders, we deploy a motivated and highly educated team of C3 AI personnel and partners. We go-to-market primarily leveraging our direct sales force. We also complement and supplement our sales force with a number of go-to-market partners.
•Industry Partners. We have developed an alliance program to partner with recognized leaders in their respective industries, such as Baker Hughes, Fidelity National Information Services, or FIS, and Raytheon, to develop, market, and sell solutions that are natively built on or tightly integrated with the C3 AI Suite.
•Consulting and Services Partners. We partner with a number of systems integrators specializing in Enterprise AI implementations.
•Hyperscale Cloud and Infrastructure. We have formed global strategic go-to-market alliances with hyperscale cloud providers including Amazon, FIS, Google, and Microsoft. In addition, we have strategic alliances with leading hardware infrastructure providers to deliver our software optimized for their technology. These partners include Hewlett Packard Enterprise and Intel. These partners supply infrastructure solutions, data management and processing services, or hardware and networking devices (e.g., IoT gateways) to support C3.ai product implementations and complement C3 AI’s products.
•Independent Software Vendors. We partner with Independent Software Vendors, or ISV, who develop, market, and sell application solutions that are natively built on or tightly integrated with the C3 AI Suite.
Key Business Metric
We monitor remaining performance obligations, or RPO, as a key metric to help us evaluate the health of our business, identify trends affecting our growth, formulate goals and objectives, and make strategic decisions. RPO is not necessarily indicative of future revenue growth because it does not account for the timing of customers’ consumption or their consumption of more than their contracted capacity. Moreover, RPO is influenced by several factors, including the timing of renewals, the timing of purchases of additional capacity, average contract terms, and seasonality. Due to these factors, it is important to review RPO in conjunction with revenue and other financial metrics disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. RPO was $293.8 million and $239.7 million as of April 30, 2021 and April 30, 2020, respectively. We may experience variations in our RPO from period to period, but RPO has generally increased over the long term as a result of contracts with new customers and increasing the value of contracts with existing customers. These increases are partially offset by revenue recognized on existing contracts during the period.
RPO represents the amount of our contracted future revenue that has not yet been recognized, including both deferred revenue and non-cancelable contracted amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. Our RPO as of April 30, 2021 is comprised of $75.2 million related to deferred revenue and $218.6 million of commitments from non-cancellable contracts. Our RPO as of April 30, 2020 is comprised of $60.3 million related to deferred revenue and $179.4 million of commitments from non-cancellable contracts.
RPO excludes amounts related to performance obligations and usage-based royalties that are billed and recognized as they are delivered. This primarily consists of monthly usage-based runtime and hosting charges in the duration of some revenue contracts. RPO also excludes any future resale commitments by our strategic partners until those end customer contracts are signed. Cancellable backlog, not included in RPO, was $51.3 million and $7.2 million as of April 30, 2021 and April 30, 2020, respectively.
Our total RPO as of April 30, 2021 and April 30, 2020 was comprised of approximately 94% and 96% non-federal contracts and 6% and 4% federal contracts, respectively.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future success and financial performance depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for our business but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” Part I, Item 1A, that we must successfully address to sustain our growth, improve our results of operations, and establish and maintain profitability.
Customer Acquisition, Retention, and Expansion
We are focused on continuing to grow our customer base, retaining existing customers and expanding customers’ usage of our C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications by addressing new use cases across multiple departments and divisions, adding users, and developing and deploying additional applications. All of these factors increase the adoption and relevance of our C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications to our customers’ business and, as an outcome, increases their runtime usage.
We have built a customer-focused culture and have implemented proactive programs and processes designed to drive customer success. These include a robust customer support and success function. For example, as part of our subscription offerings, we provide our customers with the ability to establish a COE, accessing our experienced and specialized resources in key technical areas like application development, data integration, and data science to accelerate and ensure our customers’ success developing applications on our C3 AI Suite. We closely monitor the health and status of every customer account through multiple activities, including real-time monitoring, daily and weekly reports to management, as well as quarterly reviews with our customers.
We also intend to attract new customers across multiple industries where we have limited meaningful presence today, yet represent very large market opportunities such as telecommunications, pharmaceuticals, smart cities, transportation, and healthcare, among others.
Historically, we have had a relatively small number of customers with large total subscription contract values. As a result, revenue growth can vary significantly based on the timing of customer acquisition, changes in product mix, and contract durations, renewals, or terminations. We expect the number of customers to increase compared to prior fiscal years as organizations address the importance of digital transformation. The average total subscription contract value as well as the revenue represented by our lighthouse customers as a percentage of total revenue is decreasing and we expect them to continue to decrease as we have restructured our sales organization and expanded our market-partner ecosystem to effectively address small, medium, and large enterprise sales opportunities.
Technology Innovation
We intend to continue to invest in our research and development capabilities to extend our C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications, to expand within existing accounts, and to gain new customers. Our investments in research and development drive core technology innovation and bring new products to market. Our model-driven architecture enables us and our customers to rapidly address new use cases by building new applications and extending and enhancing the features and functionality of current C3 AI Applications. By investing to make it easier to develop applications on our C3 AI Suite, our customers have become active developers. With our support, they have developed and deployed almost two-thirds of the applications currently in production and running on the C3 AI Suite. Research and development spending has fueled enhancements to our existing C3 AI Suite.
We expect to maintain high levels of investment in product innovation over the coming years as we continue to introduce new applications which address new industry use cases, and new features and functionality for the C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications. As our business scales over a longer-term horizon, we anticipate research and development spend as a percent of total revenue to decline.
Brand Awareness
We believe we are in the early stages of a large and expanding new market for AI enabled digital transformation. As a result, we intend to continue to invest in brand awareness, market education, and thought leadership. We engage the market
through digital, radio, outdoor, airport, and print advertising; virtual and physical events, including our C3 AI Transform annual customer conference; and C3 AI Live, a bi-weekly series of livestreamed events featuring C3 AI customers, C3 AI partners, and C3 AI experts in AI, machine learning, and data science.
We anticipate continuing to make significant investments in marketing over the next several years. Over the long term we expect marketing spend to decline as a percent of total revenue as we make ongoing progress establishing C3 AI’s brand and reputation and as our business scales. Any investments we make in our marketing program will occur in advance of experiencing benefits from such investments.
Grow Our Go-to-Market and Partnership Ecosystem
In addition to the activities of our field sales organization, our success in attracting new customers will depend on our ability to expand our ecosystem of strategic partners and the number of industry verticals that they serve. Our strategic go-to-market alliances vastly extend our reach globally. Some of our most notable partners include Baker Hughes, FIS, Infor, and Microsoft. Each strategic partner is a leader in its industry, with a substantial installed customer base and extensive marketing, sales, and services resources that we can leverage to engage and serve customers anywhere in the world. Using our C3 AI Suite as the development suite, we leverage our model-driven architecture to efficiently build new cross-industry and industry-specific applications based on identifying requirements across our customer base of industry leaders and through our industry partners. Our strategy with strategic partners is to establish a significant use case and prove the value of our C3 AI Suite with a flagship customer in each industry in which we participate. We have done this with our strategic vertical industry partner in oil and gas, Baker Hughes, as well as with our iconic global customers, some of whom are deploying C3 AI technology to optimize thousands of critical assets globally across their upstream, midstream, and downstream operations. We establish formal sales and marketing plans with each partner, including specific sales goals and dedicated budgets, and we work closely with these partners to identify specific target accounts. We intend to grow the business we do with each partner and to add more partners as we expand the vertical markets we serve. We also offer revenue generating trials of our applications as part of our customer acquisition strategy.
In June 2019, we entered into a three-year arrangement with Baker Hughes as both a leading customer and as a partner in the oil and gas industry. This arrangement included a subscription to our C3 AI Suite for their own operations (which we refer to below as direct subscription fees), the exclusive right for Baker Hughes to resell our offerings worldwide in the oil and gas industry, and the non-exclusive right to resell our offerings in other industries. Under the arrangement, Baker Hughes made minimum, non-cancelable, total revenue commitments to us of $50.0 million, $100.0 million, and $170.0 million, for each of the fiscal years ending April 30, 2020, 2021, and 2022, respectively. Baker Hughes revenue commitments were inclusive of their direct subscription fees of $39.5 million per year with the remainder to be generated from the resale of our solutions by the Baker Hughes sales organization. During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020, we recognized as revenue the full value of the first year of the direct subscription agreement and the value of deals brought in by Baker Hughes through the reseller arrangement. This arrangement was revised in June 2020 to extend the term by an additional two years, for a total of five years, with an expiration date in the fiscal year ending April 30, 2024 and to modify the annual amount of Baker Hughes’ commitments to $53.3 million, $75.0 million, $125.0 million, and $150.0 million, over the fiscal years ending April 30, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024, respectively. Any shortfalls against the total annual revenue commitment made to us by Baker Hughes will be assessed and recorded by us at the end of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. We are obligated to pay Baker Hughes a sales commission on subscriptions to our products and services offerings it resells in excess of these minimum revenue commitments.
Our RPO related to Baker Hughes, which includes both direct subscriptions and reseller arrangements, is comprised of $8.5 million related to deferred revenue and $95.5 million of commitments from non-cancellable contracts as of April 30, 2021 and $2.4 million related to deferred revenue and $84.8 million from non-cancellable contracts as of April 30, 2020.
As of April 30, 2021 and April 30, 2020 the total remaining amount of Baker Hughes’ minimum revenue commitments not yet contracted under the direct subscription fee or reseller arrangement, and thus subject to the shortfall annual provisions, under the entire arrangement was $219.3 million and $183.8 million, respectively.
International Expansion
The international market opportunity for Enterprise AI software is large and growing, and we believe there is a significant opportunity to continue to grow our international customer base. We believe that the demand for our C3 AI Suite will continue
growing as international awareness of the benefits of digital transformation and Enterprise AI software grows. We plan to continue to make investments to expand geographically by increasing our direct sales team in international markets and supplementing the direct sales effort with strategic partners to significantly expand our reach and market coverage. We derived approximately 35%, 22% and 34% of our total revenue for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021. 2020 and 2019, respectively, from international customers.
Impact of Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide beginning in January 2020. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition will depend on future developments that are uncertain. As a result of global business disruption, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant adverse impact on our conclusion of new and additional business agreements in 2021 and 2020 and may continue to pose challenges until the effects of the pandemic abate.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed our headquarters and other offices, required our employees and contractors to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions, all of which represented a significant change in how we operate our business. The operations of our partners and customers have likewise been altered. While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the extent and effectiveness of containment actions, the emergence and spread of variants of the COVID-19 virus, and the effectiveness, acceptance, and availability of vaccines against the COVID-19 virus and its variants, the COVID-19 pandemic has already had an adverse effect on the global economy and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. In particular, the conditions caused by this pandemic are likely to affect the rate of global IT spending and could adversely affect demand for our C3 AI Suite, lengthen our sales cycles, reduce the value or duration of subscriptions, reduce the level of subscription renewals, negatively impact collections of accounts receivable, reduce expected spending from new customers, cause some of our paying customers to go out of business, limit the ability of our direct sales force to travel to customers and potential customers, and affect contraction or attrition rates of our paying customers, all of which could adversely affect our business, results of operations, and financial condition during fiscal 2021 and potentially future periods.
We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business. For further discussion of the potential impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operating results, and financial condition, see the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Other factors affecting our performance are discussed below, although we caution you that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may also further impact these factors.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription Revenue. Our subscription revenue is primarily comprised of term licenses, stand-ready COE support services, trials of our applications, and software-as-a-service offerings. Sales of our term licenses grant our customers the right to use our software, either on their own cloud instance or their internal hardware infrastructure, over the contractual term. We also offer a premium stand-ready service through our COE. Sales of our software-as-a-service offerings include a right to use our software over the contractual term. Our subscription contracts are generally non-cancelable and non-refundable, with the majority of contracts with customers averaging approximately three years in duration. We generally invoice annually in advance and recognize revenue over the contract term on a ratable basis. In addition, customers pay a usage-based runtime fee for the C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications, which is either paid in advance for specified levels of capacity and/or paid in arrears based on actual usage. Our subscriptions also include our maintenance and support services. Our maintenance and support services include critical and continuous updates to the software that are integral to maintaining the intended utility of the software over the contractual term. Our software subscriptions and maintenance and support services are highly interdependent and interrelated and represent a single distinct performance obligation within the context of the contract. We currently have a small number of public utility customers that license our offerings under a perpetual license model, and we expect that may continue for the foreseeable future for certain customers due to their specific contracting requirements.
Professional Services Revenue. Our professional services revenue primarily includes implementation services, training and prioritized engineering services. We offer a complete range of professional service support both onsite and remotely, including training, application design, project management, system design, data modeling, data integration, application design,
development support, data science, and application and C3 AI Suite administration support. Professional services fees are based on the level of effort required to perform the specified tasks and are typically a fixed-fee engagement with defined deliverables and a duration of less than 12 months. We recognize revenue for our professional services over the period of delivery as services are performed.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Subscription Revenue. Cost of subscription revenue consists primarily of costs related to compensation, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation and other related expenses for the production environment, support and COE staff, hosting of our C3 AI Suite, including payments to outside cloud service providers, and allocated overhead and depreciation for facilities.
Cost of Professional Services Revenue. Cost of professional services revenue consists primarily of compensation, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation and other related costs associated with our professional service personnel, third-party system integration partners, and allocated overhead and depreciation for facilities.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is total revenue less total cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. Our gross margin has fluctuated historically and may continue to fluctuate from period to period based on a number of factors, including the timing and mix of the product offerings we sell as well as the geographies into which we sell, in any given period. Our gross margins are lower when we provide hosting services to our customers as compared to when a customer hosts our software in their self-managed private or public cloud environments. Our subscription gross margin may experience variability over time as we continue to invest and continue to scale our business. Our professional services gross margin may also experience variability from period to period due to the use of our own resources and third-party system integration partners in connection with the performance of our fixed price agreements.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. We expect our operating expenses as a percentage of total revenue to increase as we continue to invest to grow our business. Over the long-term, we expect those percentages to stabilize and then move lower as our business matures.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist of expenditures related to advertising, media, marketing, promotional events, brand awareness activities, business development, customer success and corporate partnerships. Sales and marketing expenses also include employee-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, and commissions for our employees engaged in sales and marketing activities, and allocated overhead and depreciation for facilities.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollar amounts as we continue to invest in brand awareness and programmatic spend to generate demand. We also expect to hire additional sales personnel to increase sales coverage of target industry vertical and geographic markets. Consequently, sales and marketing expense as a percent of total revenue will remain high in the near-term. As our business scales through customer expansion and market awareness, we anticipate that sales and marketing expense as a percent of total revenue to decline over time.
Research and Development. Our research and development efforts are aimed at continuing to develop and refine our C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications, including adding new features and modules, increasing functionality and speed, and enhancing the usability of our C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications. Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for our employees associated with research and development related activities. Research and development expenses also include cloud infrastructure costs related to our research and development efforts, and allocated overhead and depreciation for facilities. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
We expect research and development expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in our existing and future product offerings. We may experience variations from period to period with our total research and development expense as a percentage of revenue as we develop and deploy new applications targeting new use cases and new industries. Over a longer horizon, we anticipate that research and development expense as a percent of total revenue to decline.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation and other related costs associated with administrative services such as executive management and administration, legal, human resources, accounting, and finance. General and administrative expense also includes facilities costs, such as depreciation and rent expense, professional fees, and other general corporate costs, including allocated overhead and depreciation for facilities.
We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business. As a result of the closing of our IPO, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses necessary to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange and related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, as well as higher expenses for general and director and officer insurance, investor relations, and professional services. We expect that general and administrative expense as a percent of total revenue will decline over the long-term as we benefit from the scale of our business infrastructure.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and available-for-sale marketable securities. It also includes amortization of premiums and accretion of discount related to our available-for-sale marketable securities. Interest income varies each reporting period based on our average balance of cash, cash equivalents, and available-for-sale marketable securities during the period and market interest rates.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency exchange gains and losses, losses from impairment of investments, and realized gains and losses on sales of available-for-sale marketable securities. Our foreign currency exchange gains and losses relate to transactions and asset and liability balances denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. We expect our foreign currency gains and losses to continue to fluctuate in the future due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax provision consists of an estimate of federal, state, and foreign income taxes based on enacted federal, state, and foreign tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented:
__________________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented:
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended April 30, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Subscription revenue as a percentage of total revenue remained 86% for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Subscription revenue increased by $22.0 million, or 16%, for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, compared to the prior fiscal year, predominantly driven by revenue growth of $22.0 million from new customers or expanding relationships with existing C3 AI customers.
Professional services revenue increased by $4.6 million, or 22%, for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, compared to the prior fiscal year, predominantly due to the timing and mix of implementation services projects for new C3 AI Application customers.
Cost of Revenue
The decrease in cost of subscription revenue for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to a decrease in cloud service providers costs of $1.1 million and a decrease in facilities and overhead costs of $0.6 million, partially offset by an increase in personnel-related costs of $1.6 million.
The increase in cost of professional services revenue for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to higher personnel-related costs of $3.0 million and higher third-party outsourcing costs of $1.9 million.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in gross profit in the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 was primarily driven by subscription margin improvements, partially offset by declines in professional services margin due to investments in personnel to support current and future revenue growth. Overall, total gross margins increased for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. The increase in sales and marketing expense for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to higher advertising spend of $4.7 million, higher personnel-related costs as a result of headcount growth of $1.7 million and higher facilities and related depreciation costs of $1.0 million, partially offset by a $5.7 million decrease in contributions to C3.ai DTI.
Research and Development. The increase in research and development expense for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due higher cloud computing costs of $3.7 million, an increase in professional
services costs of $1.6 million, higher personnel-related costs as a result of headcount growth of $1.4 million and higher facilities costs of $1.0 million partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease in contributions to C3.ai DTI and a $0.9 million decrease in travel expenses.
General and Administrative. The increase in general and administrative expense for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to an increase in corporate insurance costs of $3.2 million, and higher professional services costs of $1.8 million partially offset by a $1.6 million net decrease in personnel-related costs.
Interest Income
The decrease in interest income for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to investments that yielded lower returns such as money market funds and government securities.
Other Income (Expense), Net
The increase in other income (expense), net for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was due to foreign currency gains on the remeasurement of Euro-denominated cash and accounts receivable balances.
Provision for Income Taxes
The increase in provision for income taxes was primarily related to foreign and state tax expense.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
In addition to our financial results determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP, we believe free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating liquidity and provides information to management and investors about our ability to fund future operating needs and strategic initiatives. We calculate free cash flow as net cash used in operating activities less purchases of property and equipment and capitalized software development costs. Free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash used in operating activities. This non-GAAP financial measure may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies. Additionally, the utility of free cash flow is further limited as it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balances for a given period. The following table below provides a reconciliation of free cash flow to the GAAP measure of net cash used in operating activities for the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed operations primarily through sales generated from our customers and sales of equity securities. As of April 30, 2021 and 2020, we had $115.4 million and $33.1 million of cash and cash equivalents and $978.0 million and $211.9 million of short-term investments, respectively, which were held for working capital purposes. In December 2020, we completed our IPO, which resulted in aggregate net proceeds of $694.6 million, after underwriting discounts and other offering expenses. We also received aggregate proceeds of $150.0 million related to our Concurrent Private Placement and did not pay any underwriting discounts or commissions with respect to the shares that were sold in these private placements. Our short-term investments generally consist of high-grade U.S. treasury securities, certificates of deposit, U.S. government agency securities, commercial paper and corporate debt securities. We have generated operating losses from our operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $349.3 million as of April 30, 2021 and negative cash flows from operations. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to make in our business, and as a result we may require additional capital to execute on our strategic initiatives to grow the business.
We believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations and investing in capital expenditures. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, the timing and the amount of cash received from customers, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, expenses associated with our international expansion, the introduction of C3 AI Suite enhancements, and the continuing market adoption of our C3 AI Suite and C3 AI Applications. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. If we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities of $37.6 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 was due to our net loss of $55.7 million in addition to non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $21.7 million, depreciation and amortization of $4.3 million, and non-cash operating lease cost of $3.3 million. The $11.0 million cash outflow related to changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to an increase in accounts receivable of $34.7 million inclusive of an increase in related party balances of $15.2 million, an increase in prepaid expenses, other current assets and
other assets of $14.9 million inclusive of an increase in related party balances of $8.3 million and a decrease in lease liabilities of $3.6 million. This was partially offset by cash inflows related to an increase to deferred revenue of $14.9 million inclusive of an increase in related party balances of $6.2 million, an increase in other liabilities of $11.5 million inclusive of an increase in related party balances of $8.3 million, increase to accrued compensation and employee benefits of $8.1 million and an increase in accounts payable of $7.5 million inclusive of an increase in related party balances of $0.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of $61.3 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss of $69.4 million in addition to non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $8.3 million, non-cash operating lease cost of $3.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.3 million, impairment of investments of $1.0 million, and other non-cash income of $0.7 million. The $4.9 million cash outflow related to changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to a decrease in deferred revenue of $30.9 million inclusive of a decrease in related party balances of $18.4 million, an increase in prepaid expenses, other current assets and other assets of $4.3 million, a decrease in lease liabilities of $3.2 million, and a decrease in accounts payable of $1.2 million. This was partially offset by a decrease in accounts receivable of $32.7 million inclusive of a decrease in related party balances of $19.8 million, an increase in other liabilities of $1.3 million, and an increase in accrued compensation and employee benefits of $0.7 million.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $767.2 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 was primarily attributable to purchases of investments of $1,152.1 million and capital expenditures of $1.6 million, partially offset by maturities and sales of short-term investments of $385.9 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $124.1 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020 was primarily attributable to purchases of investments of $219.9 million and capital expenditures of $2.3 million, partially offset by the maturities and sales of short-term investments of $98.7 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities of $887.4 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 was primarily due to $844.7 million of net proceeds from the initial public offering and private placements, $26.0 million of proceeds from the repayment of the full recourse promissory note due from our CEO in connection with the Series F preferred stock financing and $16.7 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options for Class A common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $119.9 million for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020 was primarily due to $49.8 million of proceeds from the issuance of Series H redeemable convertible preferred stock, $44.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock, $25.3 million of proceeds from the additional issuance of Series G redeemable convertible preferred stock and $4.2 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options for Class A common stock, partially offset by $3.5 million repurchase of common stock and stock options in the tender offer.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations and commitments primarily consist of operating lease commitments for our facilities and noncancelable purchase commitments related to third-party cloud hosting services.
For additional information, refer to Note 6. Leases and Note 7. Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the following accounting policies involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations. See Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our other significant
accounting policies. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and accompanying notes. Although we believe that the estimates we use are reasonable, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from those estimates. The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Subscription Revenue. Our subscription revenue is primarily comprised of term licenses, stand-ready COE support services, trials of our applications, and software-as-a-service offerings. Sales of our term licenses grant customers the right to use our functional intellectual property, either on their own cloud instance or internal hardware infrastructure, over the contractual term. We also sell premium stand-ready COE support services, hosting services, and trials of our applications as part of our customer acquisition strategy. Sales of our software-as-a-service offerings include the right to use our software in a hosted environment over the contractual term. Our subscriptions include our software and our maintenance and support services. Our maintenance and support services include critical and continuous updates to the software that are integral to maintaining the intended utility of the software over the contractual term. Our software subscriptions and maintenance and support services are highly interdependent and interrelated and represent a single distinct performance obligation within the context of the contract. We have a small number of customers who have perpetual licenses, which we recognize ratably given the critical nature of the required continuous maintenance and support provided.
Our subscription contracts are generally non-cancelable and non-refundable, and typically three years in duration. We generally invoice annually in advance, and recognize revenue over the contract term on a ratable basis. We also generate additional runtime subscription fees for the use of our C3 AI Suite, a type of consumption billing based on computing and storage resources required to run our software. We typically recognize the consumption or usage-based revenue upon occurrence and invoice in arrears, although customers may purchase blocks of runtime in advance.
Professional Services Revenue. Professional services revenue primarily consists of implementation services and training. These services are distinct from our subscription revenue.
Professional services fees are based on the level of effort required to perform such tasks and are typically a fixed-fee engagement with a duration of less than 12 months. We recognize revenue for our professional services over time on an input basis as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations. Most of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. Our subscriptions are sold for a broad range of amounts and a representative standalone selling price, or SSP, is not always discernible from past transactions or other observable evidence. When appropriate, we determine SSP based on the price at which the performance obligation has previously been sold through past transactions, taking into account internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations. When the SSP of a license or subscription and bundled maintenance and support services is highly variable and the contract also includes additional performance obligations with observable SSP, we first allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations with established SSPs and then apply the residual approach to allocate the remaining transaction price to the license or subscription and bundled maintenance and support services. If applying the residual approach results in zero or very little consideration being allocated to the combined performance obligation, or to a bundle of goods or services, we will consider all reasonably available data to determine an appropriate
allocation of the transaction price. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation.
Areas of Judgment and Estimates. Determining whether the software subscriptions and the related support are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or as a single performance obligation requires significant judgment. In reaching our conclusion, we considered the nature of our promise to provide the customer real time analytics and machine learning algorithms that require regular re-training to maintain and improve prediction accuracy. As these updates to the software subscription are integral to maintaining the utility that is derived from the software subscription by customers, we determined that the software subscription and related updates fulfill a single promise to the customer under the contract.
Determining the relative SSP for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations requires significant judgement. We determine SSP using observable pricing when available, which takes into consideration market conditions and customer specific factors. When observable pricing is not available, we first allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations with established SSPs and then apply the residual approach to allocate the remaining transaction price to the subscription and bundled maintenance and support services.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense related to stock awards and restricted stock units, or RSUs, is recognized based on the fair value of the awards granted. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used to determine the fair value of the option awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. The fair value of each RSU is based on the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant. The related stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally five years. We account for forfeitures as they occur instead of estimating the number of awards expected to be forfeited.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. Prior to our IPO, the fair value was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and valuation reports prepared by third-party valuation specialists. After our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined by the closing price, on the date of grant, of our common stock, which is traded on the New York Stock Exchange. Stock-based compensation for financial reporting purposes is measured based on updated estimates of fair value when appropriate, such as when additional relevant information related to the estimate becomes available in a valuation report issued as of a subsequent date.
•Expected Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, an expected dividend yield of zero percent was used.
•Expected Volatility. The expected volatility was estimated by taking the average historical price volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in our industry which are either similar in size, stage of life cycle, or financial leverage, over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards.
•Expected Term. The expected term of options represents the period of time that options are expected to be outstanding. Our historical stock option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term due to a lack of sufficient data. For stock options granted to employees, we estimate the expected term by using the simplified method. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For stock options granted to non-employees, the expected term equals the contractual term of the option.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the options was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant.
The weighted average Black-Scholes assumptions used in evaluating our awards are as follows:
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Income Taxes
We use the asset-and-liability method for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and are measured using the enacted tax rates that are expected to be in effect when the differences reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that, in the opinion of management, is more likely than not to be realized.
Our policy for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires the evaluation of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in the course of the preparation of tax returns to determine whether the tax positions are “more-likely-than-not” of being sustained by the applicable tax authority. Tax positions not deemed to meet the more-likely-than-not threshold would be recorded as a tax expense in the current year. Re-evaluation of tax positions considers factors such as changes in facts or circumstances, changes in or interpretations of tax law, effectively settled issues under audit or expiration of statute of limitation and new audit activity.
We recognized interest accrued and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in our income tax expense.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recently adopted accounting pronouncements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act, or the JOBS Act, was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Therefore, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.