ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere herein. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect,” and the like, and/or future-tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this annual report. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors including, but not limited to, those noted under “Risk Factors” of the reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
CloudCommerce, Inc. (“CloudCommerce,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company”) is a leading provider of digital advertising solutions. Our flagship solution, SWARM, analyzes a robust mix of audience data to help businesses find who to talk to, what to say to them, and how to market to them. We do this by applying advanced data science, behavioral science, artificial intelligence, and market research techniques to discover, develop and create custom audiences for highly targeted digital marketing campaigns. CloudCommerce was Ranked Number 300th Fastest Growing Company in North America on Deloitte’s 2020 Technology Fast 500™.
Core Services
CloudCommerce can deliver end-to-end marketing solutions through a range of services and capabilities. SWARM implementations can include some or all of these capabilities.
We believe our products and services allow our clients to lower costs and focus on promoting and marketing their brand, product line and website while leveraging the investments we have made in technology and infrastructure to operate a dynamic digital presence.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, including the discussion on liquidity and capital resources, are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, management re-evaluates its estimates and judgments, particularly those related to the determination of the estimated recoverable amounts of trade accounts receivable, impairment of long-lived assets, revenue recognition, and deferred tax assets. We believe the following critical accounting policies require more significant judgment and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Among the significant judgments made by management in the preparation of our financial statements are the following:
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU 2014-09 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all subsequent amendments to the ASU (collectively, “ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Results for reporting periods beginning
after January 1, 2018 are presented under Topic 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting under Topic 605. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The adoption of ASC 606 did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. See footnote 3 for a disclosure of our use of estimates and judgement, as it relates to revenue recognition.
Included in revenue are costs that are reimbursed by our clients, including third party services, such as photographers and stylists, furniture, supplies, and the largest component, digital advertising. We have determined, based on our review of ASC 606-10-55-39, that the amounts classified as reimbursable costs should be recorded as gross, due to the following factors:
● The Company is primarily in control of the inputs of the project and responsible for the completion of the client contract;
● We have discretion in establishing price; and
● We have discretion in supplier selection.
Accounts Receivable
The Company extends credit to its customers, who are located nationwide. Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. The Company performs continuing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition. Management reviews accounts receivable on a regular basis, based on contracted terms and how recently payments have been received to determine if any such amounts will potentially be uncollected. The Company includes any balances that are determined to be uncollectible in its allowance for doubtful accounts. After all attempts to collect a receivable have failed, the receivable is written off. The balances of the allowance account at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $742 and $118,589 respectively.
On November 30, 2016, CLWD Operations entered into a 12-month agreement wherein amounts due from our customers were pledged to a third party, in exchange for a borrowing facility in amounts up to a total of $400,000. The agreement was amended on March 23, 2017, which increased the allowable borrowing amount by $100,000, to a maximum of $500,000. On November 30, 2017, the agreement auto renewed for another twelve months. The proceeds from the facility are determined by the amounts we invoice our customers. We record the amounts due from customers in accounts receivable and the amount due to the third party as a liability, presented under “Lines of credit” on the Balance Sheet. During the term of this facility, the third-party lender has a first priority security interest in CLWD Operations’ assets, and therefore, we will require such third-party lender’s written consent to obligate CLWD Operations’ further or pledge its assets against additional borrowing facilities. Because of this position, it may be difficult for CLWD Operations to secure additional secured borrowing facilities. The cost of this secured borrowing facility is 0.05% of the daily balance. As of December 31, 2020, the balance due from this arrangement was $379,797.
On October 19, 2017, Parscale Digital entered into a 12-month agreement wherein amounts due from our customers were pledged to a third party, in exchange for a borrowing facility in amounts up to a total of $500,000. The proceeds from the facility are determined by the amounts we invoice our customers. The Company evaluated this facility in accordance with ASC 860, classifying it as a secured borrowing arrangement. We record the amounts due from customers in accounts receivable and the amount due to the third party as a liability, presented as a “Lines of credit” on the Balance Sheet. During the term of this facility, the third-party lender has a first priority security interest in the Parscale Digital, and will, therefore, we will require such third-party lender’s written consent to obligate Parscale Digital further or pledge its assets against additional borrowing facilities. Because of this position, it may be difficult for the Company to secure additional secured borrowing facilities. The cost of this secured borrowing facility is 0.05% of the daily balance. On April 12, 2018, the Company amended the secured borrowing arrangement, which increased the maximum allowable balance by $250,000, to a total of $750,000. This borrowing facility had an expiration date of November 11, 2020 and was not renewed. As of December 31, 2020, the balance due from this arrangement was zero.
On August 2, 2018, Giles Design Bureau, WebTegrity, and Data Propria entered into 12-month agreements wherein amounts due from our customers were pledged to a third-party, in exchange for borrowing facilities in amounts up to a total of $150,000, $150,000 and $600,000, respectively. The proceeds from the facility are determined by the amounts we invoice our customers. We evaluated these facilities in accordance with ASC 860, classifying as
secured borrowing arrangements. We record the amounts due from customers in accounts receivable and the amount due to the third party as a liability, presented under “Lines of credit” on the Balance Sheet. During the term of these facilities, the third-party lender has a first priority security interest in the respective entities, and will, therefore, we will require such third-party lender’s written consent to obligate the entities further or pledge our assets against additional borrowing facilities. Because of this position, it may be difficult for the entities to secure additional secured borrowing facilities. The cost of this secured borrowing facilities is 0.056%, 0.056% and 0.049%, respectively, of the daily balance. As of August 22, 2020, these three borrowing facilities had expired and were not renewed. As of December 31, 2020, the combined balance due from these arrangements was zero.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. To determine recoverability of a long-lived asset, management evaluates whether the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows from the asset are less than its carrying amount. If impairment is indicated, the long-lived asset would be written down to fair value. Fair value is determined by an evaluation of available price information at which assets could be bought or sold, including quoted market prices, if available, or the present value of the estimated future cash flows based on reasonable and supportable assumptions.
Business Combinations
The application of business combination accounting requires use of significant estimates and assumptions. The Company allocates the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer lists, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Indefinite Lived Intangibles and Goodwill Assets
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” where the total purchase price is allocated to the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer lists, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. The purchase price is allocated using the information currently available, and may be adjusted, up to one year from acquisition date, after obtaining more information regarding, among other things, asset valuations, liabilities assumed and revisions to preliminary estimates. The purchase price in excess of the fair value of the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
The Company tests for indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill impairment in the fourth quarter of each year and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value and may not be recoverable. In accordance with its policies, the Company performed a qualitative assessment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill at December 31, 2020 and determined that the fair value of the intangible assets and goodwill of WebTegrity did exceed the respective carrying values.
The impairment test conducted by the Company includes an assessment of whether events occurred that may have resulted in impairment of goodwill and intangible assets. Because it was determined that events had occurred which effected the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets, the Company conducted the two-step approach to determine the fair value and required adjustment. The steps are as follows:
1. Based on the totality of qualitative factors, determine whether the carrying amount of the intangible asset may not be recoverable. Qualitative factors and key assumptions reviewed include the following:
● Increases in costs, such as labor, materials or other costs that could negatively affect future cash flows. The Company assumed that costs associated with labor, materials, and other costs should be consistent with fair market levels. If the costs were materially higher than fair market levels, then such costs may adversely affect the future cash flows of the Company or reporting units.
● Financial performance, such as negative or declining cash flows, or reductions in revenue may adversely affect recoverability of the recorded value of the intangible assets. During our analysis, the Company assumes that revenues should remain relatively consistent or show gradual growth month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter. If we report revenue declines, instead of increases or flat levels, then such condition may adversely affect the future cash flows of the Company or reporting units.
● Legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business or other factors that could affect future cash flows. During our analysis, the Company assumes that the legal, regulatory, political or business conditions should remain consistent, without placing material pressure on the Company or any of its reporting units. If such conditions were to become materially different than what has been experienced historically, then such conditions may adversely affect the future cash flows of the Company or reporting units.
● Entity-specific events such as losses of management, key personnel, or customers, may adversely affect future cash flows. During our analysis, the Company assumes that members of management, key personnel, and customers will remain consistent period-over-period. If not effectively replaced, the loss of members of management and key employees could adversely affect operations, culture, morale and overall success of the company. In addition, if material revenue from key customers is lost and not replaced, then future cash flows will be adversely affected.
● Industry or market considerations, such as competition, changes in the market, changes in customer dependence on our service offering, or obsolescence could adversely affect the Company or its reporting units. We understand that the market we serve are constantly changing, requiring us to change with it. During our analysis, we assume that we will address new opportunities in service offering and industries served. If we do not make such changes, then we may experience declines in revenue and cash flow, making it difficult to re-capture market share.
● Macroeconomic conditions such as deterioration in general economic conditions or limitations on accessing capital could adversely affect the Company. During our analysis, we acknowledge that macroeconomic factors, such as the economy, may affect our business plan because our customers may reduce budgets for our services. If there are material declines in the economy, which lead to reductions in revenue then such conditions may adversely affect the Company.
2. Compare the carrying amount of the intangible asset to the fair value.
3. If the carrying amount is greater than the fair value, then the carrying amount is reduced to reflect fair value.
In accordance with its policies, the Company performed a qualitative assessment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill at December 31, 2019 and determined there was impairment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill from our Parscale Media and Parscale Creative acquisitions, but not WebTegrity. Accordingly, all
intangible assets and goodwill related to the Parscale Media and Parscale Creative acquisitions have been written off, amounting to $744,444 for Parscale Media and $6,016,323 for Parscale Creative. This amount reduced the consolidated balances of Parscale Digital, as outlined below. This amount is included in Operating Expenses on the Income Statement, for the year ended December 31, 2019. An impairment assessment was also conducted during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the WebTegrity acquisition and determined that impairment of indefinite lived intangibles and goodwill was necessary. Accordingly, all intangible assets and goodwill related to the WebTegrity acquisition have been written off, amounting to $560,000. This amount reduced the consolidated balances of WebTegrity, as outlined below. This amount is included in Operating Expenses on the Income Statement, for the year ended December 31, 2020. At the time of the impairment analysis, the remaining prior year balance of the Customer List ($71,606) had already been expensed throughout the year ended December 31, 2020.
Goodwill and Intangible assets are comprised of the following, presented as net of amortization:
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company’s financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities are carried at cost, which approximates their fair value, due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company’s notes payable have stated borrowing rates that are consistent with those currently available to the Company and, accordingly, the Company believes the carrying value of these debt instruments approximates their fair value.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. ASC Topic 820 established a three-tier fair value hierarchy which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
· Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
· Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
· Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our significant off-balance sheet transactions include commitments associated with non-cancelable operating leases, which includes office leases for the Company in San Antonio, TX. See footnote 14 for disclosure of operating leases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management reviewed accounting pronouncements issued during the year ended December 31, 2020, and the following pronouncement was adopted during the period.
In January 2017, the FASB issued 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments in this ASU simplify the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test and eliminating the requirement for a reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment. Instead, under this pronouncement, an entity would perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and would recognize an impairment change for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects will be considered, if applicable. This ASU is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption is permitted. Due to the limited amount of goodwill and intangible assets recorded at December 31, 2020, the impact of this ASU on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures was immaterial.
Management reviewed accounting pronouncements issued during the year ended December 31, 2019, and the following pronouncements were adopted during the period.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (“ASC 842”). Under ASC 842, lessees are recognized as a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases, other than those that meet the definition of a short-term lease. For income statement purposes, leases are classified as either operating or finance. Operating leases are expensed on a straight-line basis, similar to current operating leases, while finance leases result in a front-loaded pattern, similar to current capital leases. The Company adopted ASC 842 effective January 1, 2019 and elected certain available transitional practical expedients.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020, compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019.
REVENUE
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $495,815 to $9,742,278, compared to $9,246,463 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to demand for our digital marketing services.
COST OF REVENUE
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $1,448,724 to $6,382,601, compared to $7,831,325 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the reduction of headcount from 49 in the prior year to 31 in the current year and the corresponding reduction of salary expense.
SALARIES AND OUTSIDE SERVICES
Salaries and outside services for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1,214,520 to $2,473,716, compared to $1,259,196 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases of salary expense of non-cost of revenue employees and payments to contractors.
SELLING, GENERAL, AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increase by $220,817 to $1,649,425 compared to $1,428,608 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in advertising and insurance expenses.
LOSS ON IMPAIRMENT OF GOODWILL AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Loss on impairment of goodwill and intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $6,200,767 to $560,000, compared to $6,760,767 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to
the impairment and write off of the goodwill and intangible assets from the Parscale Creative and Parscale Media acquisitions in the prior year being larger than the write-off of the WebTegrity acquisition during the current year.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $906,185 to $113,287, compared to $1,019,472 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the reduction of intangible assets to be amortized in the current year, as a result of a prior year impairment of those intangible assets.
OTHER INCOME AND EXPENSE
Total net other income/expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1,236,576 to net other income of $166,101 compared to net other expense of $1,070,475 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net other income was primarily due to the gain recorded for the forgiveness of the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Program”) loan, derivative gains and a reduction of interest.
NET LOSS
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,270,650, compared to the net loss of $10,123,380 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net loss for the period was primarily due to increases in third party revenue and decreases in cost of revenue, impairment loss, amortization and interest, partially offset by increases in salaries and SG&A expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company had a net working capital deficit (i.e. the difference between current assets and current liabilities) of ($4,784,105) at December 31, 2020 compared to a net working capital deficit of ($5,935,500) at fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash flow used in operating activities was $1,812,623 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash flow provided by operating activities of $133,886 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash flow used in operating activities of $1,946,509 was primarily due to reductions in customer deposits, accounts payable and loss on impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, partially offset by a reduction in net loss and increase in accounts receivable.
Cash flow used in investing activities was $5,253 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash flow used in investing activities of $2,104 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash flow used in investing activities of $3,149 was primarily due to the purchase of computers.
Cash flow provided by financing activities was $1,009,086 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash flow provided by financing activities of $571,234 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash flow provided by financing activities of $437,852 was due to increase of borrowings, partially offset by debt repayments.
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis of accounting, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets and liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not reflect any adjustments that might result if we are unable to continue as a going concern. Our independent auditors, in their report on our audited financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon, among other things, additional cash infusion. Management believes the existing shareholders, the prospective new investors and future revenue will provide the additional cash needed to meet our obligations as they become due, and will allow the development of our core business operations.
As a result of the recent economic recession, and the continuing economic uncertainty, it has been difficult for companies to obtain equity or debt financing. While the credit markets have improved over the last year, it remains difficult for smaller companies to obtain financing on reasonable terms.
Any additional capital raised through the sale of equity or equity-backed securities may dilute current stockholders’ ownership percentages and could also result in a decrease in the fair market value of our equity securities. The terms of the securities issued by us in future capital transactions may be more favorable to new investors and may include preferences, superior voting rights and the issuance of warrants or other derivative securities which may have a further dilutive effect.
Furthermore, any additional debt or equity or other financing that we may need may not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. If we are unable to obtain required additional capital, we may have to curtail our growth plans or cut back on existing business. Further, we may not be able to continue operations if we do not generate sufficient revenues from operations.
We may incur substantial costs in pursuing future capital financing, including investment banking fees, legal fees, accounting fees, securities law compliance fees, printing and distribution expenses and other costs. We may also be required to recognize non-cash expenses in connection with certain securities we issue, such as convertible notes and warrants, which may adversely impact our reported financial results.