ITEM 7 | Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and other publicly available documents may include, and officers and representatives of AIG may from time to time make and discuss, projections, goals, assumptions and statements that may constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These projections, goals, assumptions and statements are not historical facts but instead represent only a belief regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside AIG’s control. These projections, goals, assumptions and statements include statements preceded by, followed by or including words such as “will,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “focused on achieving,” “view,” “target,” “goal” or “estimate.” These projections, goals, assumptions and statements may relate to future actions, prospective services or products, future performance or results of current and anticipated services or products, sales efforts, expenses, the outcome of contingencies such as legal proceedings, anticipated organizational, business or regulatory changes, the effect of catastrophes, such as the COVID-19 crisis, and macroeconomic events, anticipated dispositions, monetization and/or acquisitions of businesses or assets, or successful integration of acquired businesses, management succession and retention plans, exposure to risk, trends in operations and financial results.
It is possible that AIG’s actual results and financial condition will differ, possibly materially, from the results and financial condition indicated in these projections, goals, assumptions and statements. Factors that could cause AIG’s actual results to differ, possibly materially, from those in the specific projections, goals, assumptions and statements include:
 the adverse impact of COVID-19, including with respect to AIG’s business, financial condition and results of operations;
 changes in market and industry conditions, including the significant global economic downturn, volatility in financial and capital markets, prolonged economic recovery and disruptions to AIG’s operations driven by COVID-19 and responses thereto, including new or changed governmental policy and regulatory actions;
 the occurrence of catastrophic events, both natural and man-made, including COVID-19, other pandemics, civil unrest and the effects of climate change;
 AIG’s ability to successfully dispose of, monetize and/or acquire businesses or assets or successfully integrate acquired businesses, including any separation of the Life and Retirement business from AIG and the impact any separation may have on AIG, its businesses, employees, contracts and customers;
 AIG’s ability to effectively execute on AIG 200 transformational programs designed to achieve underwriting excellence, modernization of AIG’s operating infrastructure, enhanced user and customer experiences and unification of AIG;
 the impact of potential information technology, cybersecurity or data security breaches, including as a result of cyber-attacks or security vulnerabilities, the likelihood of which may increase due to extended remote business operations as a result of COVID-19;
 disruptions in the availability of AIG’s electronic data systems or those of third parties;
 availability and affordability of reinsurance;
 the effectiveness of our risk management policies and procedures, including with respect to our business continuity and disaster recovery plans;
 nonperformance or defaults by counterparties, including Fortitude Re;
 changes in judgments concerning potential cost-saving opportunities;
 concentrations in AIG’s investment portfolios;
 changes to the valuation of AIG’s investments;
 changes to our sources of or access to liquidity;
 actions by rating agencies with respect to our credit and financial strength ratings;
 changes in judgments or assumptions concerning insurance underwriting and insurance liabilities;
 the effectiveness of strategies to recruit and retain key personnel and to implement effective succession plans;
 the requirements, which may change from time to time, of the global regulatory framework to which AIG is subject;
 significant legal, regulatory or governmental proceedings;
 changes in judgments concerning the recognition of deferred tax assets and the impairment of goodwill; and
 such other factors discussed in:
-Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report; and
-this Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) of this Annual Report.
We are not under any obligation (and expressly disclaim any obligation) to update or alter any projections, goals, assumptions or other statements, whether written or oral, that may be made from time to time, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 49
ITEM 7 | Index to Item 7
INDEX TO ITEM 7
Page
Use of Non-GAAP Measures
Critical Accounting Estimates
Executive Summary
Overview
Financial Performance Summary
AIG's Outlook - Industry and Economic Factors
Consolidated Results of Operations
Business Segment Operations
General Insurance
Life and Retirement
Other Operations
Investments
Overview
Investment Highlights in 2020
Investment Strategies
Credit Ratings
Insurance Reserves
Loss Reserves
Life and Annuity Future Policy Benefits, Policyholder Contract Deposits and DAC
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Analysis of Sources and Uses of Cash
Liquidity and Capital Resources of AIG Parent and Subsidiaries
Credit Facilities
Contractual Obligations
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Commercial Commitments
Debt
Credit Ratings
Financial Strength Ratings
Recent Rating Agency Actions
Regulation and Supervision
Dividends
Repurchases of AIG Common Stock
Dividend Restrictions
Enterprise Risk Management
Overview
Risk Governance Structure
Risk Appetite, Limits, Identification and Measurement
Credit Risk Management
Market Risk Management
Liquidity Risk Management
Operational Risk Management
Insurance Risks
Other Business Risks
Glossary
Acronyms
Throughout the MD&A, we use certain terms and abbreviations, which are summarized in the Glossary and Acronyms.
We have incorporated into this discussion a number of cross-references to additional information included throughout this Annual Report to assist readers seeking additional information related to a particular subject.
50 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Use of Non-GAAP Measures
Use of Non-GAAP Measures
Throughout this MD&A, we present our financial condition and results of operations in the way we believe will be most meaningful and representative of our business results. Some of the measurements we use are “non-GAAP financial measures” under SEC rules and regulations. GAAP is the acronym for “generally accepted accounting principles” in the United States. The non-GAAP financial measures we present may not be comparable to similarly-named measures reported by other companies.
Book value per common share, excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets and deferred tax assets (DTA) (Adjusted book value per common share) is used to show the amount of our net worth on a per-common share basis after eliminating items that can fluctuate significantly from period to period including changes in fair value of AIG’s available for sale securities portfolio, foreign currency translation adjustments and U.S. tax attribute deferred tax assets. This measure also eliminates the asymmetrical impact resulting from changes in fair value of our available for sale securities portfolio wherein there is largely no offsetting impact for certain related insurance liabilities. In addition, we adjust for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets since these fair value movements are economically transferred to Fortitude Re. We exclude deferred tax assets representing U.S. tax attributes related to net operating loss carryforwards and foreign tax credits as they have not yet been utilized. Amounts for interim periods are estimates based on projections of full-year attribute utilization. As net operating loss carryforwards and foreign tax credits are utilized, the portion of the DTA utilized is included in these book value per common share metrics. Adjusted book value per common share is derived by dividing total AIG common shareholders’ equity, excluding AOCI adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets, and DTA (Adjusted Common Shareholders’ Equity), by total common shares outstanding. The reconciliation to book value per common share, the most comparable GAAP measure, is presented in the Executive Summary section of this MD&A.
Return on common equity - Adjusted after-tax income excluding AOCI adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets and DTA (Adjusted return on common equity) is used to show the rate of return on common shareholders’ equity. We believe this measure is useful to investors because it eliminates items that can fluctuate significantly from period to period, including changes in fair value of our available for sale securities portfolio, foreign currency translation adjustments and U.S. tax attribute deferred tax assets. This measure also eliminates the asymmetrical impact resulting from changes in fair value of our available for sale securities portfolio wherein there is largely no offsetting impact for certain related insurance liabilities. In addition, we adjust for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets since these fair value movements are economically transferred to Fortitude Re. We exclude deferred tax assets representing U.S. tax attributes related to net operating loss carryforwards and foreign tax credits as they have not yet been utilized. Amounts for interim periods are estimates based on projections of full-year attribute utilization. As net operating loss carryforwards and foreign tax credits are utilized, the portion of the DTA utilized is included in Adjusted return on common equity. Adjusted return on common equity is derived by dividing actual or annualized adjusted after-tax income attributable to AIG common shareholders by average Adjusted Common Shareholders’ Equity. The reconciliation to return on common equity, the most comparable GAAP measure, is presented in the Executive Summary section of this MD&A.
Adjusted after-tax income attributable to AIG common shareholders is derived by excluding the tax effected adjusted pre-tax income (APTI) adjustments described below, dividends on preferred stock, and the following tax items from net income attributable to AIG:
 deferred income tax valuation allowance releases and charges;
 changes in uncertain tax positions and other tax items related to legacy matters having no relevance to our current businesses or operating performance; and
 net tax charge related to the enactment of the Tax Act;
and by excluding the net realized capital gains (losses) and other charges from noncontrolling interests.
We use the following operating performance measures because we believe they enhance the understanding of the underlying profitability of continuing operations and trends of our business segments. We believe they also allow for more meaningful comparisons with our insurance competitors. When we use these measures, reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measure are provided on a consolidated basis in the Consolidated Results of Operations section of this MD&A.
Adjusted revenues exclude Net realized capital gains (losses), income from non-operating litigation settlements (included in Other income for GAAP purposes) and changes in fair value of securities used to hedge guaranteed living benefits (included in Net investment income for GAAP purposes). Adjusted revenues is a GAAP measure for our segments.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 51
ITEM 7 | Use of Non-GAAP Measures
Adjusted pre-tax income is derived by excluding the items set forth below from income from continuing operations before income tax. This definition is consistent across our segments. These items generally fall into one or more of the following broad categories: legacy matters having no relevance to our current businesses or operating performance; adjustments to enhance transparency to the underlying economics of transactions; and measures that we believe to be common to the industry. APTI is a GAAP measure for our segments. For the period ended December 31, 2018, we have excluded changes in the fair value of equity securities from adjusted pre-tax income to be consistent with our elected prospective treatment beginning in the first quarter of 2019 due to a change in accounting principle. Excluded items include the following:
 changes in fair value of securities used to hedge guaranteed living benefits;
 changes in benefit reserves and deferred policy acquisition costs (DAC), value of business acquired (VOBA), and sales inducement assets (SIA) related to net realized capital gains and losses;
 changes in the fair value of equity securities;
 net investment income on Fortitude Re funds withheld assets post deconsolidation of Fortitude Re;
 following deconsolidation of Fortitude Re, net realized capital gains and losses on Fortitude Re funds withheld assets held by AIG in support of Fortitude Re’s reinsurance obligations to AIG (Fortitude Re funds withheld assets);
 loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt;
 all net realized capital gains and losses except earned income (periodic settlements and changes in settlement accruals) on derivative instruments used for non-qualifying (economic) hedging or for asset replication. Earned income on such economic hedges is reclassified from net realized capital gains and losses to specific APTI line items based on the economic risk being hedged (e.g. net investment income and interest credited to policyholder account balances);
 income or loss from discontinued operations;
 net loss reserve discount benefit (charge);
 pension expense related to a one-time lump sum payment to former employees;
 income and loss from divested businesses;
 non-operating litigation reserves and settlements;
 restructuring and other costs related to initiatives designed to reduce operating expenses, improve efficiency and simplify our organization;
 the portion of favorable or unfavorable prior year reserve development for which we have ceded the risk under retroactive reinsurance agreements and related changes in amortization of the deferred gain;
 integration and transaction costs associated with acquiring or divesting businesses;
 losses from the impairment of goodwill; and
 non-recurring costs associated with the implementation of non-ordinary course legal or regulatory changes or changes to accounting principles.
 General Insurance
- Ratios: We, along with most property and casualty insurance companies, use the loss ratio, the expense ratio and the combined ratio as measures of underwriting performance. These ratios are relative measurements that describe, for every $100 of net premiums earned, the amount of losses and loss adjustment expenses (which for General Insurance excludes net loss reserve discount), and the amount of other underwriting expenses that would be incurred. A combined ratio of less than 100 indicates underwriting income and a combined ratio of over 100 indicates an underwriting loss. Our ratios are calculated using the relevant segment information calculated under GAAP, and thus may not be comparable to similar ratios calculated for regulatory reporting purposes. The underwriting environment varies across countries and products, as does the degree of litigation activity, all of which affect such ratios. In addition, investment returns, local taxes, cost of capital, regulation, product type and competition can have an effect on pricing and consequently on profitability as reflected in underwriting income and associated ratios.
- Accident year loss and combined ratios, as adjusted: both the accident year loss and combined ratios, as adjusted, exclude catastrophe losses and related reinstatement premiums, prior year development, net of premium adjustments, and the impact of reserve discounting. Natural catastrophe losses are generally weather or seismic events having a net impact on AIG in excess of $10 million each and man-made catastrophe losses, such as terrorism and civil disorders that exceed the $10 million threshold. We believe that as adjusted ratios are meaningful measures of our underwriting results on an ongoing basis as they exclude catastrophes and the impact of reserve discounting which are outside of management’s control. We also exclude prior year development to provide transparency related to current accident year results.
 Life and Retirement
- Premiums and deposits: includes direct and assumed amounts received and earned on traditional life insurance policies, group benefit policies and life-contingent payout annuities, as well as deposits received on universal life, investment-type annuity contracts, Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) funding agreements and mutual funds.
Results from discontinued operations are excluded from all of these measures.
52 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires the application of accounting policies that often involve a significant degree of judgment.
These accounting estimates require the use of assumptions about matters, some of which are highly uncertain at the time of estimation. To the extent actual experience differs from the assumptions used, our consolidated financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be materially affected.
Insurance Liabilities
Loss Reserves
The estimate of the loss reserves relies on several key judgments:
 the determination of the actuarial models used as the basis for these estimates;
 the relative weights given to these models by product line;
 the underlying assumptions used in these models; and
 the determination of the appropriate groupings of similar product lines and, in some cases, the disaggregation of dissimilar losses within a product line.
We use numerous assumptions in determining the best estimate of reserves for each line of business. The importance of any specific assumption can vary by both line of business and accident year. Because actual experience can differ from key assumptions used in establishing reserves, there is potential for significant variation in the development of loss reserves. This is particularly true for long-tail classes of business.
All of our methods to calculate net reserves include assumptions about estimated reinsurance recoveries and their collectability. Reinsurance collectability is evaluated independently of the reserving process and appropriate allowances for uncollectible reinsurance are established.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 53
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Overview of Loss Reserving Process and Methods
Our loss reserves can generally be categorized into two distinct groups. Short-tail reserves consists principally of U.S. Property and Special Risks, Europe Property and Special Risks, U.S. Personal Insurance, and Europe and Japan Personal Insurance. Long-tail reserves include U.S. Workers’ Compensation, U.S. Excess Casualty, U.S. Other Casualty, U.S. Financial Lines, Europe Casualty and Financial Lines, and U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance Lines.
Short-Tail Reserves
For our short-tail coverages, such as property, where the nature of claims is generally high frequency with short reporting periods, with volatility arising from occasional severe events, the process for recording non-catastrophe quarterly loss reserves is geared toward maintaining IBNR based on percentages of net earned premiums for that business, rather than projecting ultimate loss ratios based on reported losses. For example, the IBNR reserve required for the latest accident quarter for a product line such as homeowners might be approximately 20 percent of the quarter’s earned premiums. This level of reserve would generally be recorded regardless of the actual losses reported in the current quarter, thus recognizing severe events as they occur. The percent of premium factor reflects both our expectation of the ultimate loss costs associated with the line of business and the expectation of the percentage of ultimate loss costs that have not yet been reported. The expected ultimate loss costs generally reflect the average loss costs from a period of preceding accident quarters that have been adjusted for changes in rate and loss cost levels, mix of business, known exposure to unreported losses, or other factors affecting the particular line of business. The expected percentage of ultimate loss costs that have not yet been reported would be derived from historical loss emergence patterns. For more mature quarters, specific loss development methods would be used to determine the IBNR. For other product lines where the nature of claims is high frequency but low severity, methods including loss development, frequency/severity or a multiple of average monthly losses may be used to determine IBNR reserves. IBNR for claims arising from catastrophic events or events of unusual severity would be determined in close collaboration with the claims department’s knowledge of known information, using alternative techniques or expected percentages of ultimate loss cost emergence based on historical loss emergence of similar claim types.
Long-Tail Reserves
Estimation of ultimate net losses and loss adjustment expenses (net losses) for our long-tail Casualty lines of business is a complex process and depends on a number of factors, including the product line and volume of business, as well as estimates of reinsurance recoveries. Experience in the more recent accident years generally provides limited statistical credibility of reported net losses on long-tail Casualty lines of business. That is because in the more recent accident years, a relatively low proportion of estimated ultimate net incurred losses are reported or paid. Therefore, IBNR reserves constitute a relatively high proportion of net losses.
54 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
We record quarterly changes in loss reserves for each product line of business. The overall change in our loss reserves is based on the sum of the changes for all product lines of business. For most long-tail product lines of business, the quarterly loss reserve changes are based on the estimated current loss ratio for each subset of coverage less any amounts paid. Also, any change in estimated ultimate losses from prior accident years deemed to be necessary based on the results of our latest detailed valuation reviews, large loss analyses, or other analytical techniques, either positive or negative, is reflected in the loss reserve and incurred losses for the current quarter. Differences between actual loss emergence in a given period and our expectations based on prior loss reserve estimates are used to monitor reserve adequacy between detailed valuation reviews and may also influence our judgment with respect to adjusting reserve estimates.
Details of the Loss Reserving Process
The process of determining the current loss ratio for each product line of business is based on a variety of factors. These include considerations such as: prior accident year and policy year loss ratios; rate changes; and changes in coverage, reinsurance, or mix of business. Other considerations include actual and anticipated changes in external factors such as trends in loss costs, inflation, employment rates or unemployment duration or in the legal and claims environment. The current loss ratio for each product line of business is intended to represent our best estimate after reflecting all of the relevant factors. At the close of each quarter, the assumptions and data underlying the loss ratios are reviewed to determine whether the loss ratios remain appropriate. This process includes a review of the actual loss experience in the quarter, actual rate changes achieved, actual changes in reinsurance, quantifiable changes in coverage or mix of business, and changes in other factors that may affect the loss ratio. When this review suggests that the previously determined loss ratio is no longer appropriate, the loss ratio is changed to reflect the revised estimates.
We conduct a comprehensive loss detailed valuation review at least annually for each product line of business in accordance with Actuarial Standards of Practice. These standards provide that the unpaid loss estimate may be presented in a variety of ways, such as a point estimate, a range of estimates, a point estimate based on the expected value of several reasonable estimates, or a probability distribution of the unpaid loss amount. Our actuarial best estimate for each product line of business represents an expected value generally considering a range of reasonably possible outcomes.
The reserve analysis for each product line of business is performed by a credentialed actuarial team in collaboration with claims, underwriting, business unit management, risk management and senior management. Our actuaries consider the ongoing applicability of prior data groupings and update numerous assumptions, including the analysis and selection of loss development and loss trend factors. They also determine and select the appropriate actuarial or other methods used to estimate reserve adequacy for each business product line, and may employ multiple methods and assumptions for each product line. These data groupings, accident year weights, method selections and assumptions necessarily change over time as business mix changes, development factors mature and become more credible and loss characteristics evolve. In the course of these detailed valuation reviews an actuarial best estimate of the loss reserve is determined. The sum of these estimates for each product line of business yields an overall actuarial best estimate for that line of business.
For certain product lines, we measure sensitivities and determine explicit ranges around the actuarial best estimate using multiple methodologies and varying assumptions. Where we have ranges, we use them to inform our selection of best estimates of loss reserves by major product line of business. Our range of reasonable estimates is not intended to cover all possibilities or extreme values and is based on known data and facts at the time of estimation.
We consult with third-party environmental litigation and engineering specialists, third-party toxic tort claims professionals, third-party clinical and public health specialists, third-party workers’ compensation claims adjusters and third-party actuarial advisors to help inform our judgments, as needed.
A critical component of our detailed valuation reviews is an internal peer review of our reserving analyses and conclusions, where actuaries independent of the initial review evaluate the reasonableness of assumptions used, methods selected and weightings given to different methods. In addition, each detailed valuation review is subjected to a review and challenge process by specialists in our Enterprise Risk Management group.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 55
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Actuarial and Other Methods for Major Lines of Business
Our actuaries determine the appropriate actuarial methods and segmentation. This determination is based on a variety of factors including the nature of the losses associated with the product line of business, such as the frequency or severity of the claims. In addition to determining the actuarial methods, the actuaries determine the appropriate loss reserve groupings of data. This determination is a judgmental, dynamic process and refinements to the groupings are made every year. The changes to groupings may be driven by and may change to reflect observed or emerging patterns within and across product lines, or to differentiate different risk characteristics (for example, size of deductibles and extent of third-party claims specialists used by our insureds). As an example of reserve segmentation, we write many unique subsets of professional liability, which cover different products, industry segments, and coverage structures. While for pricing or other purposes, it may be appropriate to evaluate the profitability of each subset individually, we believe it is appropriate to combine the subsets into larger groups for reserving purposes to produce a greater degree of credibility in the loss experience. This determination of data segmentation and related actuarial methods is assessed, reviewed and updated at least annually.
The actuarial methods we use most commonly include paid and incurred loss development methods, expected loss ratio methods, including “Bornhuetter Ferguson” and “Cape Cod”, and frequency/severity models. Loss development methods utilize the actual loss development patterns from prior accident years updated through the current year to project the reported losses to an ultimate basis for all accident years. We also use this information to update our current accident year loss selections. Loss development methods are generally most appropriate for classes of business that exhibit a stable pattern of loss development from one accident year to the next, and for which the components of the product line have similar development characteristics. For example, property exposures would generally not be combined into the same product line as casualty exposures, and primary casualty exposures would generally not be combined into the same product line as excess casualty exposures. We continually refine our loss reserving techniques and adopt further segmentations based on our analysis of differing emerging loss patterns for certain product lines. We generally use expected loss ratio methods in cases where the reported loss data lacked sufficient credibility to utilize loss development methods, such as for new product lines of business or for long-tail product lines at early stages of loss development. Frequency/severity models may be used where sufficient frequency counts are available to apply such approaches.
Expected loss ratio methods rely on the application of an expected loss ratio to the earned premium for the product line of business to determine the liability for loss reserves and loss adjustment expenses. For example, an expected loss ratio of 70 percent applied to an earned premium base of $10 million for a product line of business would generate an ultimate loss estimate of $7 million. Subtracting any paid losses and loss adjustment expenses would result in the indicated loss reserve for this product line. Under the Bornhuetter Ferguson methods, the expected loss ratio is applied only to the expected unreported portion of the losses. For example, for a long-tail product line of business for which only 10 percent of the losses are expected to be reported at the end of the accident year, the expected loss ratio would be used to represent the 90 percent of losses still unreported. The actual reported losses at the end of the accident year would be added to determine the total ultimate loss estimate for the accident year. Subtracting the reported paid losses and loss adjustment expenses would result in the indicated loss reserve. In the example above, the expected loss ratio of 70 percent would be multiplied by 90 percent. The result of 63 percent would be applied to the earned premium of $10 million resulting in an estimated unreported loss of $6.3 million. Actual reported losses would be added to arrive at the total ultimate losses. If the reported losses were $1 million, the ultimate loss estimate under the Bornhuetter Ferguson method would be $7.3 million versus the $7 million amount under the expected loss ratio method described above. Thus, the Bornhuetter Ferguson method gives partial credibility to the actual loss experience to date for the product line of business. Loss development methods generally give full credibility to the reported loss experience to date. In the example above, loss development methods would typically indicate an ultimate loss estimate of $10 million, as the reported losses of $1 million would be estimated to reflect only 10 percent of the ultimate losses.
56 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
A key advantage of loss development methods is that they respond more quickly to any actual changes in loss costs for the product line of business. Therefore, if loss experience is unexpectedly deteriorating or improving, the loss development method gives full credibility to the changing experience. Expected loss ratio methods would be slower to respond to the change, as they would continue to give more weight to a prior expected loss ratio, until enough evidence emerged to modify the expected loss ratio to reflect the changing loss experience. On the other hand, loss development methods have the disadvantage of overreacting to changes in reported losses if the loss experience is anomalous due to the various key factors described above and the inherent volatility in some of the classes. For example, the presence or absence of large losses at the early stages of loss development could cause the loss development method to overreact to the favorable or unfavorable experience by assuming it is a fundamental shift in the development pattern. In these instances, expected loss ratio methods such as Bornhuetter Ferguson have the advantage of recognizing large losses without extrapolating unusual large loss activity onto the unreported portion of the losses for the accident year.
The Cape Cod method is a hybrid between the loss development and Bornhuetter Ferguson methods, where the historic loss data and loss development factor assumptions are used to determine the expected loss ratio estimate in the Bornhuetter Ferguson method.
Frequency/severity methods generally rely on the determination of an ultimate number of claims and an average severity for each claim for each accident year. Multiplying the estimated ultimate number of claims for each accident year by the expected average severity of each claim produces the estimated ultimate loss for the accident year. Frequency/severity methods generally require a sufficient volume of claims in order for the average severity to be predictable. Average severity for subsequent accident years is generally determined by applying an estimated annual loss cost trend to the estimated average claim severity from prior accident years. In certain cases, a structural approach may also be used to predict the ultimate loss cost. Frequency/severity methods have the advantage that ultimate claim counts can generally be estimated more quickly and accurately than can ultimate losses. Thus, if the average claim severity can be accurately estimated, these methods can more quickly respond to changes in loss experience than other methods. However, for average severity to be predictable, the product line of business must consist of homogenous types of claims for which loss severity trends from one year to the next are reasonably consistent and where there are limited changes to deductible levels or limits. Generally these methods work best for high frequency, low severity product lines of business such as personal auto. However, frequency and severity metrics are also used to test the reasonability of results for other product lines of business and provide indications of underlying trends in the data. In addition, ultimate claim counts can be used as an alternative exposure measure to earned premiums in the Cape Cod method.
Structural driver analytics seek to explain the underlying drivers of frequency/severity. A structural driver analysis of frequency/severity is particularly useful for understanding the key drivers of uncertainty in the ultimate loss cost. For example, for the excess workers’ compensation product line of business, we have attempted to corroborate our judgment by considering the impact on severity of the future potential for deterioration of an injured worker’s medical condition, the impact of price inflation on the various categories of medical expense and cost of living adjustments on indemnity benefits, the impact of injured worker mortality and claim specific settlement and loss mitigation strategies, etc., using the following:
 Claim by claim reviews, often facilitated by third-party specialists, to determine the stability and likelihood of settling an injured worker’s indemnity and medical benefits;
 Analysis of the potential for future deterioration in medical condition unlikely to be picked up by a claim file review and associated with potentially costly medical procedures (i.e., increases in both utilization and intensity of medical care) over the course of the injured worker’s lifetime;
 Analysis of the cost of medical price inflation for each category of medical spend (services and devices) and for cost of living adjustments in line with statutory requirements;
 Portfolio specific mortality level and mortality improvement assumptions based on a mortality study conducted for our primary and excess workers’ compensation portfolios and our opinion of future longevity trends for the open reported cases;
 Ground-up consideration of the reinsurance recoveries expected for the product line of business for reported claims with extrapolation for unreported claims; and
 The effects of various run-off loss management strategies that have been developed by our run-off unit.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 57
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
In recent years, we have expanded our analysis of structural drivers to additional product lines of business as a means of corroborating our judgments using traditional actuarial techniques. For example, we have explicitly used external estimates of future medical inflation and mortality in estimating the loss development tail for excess of deductible primary workers’ compensation business. Using external forecasts for items such as these can improve the accuracy and stability of our estimates.
The estimation of liability for loss reserves and loss adjustment expenses relating to asbestos and environmental pollution losses on insurance policies written many years ago is typically subject to greater uncertainty than other types of losses. This is due to inconsistent court decisions, as well as judicial interpretations and legislative actions that in some cases have tended to broaden coverage beyond the original intent of such policies or have expanded theories of liability. In addition, reinsurance recoverable balances relating to asbestos and environmental loss reserves are subject to greater uncertainty due to the underlying age of the claim, underlying legal issues surrounding the nature of the coverage, and determination of proper policy period. For these reasons, these balances tend to be subject to increased levels of disputes and legal collection activity when actually billed. The insurance industry as a whole is engaged in extensive litigation over these coverage and liability issues and is thus confronted with a continuing uncertainty in its efforts to quantify these exposures.
We continue to receive claims asserting injuries and damages from toxic waste, hazardous substances, and other environmental pollutants and alleged claims to cover the cleanup costs of hazardous waste dump sites, referred to collectively as environmental claims, and indemnity claims asserting injuries from asbestos. The vast majority of these asbestos and environmental losses emanate from policies written in 1984 and prior years. Commencing in 1985, standard policies contained absolute exclusions for pollution-related damage and asbestos. The current environmental policies that we specifically price and underwrite for environmental risks on a claims-made basis have been excluded from the analysis.
The majority of our exposures for asbestos and environmental losses are related to excess casualty coverages, not primary coverages. The litigation costs are treated in the same manner as indemnity amounts, with litigation expenses included within the limits of the liability we incur. Individual significant loss reserves, where future litigation costs are reasonably determinable, are established on a case-by-case basis.
Discussion of Key Assumptions of our Actuarial Methods
Line of
Business or Category
Key Assumptions
U.S. Workers’
Compensation
We generally use a combination of loss development and expected loss ratio methods for U.S. Workers’ Compensation as this line of business is long-tail.
The loss cost trend assumption is not believed to be material with respect to our guaranteed cost loss reserves. This is primarily because our actuaries are generally able to use loss development projections for all but the most recent accident year’s reserves, so there is limited need to rely on loss cost trend assumptions for primary workers’ compensation business.
The tail factor is typically the most critical assumption, and small changes in the selected tail factor can have a material effect on our carried reserves. For example, the tail factors beyond twenty years for guaranteed cost business could vary by one and one-half percent below to two percent above those actually indicated in the 2020 loss reserve review. For excess of deductible business, in our judgment, it is reasonably likely that tail factors beyond twenty years could vary by four percent below to six percent above those actually indicated in the 2020 loss reserve review.
58 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Line of
Business or Category
Key Assumptions
U.S. Excess Casualty
We utilize various loss cost trend assumptions for different segments of the portfolio. After evaluating the historical loss cost trends from prior accident years since the early 1990s, in our judgment, it is reasonably likely that actual loss cost trends applicable to the year-end 2020 loss reserve review for U.S. Excess Casualty may range five percent lower or higher than this estimated loss trend. The loss cost trend assumption is critical for the U.S. Excess Casualty class of business due to the long-tail nature of the losses, and is applied across many accident years. Thus, there is the potential for the loss reserves with respect to a number of accident years (the expected loss ratio years) to be significantly affected by changes in loss cost trends that were initially relied upon in setting the loss reserves. These changes in loss trends could be attributable to changes in inflation or in the judicial environment, or in other social or economic conditions affecting losses.
U.S. Excess Casualty is a long-tail class of business and any deviation in loss development factors might not be discernible for an extended period of time subsequent to the recording of the initial loss reserve estimates for any accident year. Mass tort claims in particular may develop over a very extended period and impact multiple accident years, so we usually select a separate pattern for them. Thus, there is the potential for the loss reserves with respect to a number of accident years to be significantly affected by changes in loss development factors that were initially relied upon in setting the reserves.
After evaluating the historical loss development factors from prior accident years since the early 1990s, in our judgment, it is reasonably likely that the actual loss development factors could vary by an amount equivalent to a six month shift from those actually utilized in the year-end 2020 reserve review. This would impact projections both for accident years where the selections were directly based on loss development methods as well as the a priori loss ratio assumptions for accident years with selections based on Bornhuetter-Ferguson or Cape Cod methods. Similar to loss cost trends, these changes in loss development factors could be attributable to changes in inflation or in the judicial environment, or in other social or economic conditions affecting losses.
U.S. Other Casualty
The key uncertainties for other casualty lines are similar to excess casualty, as the underlying business is long-tailed and can be subject to variability in loss cost trends and changes in loss development factors. These may differ significantly by line of business as coverages such as general liability, medical malpractice and environmental may be subject to different risk drivers.
U.S. Financial Lines
The loss cost trends for U.S. Directors and Officers (D&O) liability business vary by year and subset, but for the most recent accident years, it is assumed to have been generally close to zero. After evaluating the historical loss cost levels from prior accident years since the early 1990s, including the potential effect of losses relating to the credit crisis, in our judgment, it is reasonably likely that the actual variation in loss cost levels for these subsets could vary by approximately 10 percent lower or higher on a year-over-year basis than the assumptions actually utilized in the year-end 2020 reserve review. Because U.S. D&O business has exhibited highly volatile loss trends from one accident year to the next, there is the possibility of an exceptionally high deviation. In our analysis, the effects of loss cost trend assumptions affect the results through the a priori loss ratio assumptions used for the Bornhuetter-Ferguson and Cape Cod methods, which impact the projections for the more recent accident years.
The selected loss development factors are also an important assumption, but are less critical than for U.S. Excess Casualty. Because these classes are written on a claims made basis, the loss reporting and development tail is much shorter than for U.S. Excess Casualty. However, the high severity nature of the losses does create the potential for significant deviations in loss development patterns from one year to the next. Similar to U.S. Excess Casualty, after evaluating the historical loss development factors from prior accident years since the early 1990s, in our judgment, it is reasonably likely that actual loss development factors could change by an amount equivalent to a shift by six months from those actually utilized in the year-end 2020 reserve review.
Europe Casualty and Financial Lines
Similar to U.S. business, European Casualty and Financial Lines can be significantly impacted by loss cost trends and changes in loss development factors. The variation in such factors can differ significantly by product and region.
U.S. Property and Special Risks, and Europe Property and Special Risks
For short-tail lines such as Property and Special Risks, variance in outcomes for individual large claims or events can have a significant impact on results. These outcomes generally relate to unique characteristics of events such as catastrophes or losses with significant business interruption claims.
U.S. Personal Insurance, and Europe, and Japan Personal Insurance
Personal Insurance is short-tailed in nature similar to Property and Special Risks but less volatile. Variance in estimates can result from unique events such as catastrophes. In addition, some subsets of this business, such as auto liability, can be impacted by changes in loss development factors and loss cost trends.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 59
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Line of
Business or Category
Key Assumptions
U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance lines
We historically have used a combination of loss development methods and expected loss ratio methods for excess workers’ compensation and other run-off insurance lines. For environmental claims, we have utilized a variety of methods including traditional loss development approaches, claim department and other expert evaluations of the ultimate costs for certain claims and survival ratio metrics.
U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance lines is an extremely long-tail class of business, with a much greater than normal uncertainty as to the appropriate loss development factors for the tail of the loss development. Specifically for excess workers’ compensation, after evaluating the historical loss development factors for prior accident years since the 1980s as well as the development over the past several years of the ground up loss projections utilized to help select the loss development factors in the tail for this class of business, in our judgment, it is reasonably likely that the tail factor beyond 30 years could vary by 10 percent above or below that actually indicated in the 2020 loss reserve review.
Other Reserve Items
Loss adjustment expenses (LAE) are separated into two broad categories: allocated loss adjustment expenses (ALAE), also referred to as legal defense and cost containment or “legal” and unallocated loss adjustment expenses, which includes certain claims adjuster fees and other internal claim management costs.
We determine reserves for legal expenses for each class of business by one or more actuarial or structural driver methods. For the majority of lines of business, legal costs are analyzed in conjunction with losses. For lines of business where they are separately analyzed the methods used generally include development methods comparable to those described for loss development methods. The development could be based on either the paid loss adjustment expenses or the ratio of paid loss adjustment expenses to paid losses, or both. Other methods include the utilization of expected ultimate ratios of paid loss expense to paid losses, based on actual experience from prior accident years or from similar product lines of business.
The bulk of adjuster expenses are allocated and charged to individual claim files. For these expenses, we generally determine reserves based on calendar year ratios of adjuster expenses paid to losses paid for the particular product line of business. For other internal claim costs, which generally relate to specific claim department expenses that are not allocated to individual claim files such as technology costs and other broad initiatives, we look at historic and expected expenditures for these items and project these into the future.
The incidence of LAE is directly related to the frequency, complexity and level of underlying claims. As a result, a key driver of variability in LAE is the variability in the overall claims, particularly for long tail lines.
The following sensitivity analysis table summarizes the effect on the loss reserve position of using certain alternative loss cost trend (for accident years where we use expected loss ratio methods) or loss development factor assumptions rather than the assumptions actually used in determining our estimates in the year-end loss reserve analyses in 2020:
December 31, 2020
Increase (Decrease)
Increase (Decrease)
(in millions)
to Loss Reserves
to Loss Reserves
Loss cost trends:
Loss development factors:
U.S. Excess Casualty:
U.S. Excess Casualty:
5 percent increase
$
1,000
6-months slower
$
1,050
5 percent decrease
(650)
6-months faster
(800)
U.S. Financial Lines (D&O)
U.S. Financial Lines (D&O)
10 percent increase
1,100
6-months slower
10 percent decrease
(650)
6-months faster
(450)
U.S. Workers' Compensation:
Tail factor increase(a)
1,100
Tail factor decrease(b)
(800)
(a) Tail factor increase of 2 percent for guaranteed cost business and 6 percent for deductible business.
(b) Tail factor decrease of 1.5 percent for guaranteed cost business and 4 percent for deductible business.
60 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Future Policy Benefits for Life and Accident and Health Insurance Contracts
Long-duration traditional products include whole life insurance, term life insurance, accident and health insurance, long-term care insurance, and certain payout annuities for which the payment period is life-contingent, which include certain of our single premium immediate annuities and structured settlements.
For long-duration traditional business, a “lock-in” principle applies. The assumptions used to calculate the benefit liabilities and DAC are set when a policy is issued and do not change with changes in actual experience, unless a loss recognition event occurs. The assumptions include mortality, morbidity, persistency, maintenance expenses, and investment returns. These assumptions are typically consistent with pricing inputs. The assumptions also include margins for adverse deviation, principally for key assumptions such as mortality and interest rates used to discount cash flows, to reflect uncertainty given that actual experience might deviate from these assumptions. Establishing margins at contract inception requires management judgment. The extent of the margin for adverse deviation may vary depending on the uncertainty of the cash flows, which is affected by the volatility of the business and the extent of our experience with the product.
Loss recognition occurs if observed changes in actual experience or estimates result in projected future losses under loss recognition testing. To determine whether loss recognition exists, we determine whether a future loss is expected based on updated current assumptions. If loss recognition exists, we recognize the loss by first reducing DAC through amortization expense, and, if DAC is depleted, record additional liabilities through a charge to policyholder benefit expense. Because of the long-term nature of many of our liabilities subject to the “lock-in” principle, small changes in certain assumptions may cause large changes in the degree of reserve adequacy. In particular, changes in estimates of future invested asset returns have a large effect on the degree of reserve deficiency.
For additional information on loss recognition see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Groupings for loss recognition testing are consistent with our manner of acquiring, servicing, and measuring the profitability of the business and are applied by product groupings, including traditional life, payout annuities and long-term care insurance. Once loss recognition has been recorded for a block of business, the old assumption set is replaced and the assumption set used for the loss recognition would then be subject to the lock-in principle. For the business ceded to Fortitude Re, 100 percent of the risk is transferred and no additional loss recognition will occur. Key judgments made in loss recognition testing include the following:
 To determine investment returns used in loss recognition tests, we typically match liabilities with assets of comparable duration, to the extent practicable, and then project future cash flows on those assets. Assets supporting insurance liabilities are primarily comprised of a diversified portfolio of high to medium quality fixed maturity securities, and may also include, to a lesser extent, alternative investments. Our projections include a reasonable allowance for investment expenses and expected credit losses over the projection horizon. A critical assumption in the projection of expected investment income is the assumed net rate of investment return at which excess cash flows are to be reinvested. For products in which asset and liability durations are matched relatively well, this is less of a consideration since interest on excess cash flows are not a significant component of future cash flows. For the reinvestment rate assumption, anticipated future changes to the yield curves could have a large effect. Given the interest rate environment applicable at the date of our most recent loss recognition tests, we assumed a modest and gradual increase in long-term interest rates over time.
 For mortality assumptions, key judgments include the extent of industry versus own experience to base future assumptions as well as the extent of expected mortality improvements in the future. The latter judgment is based on a combination of historical mortality trends and advice from industry, public health and demography specialists that were consulted by AIG’s actuaries and published industry information.
 For surrender rates, a key judgment involves the correlation between expected increases/decreases in interest rates and increases/decreases in surrender rates. To support this judgment, we compare crediting rates on our products to expected rates on competing products under different interest rate scenarios.
 For in-force long-term care insurance, rate increases are allowed but must be approved by state insurance regulators. Consequently, the extent of rate increases that may be assumed requires judgment. In establishing our assumption for rate increases for long-term care insurance, we consider historical experience as to the frequency and level of rate increases approved by state regulators.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 61
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
Significant unrealized appreciation on investments in a low interest rate environment may cause DAC to be adjusted and additional future policy benefit liabilities to be recorded through a charge directly to accumulated other comprehensive income (“shadow loss recognition”). These charges are included, net of tax, with the change in net unrealized appreciation of investments. In applying shadow loss recognition, the Company overlays unrealized gains and other shadow adjustments onto loss recognition tests without revising the underlying test. Accordingly, there is limited additional judgment in this process.
For additional information on shadow loss recognition see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Guaranteed Benefit Features of Variable Annuity Products
Variable annuity products offered by our Individual Retirement and Group Retirement product lines offer guaranteed benefit features. These guaranteed features include guaranteed minimum death benefits (GMDB) that are payable in the event of death or other instances, and living benefits that are payable in the event of annuitization, or, in other instances, at specified dates during the accumulation period. Living benefits primarily include guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits (GMWB).
For additional information on these features see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The liability for GMDB, which is recorded in Future policyholder benefits, represents the expected value of benefits in excess of the projected account value, with the excess recognized ratably through Policyholder benefits and losses incurred over the accumulation period based on total expected fee assessments. The liabilities for GMWB, which are recorded in Policyholder contract deposits, are accounted for as embedded derivatives measured at fair value, with changes in the fair value of the liabilities recorded in realized capital gains (losses).
Our exposure to the guaranteed amounts is equal to the amount by which the contract holder’s account balance is below the amount provided by the guaranteed feature. A variable annuity contract may include more than one type of guaranteed benefit feature; for example, it may have both a GMDB and a GMWB. However, a policyholder can generally only receive payout from one guaranteed feature on a contract containing a death benefit and a living benefit, i.e., the features are generally mutually exclusive (except a surviving spouse who has a rider to potentially collect both a GMDB upon their spouse’s death and a GMWB during his or her lifetime). A policyholder cannot purchase more than one living benefit on one contract. Declines in the equity markets, increased volatility and a sustained low interest rate environment increase our exposure to potential benefits under the guaranteed features, leading to an increase in the liabilities for those benefits.
For sensitivity analysis which includes the sensitivity of reserves for guaranteed benefit features to changes in the assumptions for interest rates, equity market returns, volatility, and mortality see Estimated Gross Profits for Investment-Oriented Products below.
For additional discussion of market risk management related to these product features see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - Life and Retirement Companies’ Key Risks - Variable Annuity, Index Annuity and Universal Life Risk Management and Hedging Programs.
62 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
The reserving methodology and assumptions used to measure the liabilities of our two largest guaranteed benefit features are presented in the following table:
Guaranteed Benefit Feature
Reserving Methodology &
Assumptions and Accounting Judgments
GMDB
We determine the GMDB liability at each balance sheet date by estimating the expected value of death benefits in excess of the projected account balance and recognizing the excess ratably over the accumulation period based on total expected fee assessments. For additional information on how we reserve for variable annuity products with guaranteed benefit features see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Key assumptions include:
 Mortality rates, which are based upon actual experience modified to allow for variations in policy form
 Lapse rates, which are based upon actual experience modified to allow for variations in policy form
 Investment returns, using assumptions from a stochastic equity model
In applying asset growth assumptions for the valuation of the GMDB liability, we use a reversion to the mean methodology, similar to that applied for DAC. For a description of this methodology see Estimated Gross Profits for Investment-Oriented Products below.
GMWB
GMWB living benefits are embedded derivatives that are required to be bifurcated from the host contract and carried at fair value. For additional information on how we reserve for variable annuity products with guaranteed benefit features see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, and for information on fair value measurement of these embedded derivatives, including how we incorporate our own non-performance risk see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The fair value of the embedded derivatives is based on actuarial and capital market assumptions related to projected cash flows over the expected lives of the contracts. Key assumptions include:
 Interest rates
 Equity market returns
 Market volatility
 Credit spreads
 Equity / interest rate correlation
 Policyholder behavior, including mortality, lapses, withdrawals and benefit utilization. Estimates of future policyholder behavior are subjective and based primarily on our historical experience
 In applying asset growth assumptions for the valuation of GMWBs, we use market-consistent assumptions calibrated to observable interest rate and equity option prices
 Allocation of fees between the embedded derivative and host contract
valuation of embedded derivatives for fixed index annuity and Life Products
Fixed index annuity and life products provide growth potential based in part on the performance of a market index. Certain fixed index annuity products offer optional guaranteed benefit features similar to those offered on variable annuity products. The index crediting feature of these products results in the recognition of an embedded derivative that is required to be bifurcated from the host contract and carried at fair value. Option pricing models are used to estimate fair value, taking into account assumptions for future equity index growth rates, volatility of the equity index, future interest rates, and our ability to adjust the participation rate and the cap on equity indexed credited rates in light of market conditions and policyholder behavior assumptions.
For additional discussion of market risk management related to these product features see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - Life and Retirement Companies’ Key Risks - Variable Annuity, Index Annuity and Universal Life Risk Management and Hedging Programs.
Estimated Gross Profits for Investment-Oriented Products
Policy acquisition costs and policy issuance costs that are incremental and directly related to the successful acquisition of new or renewal of existing insurance contracts related to universal life and investment-type products (collectively, investment-oriented products) are generally deferred and amortized, with interest, in relation to the incidence of estimated gross profits to be realized over the expected lives of the contracts, except in instances where significant negative gross profits are expected in one or more periods. Estimated gross profits include current and expected interest rates, net investment income and spreads, net realized capital gains and losses, fees, surrender rates, mortality experience and equity market returns and volatility. In estimating future gross profits, lapse assumptions require judgment and can have a material impact on DAC amortization. For fixed deferred annuity contracts, the future spread between investment income and interest credited to policyholders is a significant judgment, particularly in a low interest rate environment.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 63
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
If the assumptions used for estimated gross profits change, DAC and related reserves, including VOBA, SIA, guaranteed benefit reserves and unearned revenue reserve (URR), are recalculated using the new assumptions, and any resulting adjustment is included in income. Updating such assumptions may result in acceleration of amortization in some products and deceleration of amortization in other products.
In estimating future gross profits for variable annuity products as of December 31, 2020, a long-term annual asset growth assumption of 7.0 percent (before expenses that reduce the asset base from which future fees are projected) was applied to estimate the future growth in assets and related asset-based fees. In determining the asset growth rate, the effect of short-term fluctuations in the equity markets is partially mitigated through the use of a reversion to the mean methodology, whereby short-term asset growth above or below the long-term annual rate assumption impacts the growth assumption applied to the five-year period subsequent to the current balance sheet date. The reversion to the mean methodology allows us to maintain our long-term growth assumptions, while also giving consideration to the effect of actual investment performance. When actual performance significantly deviates from the annual long-term growth assumption, as evidenced by growth assumptions for the five-year reversion to the mean period falling below a certain rate (floor) or above a certain rate (cap) for a sustained period, judgment may be applied to revise or “unlock” the growth rate assumptions to be used for both the five-year reversion to the mean period as well as the long-term annual growth assumption applied to subsequent periods. The use of a reversion to the mean assumption is common within the industry; however, the parameters used in the methodology are subject to judgment and vary within the industry.
For additional discussion see Insurance Reserves - Life and Annuity Reserves and DAC - DAC - Reversion to the Mean.
The following table summarizes the sensitivity of changes in certain assumptions for DAC and SIA, embedded derivatives and other reserves related to guaranteed benefits and URR, measured as the related hypothetical impact on December 31, 2020 balances and the resulting hypothetical impact on pre-tax income, before hedging.
Increase (decrease) in
Other
Embedded
Reserves
Derivatives
Related to
Unearned
Related to
December 31, 2020
DAC/SIA
Guaranteed
Revenue
Guaranteed
Pre-Tax
(in millions)
Asset
Benefits
Reserve
Benefits
Income
Assumptions:
Net Investment Spread
Effect of an increase by 10 basis points
$
$
(42)
$
(8)
$
(184)
$
Effect of a decrease by 10 basis points
(115)
(353)
Equity Return(a)
Effect of an increase by 1%
(30)
-
(62)
Effect of a decrease by 1%
(100)
-
(201)
Volatility(b)
Effect of an increase by 1%
(3)
-
(44)
Effect of a decrease by 1%
(23)
-
(19)
Interest Rate(c)
Effect of an increase by 1%
-
-
-
(2,675)
2,675
Effect of a decrease by 1%
-
-
-
3,469
(3,469)
Mortality
Effect of an increase by 1%
(7)
(5)
(55)
Effect of a decrease by 1%
(42)
(5)
Lapse
Effect of an increase by 10%
(122)
(89)
(25)
(113)
Effect of an decrease by 10%
(102)
(a) Represents the net impact of a one percent increase or decrease in long-term equity returns for GMDB reserves and net impact of a one percent increase or decrease in the S&P 500 index on the value of the GMWB embedded derivative.
(b) Represents the net impact of a one percentage point increase or decrease in equity volatility.
(c) Represents the net impact of one percent parallel shift in the yield curve on the value of the GMWB embedded derivative. Does not represent interest rate spread compression on investment-oriented products.
64 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
The sensitivity ranges of 10 basis points, one percent and 10 percent are included for illustrative purposes only and do not reflect the changes in net investment spreads, equity return, volatility, interest rate, mortality or lapse used by AIG in its fair value analyses or estimates of future gross profits to value DAC and related reserves. Changes different from those illustrated may occur in any period.
The analysis of DAC, embedded derivatives and other reserves related to guaranteed benefits, and unearned revenue reserve is a dynamic process that considers all relevant factors and assumptions described above. We estimate each of the above factors individually, without the effect of any correlation among the key assumptions. An assessment of sensitivity associated with changes in any single assumption would not necessarily be an indicator of future results. The effects on pre-tax income in the sensitivity analysis table above do not reflect the related effects from our economic hedging program, which utilizes derivative and other financial instruments and is designed so that changes in value of those instruments move in the opposite direction of changes in the guaranteed benefit embedded derivative liabilities.
For a further discussion on guaranteed benefit features of our variable annuities and the related hedging program see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - Life and Retirement Companies’ Key Risks - Variable Annuity, Index Annuity and Universal Life Risk Management and Hedging Programs, Insurance Reserves - Life and Annuity Reserves and DAC - Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits and Hedging Results, and Notes 5 and 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Reinsurance Recoverable
The estimation of reinsurance recoverable involves a significant amount of judgment, particularly for latent exposures, such as asbestos, due to their long-tail nature. Reinsurance assets include reinsurance recoverable on unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses that are estimated as part of our loss reserving process and, consequently, are subject to similar judgments and uncertainties as the estimation of gross loss reserves. Similarly, Other assets include reinsurance recoverable for contracts which are accounted for as deposits.
We assess the collectability of reinsurance recoverable balances, at minimum on an annual basis, through either comparison with historical trends of disputes and credit events or financial analysis of the credit quality of the reinsurer. We record adjustments to reflect the results of these assessments through an allowance for credit losses and disputes on uncollectable reinsurance that reduces the carrying amount of reinsurance and other assets on the balance sheet (collectively, the reinsurance recoverable balances). This estimate requires significant judgment for which key considerations include:
 paid and unpaid amounts recoverable;
 whether the balance is in dispute or subject to legal collection;
 the relative financial health of the reinsurer as determined by the Obligor Risk Ratings (ORRs) we assign to each reinsurer based upon our financial reviews; reinsurers that are financially troubled (i.e., in run-off, have voluntarily or involuntarily been placed in receivership, are insolvent, are in the process of liquidation or otherwise subject to formal or informal regulatory restriction) are assigned ORRs that will generate significant allowance; and
 whether collateral and collateral arrangements exist.
An estimate of the reinsurance recoverable’s lifetime expected credit losses is established utilizing a probability of default and loss given default method, which reflects the reinsurer’s ORR rating. The allowance for credit losses excludes disputed amounts. An allowance for disputes is established for a reinsurance recoverable using the losses incurred model for contingencies.
At December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses and disputes on reinsurance recoverable was $375 million, or less than one percent of the consolidated reinsurance recoverable.
Risk transfer
All insurance contracts, including reinsurance contracts, must meet risk transfer requirements in order to use insurance accounting, principally resulting in the recognition of cash flows under the contract as premiums and losses. If risk transfer requirements are not met, a contract is to be accounted for as a deposit, typically resulting in the recognition of cash flows under the contract through a deposit asset or liability and not as revenue or expense. To meet risk transfer requirements, all insurance and reinsurance contracts must include insurance risk, consisting of underwriting and timing risk; in addition, reinsurance contracts must also include a reasonable possibility of a significant loss for the assuming entity. We have entered into certain insurance and reinsurance contracts, primarily in our General Insurance companies, that do not contain sufficient insurance risk to be accounted for as insurance or reinsurance and are therefore subject to deposit accounting.
For additional information on reinsurance see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 65
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES AND GOODWILL Impairment
Allowance for Credit Losses
Available for sale securities
If we intend to sell a fixed maturity security, or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell a fixed maturity security before recovery of its amortized cost basis and the fair value of the security is below amortized cost, an impairment has occurred and the amortized cost is written down to current fair value, with a corresponding charge to realized capital losses. No allowance is established in these situations and any previously recorded allowance is reversed. When assessing our intent to sell a fixed maturity security, or whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell a fixed maturity security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, management evaluates relevant facts and circumstances including, but not limited to, decisions to reposition our investment portfolio, sales of securities to meet cash flow needs and sales of securities to take advantage of favorable pricing.
For fixed maturity securities for which a decline in the fair value below the amortized cost is due to credit related factors, an allowance is established for the difference between the estimated recoverable value and amortized cost with a corresponding charge to realized capital losses. The allowance for credit losses is limited to the difference between amortized cost and fair value. The estimated recoverable value is the present value of cash flows expected to be collected, as determined by management. The difference between fair value and amortized cost that is not associated with credit related factors is presented in unrealized appreciation (depreciation) of fixed maturity securities on which an allowance for credit losses was previously recognized (a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income). Accrued interest is excluded from the measurement of the allowance for credit losses.
Commercial and residential mortgage loans
At the time of origination or purchase, an allowance for credit losses is established for mortgage and other loan receivables and is updated each reporting period. Changes in the allowance for credit losses are recorded in realized capital losses. This allowance reflects the risk of loss, even when that risk is remote, and reflects losses expected over the remaining contractual life of the loan. The allowance for credit losses considers available relevant information about the collectability of cash flows, including information about past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions. We revert to historical information when we determine that we can no longer reliably forecast future economic assumptions.
The allowances for the commercial mortgage loans and residential mortgage loans are estimated utilizing a probability of default and loss given default model. Loss rate factors are determined based on historical data and adjusted for current and forecasted information. The loss rates are applied based on individual loan attributes and considering such data points as loan-to-value ratios, Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO) scores, and debt service coverage.
The estimate of credit losses also reflects management’s assumptions on certain macroeconomic factors that include, but are not limited to, gross domestic product growth, employment, inflation, housing price index, interest rates and credit spreads.
For additional information on the methodology and significant inputs, by investment type, that we use to determine the amount of impairment and allowances for loan losses see the discussion in Notes 6 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill Impairment
For a discussion of goodwill impairment see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Estimates and Assumptions and Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In 2020, 2019 and 2018, for substantially all of the reporting units we elected to bypass the qualitative assessment of whether goodwill impairment may exist and, therefore, performed quantitative assessments that supported a conclusion that the fair value of all of the reporting units tested exceeded their book value. To determine fair value, we primarily use a discounted expected future cash flow analysis that estimates and discounts projected future distributable earnings. Such analysis is principally based on our business projections that inherently include judgments regarding business trends.
COVID-19 has caused significant market volatility impacting our actual and projected results and contributed to a decline in our stock price. As this is an evolving crisis, we expect to continue to monitor developments and perform updated analyses as necessary.
Liability for Legal Contingencies
We estimate and record a liability for potential losses that may arise from regulatory and government investigations and actions and litigation and other forms of dispute resolution to the extent such losses are probable and can be estimated. Determining a reasonable estimate of the amount of such losses requires significant management judgment. In many cases, it is not possible to determine whether a liability has been incurred or to estimate the ultimate or minimum amount of that liability until the matter is close to resolution. In view of the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of such matters, particularly in cases that are in the early
66 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
stages of litigation or in which claimants seek substantial or indeterminate damages, we often cannot predict the outcome or estimate the eventual loss or range of reasonably possible losses related to such matters. Given the inherent unpredictability of such matters, the outcome of certain matters could, from time to time, have a material adverse effect on the company’s consolidated financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
For more information on legal, regulatory and litigation matters see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value Measurements of Certain Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities
For additional information about the measurement of fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities and our accounting policy regarding the incorporation of credit risk in fair value measurements see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents the fair value of fixed maturity and equity securities by source of value determination:
December 31, 2020
Fair
Percent
(in billions)
Value
of Total
Fair value based on external sources(a)
$
255.4
91.9
%
Fair value based on internal sources
22.4
8.1
Total fixed maturity and equity securities(b)
$
277.8
100.0
%
(a) Includes $20.6 billion for which the primary source is broker quotes.
(b) Includes available for sale and other securities.
Level 3 Assets and Liabilities
Assets and liabilities recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheets are measured and classified in a hierarchy for disclosure purposes consisting of three levels based on the observability of inputs available in the marketplace used to measure the fair value.
For additional information see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents the amount of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis and classified as Level 3:
December 31,
Percentage
December 31,
Percentage
(in billions)
of Total
of Total
Assets
$
31.8
5.4
%
$
31.2
5.9
%
Liabilities
15.9
3.1
7.0
1.5
Level 3 fair value measurements are based on valuation techniques that use at least one significant input that is unobservable. We consider unobservable inputs to be those for which market data is not available and that are developed using the best information available about the assumptions that market participants would use when valuing the asset or liability. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement in its entirety requires judgment.
We classify fair value measurements for certain assets and liabilities as Level 3 when they require significant unobservable inputs in their valuation, including contractual terms, prices and rates, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates, default rates, mortality rates, policyholder behavior, and correlations of such inputs.
For a discussion of the valuation methodologies for assets and liabilities measured at fair value, as well as a discussion of transfers of Level 3 assets and liabilities see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes
Recoverability of Net Deferred Tax Asset
The evaluation of the recoverability of our deferred tax asset and the need for a valuation allowance requires us to weigh all positive and negative evidence to reach a conclusion that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The weight given to the evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. The more negative evidence that exists, the more positive evidence is necessary and the more difficult it is to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed.
We consider a number of factors to reliably estimate future taxable income so we can determine the extent of our ability to realize net operating losses, foreign tax credits, realized capital loss and other carryforwards. These factors include forecasts of future income for each of our businesses and actual and planned business and operational changes, both of which include assumptions about future
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 67
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
macroeconomic and AIG specific conditions and events. We subject the forecasts to stresses of key assumptions and evaluate the effect on tax attribute utilization. We also apply stresses to our assumptions about the effectiveness of relevant prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. We have also considered the impact of the Tax Act on our forecasts of taxable income, made certain assumptions related to interpretation of relevant new rules, and incorporated guidance issued by the U.S. tax authority. Our analysis also reflects the effect of slower utilization of our tax credits due to a reduction in the U.S. statutory tax rate as a result of the Tax Act.
Recent events, including the COVID-19 crisis, multiple reductions in target interest rates by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and significant market volatility, continued to impact actual and projected results of our business operations as well as our views on potential effectiveness of certain prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In order to demonstrate the predictability and sufficiency of future taxable income necessary to support the realizability of the net operating losses and foreign tax credit carryforwards, we have considered forecasts of future income for each of our businesses, including assumptions about future macro-economic and AIG-specific conditions and events, and any impact these conditions and events may have on our prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. We also subjected the forecasts to a variety of stresses of key assumptions and evaluated the effect on tax attribute utilization.
The carryforward periods of our foreign tax credit carryforwards range from tax years 2021 through 2023. Carryforward periods for our net operating losses extend from 2028 forward. However, utilization of a portion of our net operating losses is limited under separate return limitation year rules. Based on 2020 events and our analysis of their potential impact on utilization of our tax attributes, we concluded that a valuation allowance should be established on a portion of our foreign tax credit carryforwards that are no longer more-likely-than-not to be realized, all of which was allocated to continuing operations.
For 2020, recent changes in market conditions, including the COVID-19 crisis and interest rate fluctuations, impacted the unrealized tax gains and losses in the U.S. Life Insurance companies’ available for sale securities portfolio, resulting in a deferred tax liability related to net unrealized tax capital gains. As of December 31, 2020, based on all available evidence, we concluded that no valuation allowance is necessary in the U.S. Life Insurance companies’ available for sale securities portfolio.
For 2020, recent changes in market conditions, including interest rate fluctuations, impacted the unrealized tax gains and losses in the U.S. non-life companies’ available for sale securities portfolio, resulting in a deferred tax liability related to net unrealized tax capital gains. As of December 31, 2020, based on all available evidence, we concluded that no valuation allowance is necessary in the U.S. non-life companies’ available for sale securities portfolio.
For a discussion of our framework for assessing the recoverability of our deferred tax asset see Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Uncertain Tax Positions
Our accounting for income taxes, including uncertain tax positions, represents management’s best estimate of various events and transactions, and requires judgment. FASB Interpretation No. 48, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes” now incorporated into Accounting Standards Codification, 740, Income Taxes prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of an income tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The standard also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties and additional disclosures. We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained, based on technical merits, upon examination by the relevant taxing authorities before any part of the benefit can be recognized in the financial statements. A tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized upon settlement.
We classify interest expense and penalties recognized on income taxes as a component of income taxes.
U.S. Income Taxes on Earnings of Certain Foreign Subsidiaries
The U.S. federal income tax laws applicable to determining the amount of income taxes related to differences between the book carrying amounts and tax bases of subsidiaries are complex. Determining the amount also requires significant judgment and reliance on reasonable assumptions and estimates.
U.S. Tax Law Changes
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Act. The Tax Act reduced the statutory rate of U.S. federal corporate income tax to 21 percent and enacted numerous other changes impacting AIG and the insurance industry.
The Tax Act includes provisions for GILTI under which taxes are imposed on the excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of certain foreign subsidiaries and for BEAT under which taxes are imposed on certain base eroding payments to affiliated foreign companies. While the U.S. tax authorities issued formal guidance, including recently issued regulations for BEAT and other provisions of the Tax Act, there are still certain aspects of the Tax Act that remain unclear and subject to substantial uncertainties. Additional guidance is expected in future periods. Such guidance may result in changes to the interpretations and assumptions we made and
68 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Critical Accounting Estimates
actions we may take, which may impact amounts recorded with respect to international provisions of the Tax Act, possibly materially. Consistent with accounting guidance, we treat BEAT as a period tax charge in the period the tax is incurred and have made an accounting policy election to treat GILTI taxes in a similar manner.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act to mitigate the economic impacts of the COVID-19 crisis. The tax provisions of the CARES Act have not had and are currently not expected to have a material impact on AIG’s U.S. federal tax liabilities.
For an additional discussion of the Tax Act see Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Executive Summary
Overview
This overview of the MD&A highlights selected information and may not contain all of the information that is important to current or potential investors in our securities. You should read this Annual Report in its entirety for a more detailed description of events, trends, uncertainties, risks and critical accounting estimates affecting us.
Announcement of Intent to Separate Life and Retirement
On October 26, 2020, AIG announced its intention to separate its Life and Retirement business from AIG. No decisions have yet been made regarding the structure of the initial disposition of up to a 19.9% interest in the Life and Retirement business. In addition, any separation transaction will be subject to the satisfaction of various conditions and approvals, including approval by the AIG Board of Directors, receipt of insurance and other required regulatory approvals, and satisfaction of any applicable requirements of the SEC. No assurance can be given regarding the form that a separation transaction may take or the specific terms or timing thereof, or that a separation will in fact occur.
Sale of Fortitude Holdings
On June 2, 2020, we completed the sale of a majority of the interests in Fortitude Holdings to Carlyle FRL, an investment fund advised by an affiliate of Carlyle, and T&D, a subsidiary of T&D Holdings, Inc., under the terms of a membership interest purchase agreement entered into on November 25, 2019 by and among AIG, Fortitude Holdings, Carlyle FRL, Carlyle, T&D and T&D Holdings, Inc. (the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale). AIG established Fortitude Reinsurance Company Ltd. (Fortitude Re), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Fortitude Holdings, in 2018 in a series of reinsurance transactions related to AIG’s Run-Off portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $30.5 billion of reserves from AIG’s Life and Retirement Run-Off Lines and approximately $4.1 billion of reserves from AIG’s General Insurance Run-Off Lines, related to business written by multiple wholly-owned AIG subsidiaries, had been ceded to Fortitude Re under these reinsurance transactions. As of closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, these reinsurance transactions are no longer considered affiliated transactions and Fortitude Re is the reinsurer of the majority of AIG’s Run-Off operations. As these reinsurance transactions are structured as modified coinsurance and loss portfolio transfers with funds withheld, following the closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, AIG continues to reflect the invested assets, which consist mostly of available for sale securities, supporting Fortitude Re’s obligations, in AIG’s financial statements.
AIG sold a 19.9 percent ownership interest in Fortitude Holdings to TCG, an affiliate of Carlyle, in November 2018 (the 2018 Fortitude Sale). As a result of completion of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, Carlyle FRL purchased from AIG a 51.6 percent ownership interest in Fortitude Holdings and T&D purchased from AIG a 25 percent ownership interest in Fortitude Holdings; AIG retained a 3.5 percent ownership interest in Fortitude Holdings and one seat on its Board of Managers. The $2.2 billion of proceeds received by AIG at closing include (i) the $1.8 billion under the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, which is subject to a post-closing purchase price adjustment pursuant to which AIG will pay Fortitude Re for certain adverse development in property casualty related reserves, based on an agreed methodology, that may occur on or prior to December 31, 2023, up to a maximum payment of $500 million; and (ii) a $383 million purchase price adjustment from Carlyle FRL and T&D, corresponding to their respective portions of a proposed $500 million non-pro rata distribution from Fortitude Holdings that was not received by AIG prior to the closing.
For further discussion on the sale of Fortitude Holdings see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 69
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
Segment Changes
In the fourth quarter of 2020, AIG’s chief operating decision makers modified their view of AIG’s businesses and how they allocate resources and assess performance. The new operating structure no longer includes a Legacy segment. AIG now reports the results of its businesses through three segments - General Insurance, Life and Retirement and Other Operations. See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our segment changes.
Financial Performance Summary
Net Income (Loss) Attributable To AIG Common Shareholders
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Net loss attributable to AIG common shareholders in 2020 compared to Net income attributable to AIG common shareholders in 2019 primarily due to:
 loss on the closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale;
 higher catastrophe losses in General Insurance due to the impact of COVID-19, wildfires, civil unrest and other events and unfavorable impact from COVID-19 mortality in Life and Retirement;
 lower investment returns due primarily to lower income on our available for sale fixed maturity securities due to yield compression and fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected due to a widening of credit spreads in 2020. This compares to the prior year where we experienced higher income on our available for sale fixed maturity securities and higher gains on our fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected due to a decrease in rates and narrowing of credit spreads;
 net realized capital losses in 2020 compared to net realized capital gains in the prior year primarily driven by the loss on the embedded derivative related to the Fortitude Re funds withheld assets; and
 asset impairment charges as a result of Blackboard being placed into run-off.
This decrease was partially offset by:
 lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted due to underwriting discipline, increased use of reinsurance and a change in business mix;
 lower net loss reserve discount charge;
 lower general operating expenses primarily driven by lower employee related expenses as well as a reduction in travel expenses as a result of the COVID-19 crisis; and
 the impact of noncontrolling interest attributed to Fortitude Re results as discussed in Consolidated Results of Operations.
For further discussion see Consolidated Results of Operations.
70 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Net income attributable to AIG common shareholders increased due to:
• improvement in accident year losses in General Insurance as a result of underwriting discipline, increased use of reinsurance and a change in business mix as well as lower catastrophe losses and favorable prior year loss reserve development compared to unfavorable loss reserve development in the prior year in General Insurance;
• higher investment returns in our alternative investments portfolio due to robust equity market returns in 2019, income from an initial public offering of a holding in the private equity portfolio, and an increase in income from fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected. This compares to the prior year where returns were lower as a result of an increase in interest rates and widening credit spreads that occurred, lower hedge fund performance as well as negative performance of our fair value option equity securities portfolio;
• net realized capital gains in 2019 compared to net realized capital losses in the prior year; and
• lower general and other operating expenses as a result of ongoing strategic initiatives to reduce costs.
These increases were partially offset by:
• a net loss reserve discount charge in 2019 compared to a loss reserve discount benefit in 2018; and
• the impact of noncontrolling interest attributed to Fortitude Re results in 2019 as discussed in Consolidated Results of Operations.
For further discussion see Consolidated Results of Operations.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 71
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
Adjusted Pre-Tax Income*
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income decreased primarily due to:
 higher catastrophe losses in General Insurance due to the impact of COVID-19, wildfires, civil unrest and other events and unfavorable impact from COVID-19 mortality in Life and Retirement; and
 lower investment returns due to the sale of Fortitude Re and lower income on our available for sale fixed maturity securities due to yield compression and fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected due to a widening of credit spreads in 2020. This compares to the prior year where we experienced higher income on our available for sale fixed maturity securities and higher gains on our fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected due to a decrease in rates and narrowing of credit spreads.
This decrease was partially offset by:
 lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted due to underwriting discipline, increased use of reinsurance and a change in business mix; and
 lower general operating expenses primarily driven by lower employee related expenses as well as a reduction in travel expenses as a result of the COVID-19 crisis.
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income increased primarily due to:
• lower catastrophe losses and lower accident year losses as a result of underwriting discipline, increased use of reinsurance and a change in business mix and favorable prior year loss reserve development compared to unfavorable loss reserve development in the prior year;
• higher investment returns in our alternative investments portfolio due to robust equity market returns in 2019, income from an initial public offering of a holding in the private equity portfolio, and an increase in income from fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected. In the prior year returns were lower as a result of an increase in interest rates and widening credit spreads that occurred and lower hedge fund performance; and
• lower general operating and other expenses as a result of ongoing strategic initiatives to reduce costs.
For further discussion see Consolidated Results of Operations.
* Non-GAAP measure - for reconciliation of Non-GAAP to GAAP measures see Consolidated Results of Operations.
72 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
General Operating and Other Expenses
(in millions)
General operating and other expenses decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower employee related expenses as well as a reduction in travel expenses as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. General operating and other expenses declined in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to lower employee related expenses and professional fee reductions pertaining to expense reduction initiatives. The declines were partially offset by an increase in expenses caused by the acquisitions of Validus and Glatfelter in the third and fourth quarters of 2018, respectively.
General operating and other expenses for 2020, 2019 and 2018 included approximately $435 million, $218 million and $395 million, respectively, of pre-tax restructuring and other costs which were primarily comprised of employee severance charges and other costs related to organizational simplification, operational efficiency, and business rationalization.
Return on Common Equity
Adjusted Return on Common Equity*
* Non-GAAP measure - for reconciliation of Non-GAAP to GAAP measures see Consolidated Results of Operations.
Book Value Per Common Share
Adjusted Book Value Per Common Share*
* Non-GAAP measure - for reconciliation of Non-GAAP to GAAP measures see Consolidated Results of Operations.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 73
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
AIG’s Outlook - Industry and economic factors
Our business is affected by industry and economic factors such as interest rates, currency exchange rates, credit and equity market conditions, catastrophic claims events, regulation, tax policy, competition, and general economic, market and political conditions. We continued to operate under difficult market conditions in 2020, characterized by factors such as the impact of COVID-19 and the related governmental and societal responses, historically low interest rates, global economic contraction, global trade tensions and Brexit. Brexit has also affected the U.S. dollar/British pound exchange rate and increased the volatility of exchange rates among the Euro, British pound and the Japanese yen (the Major Currencies), which may continue for some time.
On October 26, 2020, AIG announced its intention to separate its Life and Retirement business from AIG. No decisions have yet been made regarding the structure of the initial disposition of up to a 19.9% interest in the Life and Retirement business. In addition, any separation transaction will be subject to the satisfaction of various conditions and approvals, including approval by the AIG Board of Directors, receipt of insurance and other required regulatory approvals, and satisfaction of any applicable requirements of the SEC. No assurance can be given regarding the form that a separation transaction may take or the specific terms or timing thereof, or that a separation will in fact occur.
For additional information please see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Business and Operations - No assurances can be given that the separation of our Life and Retirement business will occur or as to the specific terms or timing thereof. In addition, the separation could cause the emergence or exacerbate the effects of other risks to which AIG is exposed.
Impact of COVID-19
We are continually assessing the impact on our business, operations and investments of COVID-19 and the resulting ongoing and severe economic and societal disruption. These impacts, including a global economic contraction, disruptions in financial markets, increased market volatility and declines in certain equity and other asset prices have had and may continue to have negative effects on our investments, our access to liquidity, our ability to generate new sales and the costs associated with claims. In addition, in response to the crisis, new governmental, legislative and regulatory actions have been taken and continue to be developed that have resulted and could continue to result in additional restrictions and requirements, or court decisions rendered, relating to or otherwise affecting our policies that may have a negative impact on our business, operations and capital.
General Insurance offers numerous products for which we are monitoring claims activity and assessing adverse impact on future new and renewal business in relation to the COVID-19 crisis. General Insurance had $2.4 billion of pre-tax catastrophe losses, net of reinsurance, in 2020, which included $1.1 billion of estimated COVID-19 losses primarily related to Commercial Property, Validus Re, contingency and travel. The remainder of the catastrophe losses were primarily weather-related. We are continually reassessing our exposures in light of unfolding developments in the U.S. and globally and evaluating coverage by our reinsurance arrangements.
In our Life and Retirement business, the most significant impacts relating to COVID-19 have been the impact of interest rate and equity market levels on spread and fee income, deferred acquisition cost amortization and adverse mortality. We are actively monitoring our claims activity and the potential direct and indirect impacts that COVID-19 may have across our portfolio of Life and Retirement businesses.
We have a diverse investment portfolio with material exposures to various forms of credit risk. To date, the far reaching economic impacts of COVID-19 have been largely offset, to date, by intervention taken by governments and monetary authorities and equity market rebound resulting in a minimal impact on the value of the portfolio. At this point in time, uncertainty surrounding the duration and severity of the COVID-19 crisis makes the long-term financial impact difficult to quantify.
For additional information please see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - COVID-19 is adversely affecting, and is expected to continue to adversely affect, our global business, financial condition and results of operations, and its ultimate impact will depend on future developments that are uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope, severity and duration of the crisis, and the governmental, legislative and regulatory actions taken and court decisions rendered in response thereto.
Impact of Changes in the Interest Rate Environment
In 2020, interest rates declined in response to COVID-19 and related impacts with key benchmark rates in the U.S. and in many developed markets close to historic lows and, in some international jurisdictions, negative. The low interest rate environment negatively affects sales of interest rate sensitive products in our industry and negatively impacts the profitability of our existing business as we reinvest cash flows from investments, including increased calls and prepayments of fixed maturity securities and mortgage loans, at rates below the average yield of our existing portfolios. The severe market impacts in 2020 have, however, resulted in an increase in certain credit spreads that partially offset the decrease in benchmark rates. On the other hand, if rates rise, some of these impacts may abate while there may be different impacts, some of which are highlighted below. We actively manage our exposure to the interest rate environment through portfolio selection and asset-liability management, including spread management
74 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
strategies for our investment-oriented products and economic hedging of interest rate risk from guarantee features in our variable and fixed index annuities.
Additionally, sustained low interest rates may result in higher pension expense due to the impact on discounting of projected benefit cash flows.
Annuity Sales and Surrenders
The sustained low interest rate environment has a significant impact on the annuity industry. Low long-term interest rates put pressure on investment returns, which may negatively affect sales of interest rate sensitive products and reduce future profits on certain existing fixed rate products. However, our disciplined rate setting has helped to mitigate some of the pressure on investment spreads. Rapidly rising interest rates could create the potential for increased sales, but may also drive higher surrenders. Fixed annuities have surrender charge periods, generally in the three-to-five year range, which may help mitigate increased early surrenders in a rising rate environment. In addition, older contracts that have higher minimum interest rates and continue to be attractive to the contract holders have driven better than expected persistency in fixed annuities, although the reserves for such contracts have continued to decrease over time in amount and as a percentage of the total annuity portfolio. We closely monitor surrenders of fixed annuities as contracts with lower minimum interest rates come out of the surrender charge period. Low interest rates have also reduced growth in our fixed index annuity products, which provide additional interest crediting, tied to favorable performance in certain equity market indices and the availability of guaranteed living benefits. Changes in interest rates significantly impact the valuation of our liabilities for annuities with guaranteed income features and the value of the related hedging portfolio.
Reinvestment and Spread Management
We actively monitor fixed income markets, including the level of interest rates, credit spreads and the shape of the yield curve. We also frequently review our interest rate assumptions and actively manage the crediting rates used for new and in-force business. Business strategies continue to evolve to maintain profitability of the overall business in light of the interest rate environment. A low interest rate environment puts margin pressure on pricing of new business and on existing products, due to the challenge of investing new money or recurring premiums and deposits, and reinvesting investment portfolio cash flows, in the low interest rate environment. In addition, there is investment risk associated with future premium receipts from certain in-force business. Specifically, the investment of these future premium receipts may be at a yield below that required to meet future policy liabilities.
The contractual provisions for renewal of crediting rates and guaranteed minimum crediting rates included in products may reduce spreads in a sustained low interest rate environment and thus reduce future profitability. Although this interest rate risk is partially mitigated through the asset-liability management process, product design elements and crediting rate strategies, a sustained low interest rate environment may negatively affect future profitability.
For additional information on our investment and asset-liability management strategies see Investments.
For investment-oriented products in our Individual Retirement, Group Retirement, Life Insurance and Institutional Markets businesses, our spread management strategies include disciplined pricing and product design for new business, modifying or limiting the sale of products that do not achieve targeted spreads, using asset-liability management to match assets to liabilities to the extent practicable, and actively managing crediting rates to help mitigate some of the pressure on investment spreads. Renewal crediting rate management is done under contractual provisions that were designed to allow crediting rates to be reset at pre-established intervals in accordance with state and federal laws and subject to minimum crediting rate guarantees. We will continue to adjust crediting rates on in-force business to mitigate the pressure on spreads from declining base yields, but our ability to lower crediting rates may be limited by the competitive environment, contractual minimum crediting rates, and provisions that allow rates to be reset only at pre-established intervals. As and when interest rates begin to rise again, we may need to raise crediting rates on in-force business for competitive and other reasons potentially reducing the impact of investing in a higher interest rate environment.
Of the aggregate fixed account values of our Individual Retirement and Group Retirement annuity products, 67 percent were crediting at the contractual minimum guaranteed interest rate at December 31, 2020. The percentage of fixed account values of our annuity products that are currently crediting at rates above one percent was 59 percent and 61 percent at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. These businesses continue to focus on pricing discipline and strategies to manage the minimum guaranteed interest crediting rates offered on new sales in the context of regulatory requirements and competitive positioning. In the core universal life business in our Life Insurance business, 68 percent of the account values were crediting at the contractual minimum guaranteed interest rate at December 31, 2020.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 75
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
The following table presents fixed annuity and universal life account values of our Individual Retirement, Group Retirement and Life Insurance operating segments by contractual minimum guaranteed interest rate and current crediting rates, excluding balances ceded to Fortitude Re:
Current Crediting Rates
December 31, 2020
1-50 Basis
More than 50
Contractual Minimum Guaranteed
At Contractual
Points Above
Basis Points
Interest Rate
Minimum
Minimum
Above Minimum
(in millions)
Guarantee
Guarantee
Guarantee
Total
Individual Retirement*
<=1%
$
8,388
$
1,953
$
18,898
$
29,239
> 1% - 2%
5,018
1,699
6,753
> 2% - 3%
11,025
11,049
> 3% - 4%
8,622
8,669
> 4% - 5%
-
> 5% - 5.5%
-
Total Individual Retirement
$
33,579
$
2,035
$
20,631
$
56,245
Group Retirement*
1%
$
1,868
$
3,120
$
4,469
$
9,457
> 1% - 2%
5,986
6,848
> 2% - 3%
14,869
-
-
14,869
> 3% - 4%
-
-
> 4% - 5%
7,039
-
-
7,039
> 5% - 5.5%
-
-
Total Group Retirement
$
30,684
$
3,822
$
4,629
$
39,135
Universal life insurance
1%
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
> 1% - 2%
> 2% - 3%
1,201
2,013
> 3% - 4%
1,476
1,861
> 4% - 5%
3,200
-
3,202
> 5% - 5.5%
-
-
Total universal life insurance
$
5,283
$
$
1,761
$
7,812
Total
$
69,546
$
6,625
$
27,021
$
103,192
Percentage of total
%
%
%
%
* Individual Retirement and Group Retirement amounts shown include fixed options within variable annuity products.
General Insurance
The impact of low interest rates on our General Insurance segment is primarily on our long-tail Casualty line of business. We currently expect limited impacts on our existing long-tail Casualty business as the duration of our assets is slightly longer than that of our liabilities. Sustained low interest rates would potentially impact new and renewal business for the long-tail Casualty line as we may not be able to adjust our future pricing consistent with our profitability objectives to fully offset the impact of investing at lower rates. However, we will continue to maintain pricing discipline and risk selection.
In addition, for our General Insurance segment, sustained low interest rates may unfavorably affect the net loss reserve discount for workers’ compensation, and to a lesser extent could favorably impact assumptions about future medical costs, the combined net effect of which could result in higher net loss reserves.
76 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Executive Summary
Standard of Care Developments
In our Life and Retirement business, we and our distributors are subject to laws and regulations regarding the standard of care applicable to sales of our products and the provision of advice to our customers. In recent years, many of these laws and regulations have been revised or reexamined while others have been newly adopted. We continue to closely follow these legislative and regulatory activities. For additional information regarding these legislative and regulatory activities, see Item 1. Business - Regulation - U.S. Regulation - Standard of Care Developments. Changes in standard of care requirements or new standards issued by governmental authorities, such as the DOL, the SEC, the NAIC or state regulators and/or legislators, may affect our businesses, results of operations and financial condition. While we cannot predict the long-term impact of these legislative and regulatory developments on our Life and Retirement businesses, we believe our diverse product offerings and distribution relationships position us to compete effectively in this evolving marketplace.
Impact of Currency Volatility
Currency volatility remains acute. Such volatility affected line item components of income for those businesses with substantial international operations. In particular, growth trends in net premiums written reported in U.S. dollars can differ significantly from those measured in original currencies. The net effect on underwriting results, however, is significantly mitigated, as both revenues and expenses are similarly affected.
These currencies may continue to fluctuate, in either direction, especially as a result of the UK’s exit from the EU, and such fluctuations will affect net premiums written growth trends reported in U.S. dollars, as well as financial statement line item comparability.
General Insurance businesses are transacted in most major foreign currencies. The following table presents the average of the quarterly weighted average exchange rates of the Major Currencies, which have the most significant impact on our businesses:
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
Rate for 1 USD
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Currency:
GBP
0.78
0.79
0.75
(1)
%
%
EUR
0.88
0.90
0.84
(2)
%
%
JPY
107.23
109.31
110.50
(2)
%
(1)
%
Unless otherwise noted, references to the effects of foreign exchange in the General Insurance discussion of results of operations are with respect to movements in the Major Currencies included in the preceding table.
Other Industry Developments
On September 7, 2017, the UK Ministry of Justice announced a proposal to increase the Ogden rate from negative 0.75 percent to between zero and one percent. Following this announcement, on December 20, 2018 the UK Parliament passed the Civil Liability Act 2018 which implements a new framework for determining the Ogden rate and requires the UK Ministry of Justice to start a review of the Ogden rate within 90 days of its commencement and review periodically thereafter. The Ministry of Justice concluded a public call for evidence on January 30, 2019 prior to beginning its first review. On July 15, 2019, the UK Ministry of Justice announced a change in the Ogden rate from negative 0.75 percent to negative 0.25 percent with an effective date of August 5, 2019.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 77
ITEM 7 | Consolidated Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following section provides a comparative discussion of our Consolidated Results of Operations on a reported basis for the three-year period ended December 31, 2020. Factors that relate primarily to a specific business are discussed in more detail within the business segment operations section.
For a discussion of the Critical Accounting Estimates that affect our results of operations see Critical Accounting Estimates.
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations and other key financial metrics:
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
28,523
$
30,561
$
30,614
(7)
%
-
%
Policy fees
2,917
3,015
2,791
(3)
Net investment income
13,631
14,619
13,086
(7)
Net realized capital gains (losses)
(2,238)
(51)
NM
NM
Other income
(2)
(3)
Total revenues
43,736
49,746
47,389
(12)
Benefits, losses and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
24,806
25,402
27,412
(2)
(7)
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
3,622
3,832
3,754
(5)
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
4,211
5,164
5,386
(18)
(4)
General operating and other expenses
8,396
8,537
9,302
(2)
(8)
Interest expense
1,457
1,417
1,309
(Gain) loss on extinguishment of debt
(63)
Net (gain) loss on sale or disposal of divested businesses
8,525
(38)
NM
NM
Total benefits, losses and expenses
51,029
44,459
47,132
(6)
Income (loss) from continuing operations before
income tax expense (benefit)
(7,293)
5,287
NM
NM
Current
(60)
Deferred
(1,677)
(182)
NM
NM
Income tax expense (benefit)
(1,460)
1,166
NM
NM
Income (loss) from continuing operations
(5,833)
4,121
NM
NM
Income (loss) from discontinued operations,
net of income taxes
(42)
(92)
NM
Net income (loss)
(5,829)
4,169
NM
NM
Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(86)
NM
Net income (loss) attributable to AIG
(5,944)
3,348
(6)
NM
NM
Less: Dividends on preferred stock
-
NM
Net income (loss) attributable to AIG common shareholders
$
(5,973)
$
3,326
$
(6)
NM
%
NM
%
Years Ended December 31,
Return on common equity
(9.4)
%
5.3
%
0.0
%
Adjusted return on common equity
4.4
%
8.3
%
2.5
%
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions, except per common share data)
Balance sheet data:
Total assets
$
586,481
$
525,064
Long-term debt and debt of consolidated investment entities
37,534
35,350
Total AIG shareholders’ equity
66,362
65,675
Book value per common share
76.46
74.93
Adjusted book value per common share
57.01
58.89
78 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table presents a reconciliation of Book value per common share to Book value per common share, excluding AOCI adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets and DTA (Adjusted book value per common share), which is a non-GAAP measure. For additional information see Use of Non-GAAP Measures.
At December 31,
(in millions, except per common share data)
Total AIG shareholders' equity
$
66,362
$
65,675
$
56,361
Preferred equity
-
Total AIG common shareholders' equity
65,877
65,190
56,361
Less: Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
13,511
4,982
(1,413)
Add: Cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to
Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets
4,657
-
-
Less: Deferred tax assets
7,907
8,977
10,153
Adjusted common shareholders' equity
$
49,116
$
51,231
$
47,621
Total common shares outstanding
861,558,049
869,999,031
866,609,429
Book value per common share
$
76.46
$
74.93
$
65.04
Adjusted book value per common share
57.01
58.89
54.95
The following table presents a reconciliation of Return on common equity to Adjusted return on common equity, which is a non-GAAP measure. For additional information see Use of Non-GAAP Measures.
Years Ended December 31,
(dollars in millions)
Actual or annualized net income (loss) attributable to AIG
common shareholders
$
(5,973)
$
3,326
$
(6)
Actual or annualized adjusted after-tax income (loss) attributable
to AIG common shareholders
2,201
4,078
1,215
Average AIG common shareholders' equity
$
63,225
$
62,205
$
60,819
Less: Average AOCI
7,529
3,261
1,193
Add: Average cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to
Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets
2,653
-
-
Less: Average DTA
8,437
9,605
10,133
Average adjusted AIG common shareholders' equity
$
49,912
$
49,339
$
49,493
Return on common equity
(9.4)
%
5.3
%
0.0
%
Adjusted return on common equity
4.4
%
8.3
%
2.5
%
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 79
ITEM 7 | Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table presents a reconciliation of pre-tax income/net income (loss) attributable to AIG to adjusted pre-tax income/adjusted after-tax income attributable to AIG:
Years Ended December 31,
Total Tax
Non-
Total Tax
Non-
Total Tax
Non-
(Benefit)
controlling
After
(Benefit)
controlling
After
(Benefit)
controlling
After
(in millions, except per common share data)
Pre-tax
Charge
Interests(e)
Tax
Pre-tax
Charge
Interests(e)
Tax
Pre-tax
Charge
Interests(e)
Tax
Pre-tax income (loss)/net income (loss), including
noncontrolling interests
$
(7,293)
$
(1,460)
$
-
$
(5,829)
$
5,287
$
1,166
$
-
4,169
$
$
$
-
$
Noncontrolling interests
(115)
(115)
(821)
(821)
(67)
(67)
Pre-tax income (loss)/net income (loss) attributable to AIG
$
(7,293)
$
(1,460)
$
(115)
$
(5,944)
$
5,287
$
1,166
$
(821)
$
3,348
$
$
$
(67)
$
(6)
Dividends on preferred stock
-
Net income (loss) attributable to AIG common
shareholders
$
(5,973)
$
3,326
$
(6)
Changes in uncertain tax positions and other tax
adjustments(a)
-
(132)
(30)
-
(48)
-
Deferred income tax valuation allowance
(releases) charges(b)
-
(65)
-
(43)
(21)
-
Changes in fair value of securities used to hedge
guaranteed living benefits
(41)
(9)
-
(32)
(194)
(40)
-
(154)
-
Changes in benefit reserves and DAC, VOBA and
SIA related to net realized capital gains (losses)
(12)
(3)
-
(9)
(56)
(12)
-
(44)
(6)
(3)
-
(3)
Changes in the fair value of equity securities
(200)
(42)
-
(158)
(158)
(33)
-
(125)
-
Loss on extinguishment of debt
-
-
-
Net investment income on Fortitude Re funds
\withheld assets(c)
(1,053)
(221)
-
(832)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Net realized capital (gains) losses on Fortitude Re
funds withheld assets(c)
(463)
(98)
-
(365)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Net realized capital (gains) losses on Fortitude Re
funds withheld embedded derivative(c)
2,645
-
2,090
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Net realized capital (gains) losses(d)
-
(456)
(99)
-
(357)
-
(Income) loss from discontinued operations
(4)
(48)
(Income) loss from divested businesses
8,525
1,610
-
6,915
-
(38)
(8)
-
(30)
Non-operating litigation reserves and settlements
(21)
(4)
-
(17)
(2)
-
-
(2)
-
Favorable prior year development and
related amortization changes ceded under
retroactive reinsurance agreements
(221)
(46)
-
(175)
(267)
(56)
-
(211)
-
Net loss reserve discount (benefit) charge
-
-
(371)
(79)
-
(292)
Integration and transaction costs associated with
acquiring or divesting businesses
-
-
-
Restructuring and other costs
-
-
-
Non-recurring costs related to regulatory or
accounting changes
-
-
-
-
-
-
Noncontrolling interests primarily related to net
realized capital gains (losses) of Fortitude
Holdings' standalone results(e)
Adjusted pre-tax income/Adjusted after-tax
income attributable to AIG common
shareholders
$
3,003
$
$
(53)
$
2,201
$
5,470
$
1,209
$
(161)
$
4,078
$
1,599
$
$
(21)
$
1,215
Weighted average diluted shares outstanding(f)
869.3
889.5
910.1
Income (loss) per common share attributable to
AIG common shareholders (diluted)(f)
$
(6.88)
$
3.74
$
(0.01)
Adjusted after-tax income per common
share attributable to AIG common
shareholders (diluted)(f)
$
2.52
$
4.58
$
1.34
(a) The year ended December 31, 2020 includes the tax audit resolution related to the IRS audit settlement for tax years 1991-2006 and the write-down of net operating loss deferred tax assets in certain foreign jurisdictions, which is offset by valuation allowance release.
(b) The year ended December 31, 2020 includes valuation allowance established against a portion of foreign tax credit carryforwards of AIG’s U.S. federal consolidated income tax group, as well as net valuation allowance release in certain foreign jurisdictions for 2020.
(c) Represents activity subsequent to the deconsolidation of Fortitude Re on June 2, 2020.
(d) Includes all net realized capital gains and losses except earned income (periodic settlements and changes in settlement accruals) on derivative instruments used for non-qualifying (economic) hedging or for asset replication and net realized gains and losses on Fortitude Re funds withheld assets.
(e) Prior to June 2, 2020, noncontrolling interests was primarily due to the 19.9 percent investment in Fortitude Holdings by an affiliate of Carlyle, which occurred in the fourth quarter of 2018. Carlyle was allocated 19.9 percent of Fortitude Holdings’ standalone financial results through the June 2, 2020 closing date of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale. Fortitude Holdings’ results were mostly eliminated in AIG’s consolidated income from continuing operations given that its results arose from intercompany transactions. Noncontrolling interests was calculated based on the standalone financial results of Fortitude Holdings. The most significant component of Fortitude Holdings’ standalone results was the change in fair value of the embedded derivatives which changes with movements in interest rates and credit spreads, and which was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses of Fortitude Holdings. In accordance with AIG's adjusted after-tax income definition, realized capital gains and losses are excluded from noncontrolling interests. Subsequent to the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, AIG owns 3.5 percent of Fortitude Holdings and no longer consolidates Fortitude Holdings in its financial statements as of such date. The minority interest in Fortitude Holdings is carried at cost within AIG’s Other invested assets, which was $100 million as of December 31, 2020.
80 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Consolidated Results of Operations
Fortitude Holdings’ summarized financial information (standalone results), prior to the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale on June 2, 2020, is presented below:
Years Ended December 31,
Fortitude
AIG Noncontrolling
Fortitude
AIG Noncontrolling
(in millions)
Holdings
Interest
Holdings
Interest
Revenues
$
$
$
2,359
$
Expenses
1,890
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss)
(49)
(10)
Taxes (benefit) expense
(10)
(2)
Adjusted after-tax income (loss)
(39)
(8)
Net realized capital gains and other charges
4,216
Taxes on realized capital gains and other charges
Net realized capital gains and other charges - after-tax
3,330
Net income
$
$
$
3,701
$
(f) For the year ended December 31, 2020, because we reported a net loss attributable to AIG common shareholders, all common stock equivalents are anti-dilutive and are therefore excluded from the calculation of diluted shares and diluted per share amounts. However, because we reported adjusted after-tax income attributable to AIG common shareholders, the calculation of adjusted after-tax income per diluted share attributable to AIG common shareholders includes 5,401,597 dilutive shares for the year ended December 31, 2020.
pre-tax income (LOSS) Comparison for 2020 and 2019
We recorded a pre-tax loss in 2020 compared to pre-tax income in 2019 primarily due to:
 an $8.3 billion loss on the closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale;
 higher catastrophe losses in General Insurance due to the impact of COVID-19, wildfires, civil unrest and other events and unfavorable impact from COVID-19 mortality in Life and Retirement;
 lower investment returns due primarily to lower income on our available for sale fixed maturity securities due to yield compression and fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected due to a widening of credit spreads in 2020. This compares to the prior year where we experienced higher income on our available for sale fixed maturity securities and higher gains on our fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected due to a decrease in rates and narrowing of credit spreads;
 net realized capital losses in 2020 compared to net realized gains in the prior year due to:
- fair value loss on embedded derivative related to the Fortitude Re funds withheld assets;
- partially offset by Life and Retirement guaranteed living benefits, net of hedges, reflecting net realized capital gains in 2020 compared to net realized capital losses in 2019, primarily due to changes in the movement in the NPA, which is not hedged as part of our economic hedging program (see Insurance Reserves - Life and Annuity Reserves and DAC - Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits and Hedging Results).
 asset impairment charges as a result of Blackboard being placed into run-off.
This decrease was partially offset by:
 lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted due to underwriting discipline, increased use of reinsurance and a change in business mix;
 lower net loss reserve discount charge; and
 lower general operating expenses primarily driven by lower employee related expenses as well as a reduction in travel expenses as a result of the COVID-19 crisis.
pre-tax income (LOSS) Comparison for 2019 and 2018
Pre-tax income increased in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to:
 improvement in accident year losses in General Insurance as a result of underwriting discipline, increased use of reinsurance and a change in business mix as well as lower catastrophe losses and favorable prior year loss reserve development compared to unfavorable loss reserve development in the prior year in General Insurance;
 higher investment returns in our alternative investments portfolio due to robust equity market returns in 2019, income from an initial public offering of a holding in the private equity portfolio, and an increase in income from fixed maturity securities for which the fair value option was elected. This compares to lower returns in the prior year as a result of an increase in interest rates and widening credit spreads that occurred, lower hedge fund performance, as well as negative performance of our fair value option equity securities portfolio;
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 81
ITEM 7 | Consolidated Results of Operations
 net realized capital gains in 2019 compared to net realized capital losses in the prior year due to gains on the sales of securities and foreign exchange compared to losses on sales of securities and foreign exchange in 2018, as well as lower impairments in 2019 and losses on private equity sales in 2018. Partially offsetting these gains were derivative losses in 2019 compared to gains in 2018; and
 lower general and other operating expenses as a result of ongoing strategic initiatives to reduce costs.
These increases were partially offset by:
 a net loss reserve discount charge in 2019 compared to a loss reserve discount benefit in the prior year.
U.S. Tax law changes
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted Public Law 115-97, known informally as the Tax Act. The Tax Act includes provisions for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) under which taxes are imposed on the excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of certain foreign subsidiaries and for Base Erosion and Anti Abuse Tax (BEAT) under which taxes are imposed on certain base eroding payments to affiliated foreign companies. While the U.S. tax authorities issued formal guidance, including recently issued regulations for BEAT and other provisions of the Tax Act, there are still certain aspects of the Tax Act that remain unclear and subject to substantial uncertainties. Additional guidance is expected in future periods. Such guidance may result in changes to the interpretations and assumptions we made and actions we may take, which may impact amounts recorded with respect to international provisions of the Tax Act, possibly materially. Consistent with accounting guidance, we treat BEAT as a period tax charge in the period the tax is incurred and have made an accounting policy election to treat GILTI taxes in a similar manner.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. enacted the CARES Act to mitigate the economic impacts of the COVID-19 crisis. The tax provisions of the CARES Act have not had and are currently not expected to have a material impact on AIG’s U.S. federal tax liabilities.
Repatriation Assumptions
For 2020, we consider our foreign earnings with respect to certain operations in Canada, South Africa, the Far East, Latin America, Bermuda as well as the European, Asia Pacific and Middle East regions to be indefinitely reinvested. These earnings relate to ongoing operations and have been reinvested in active business operations. Deferred taxes, if necessary, have been provided on earnings of non-U.S. affiliates whose earnings are not indefinitely reinvested.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE ANALYSIS
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective tax rate on loss from continuing operations was 20.0 percent. The effective tax rate on loss from continuing operations differs from the statutory tax rate of 21 percent primarily due to:
 tax charges of:
- $186 million related to tax effects of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale,
- $150 million associated with the establishment of U.S. federal valuation allowance related to certain tax attribute carryforwards,
- $165 million net charge associated with changes in uncertain tax positions primarily driven by the accrual of IRS interest,
- $76 million associated with the effect of foreign operations; and
- $35 million of excess tax charges related to share-based compensation payments recorded through the income statement;
 partially offset by tax benefits of:
- $379 million associated with the remeasurement of tax liabilities, penalties and interest primarily related to the IRS audit settlement for tax years 1991-2006,
- $101 million of reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income to income from continuing operations related to the disposal of available for sale securities, and
- $58 million associated with tax exempt income.
The effect of foreign operations is primarily related to income and losses in our foreign operations taxed at statutory tax rates different than 21 percent and foreign income subject to U.S. taxation.
82 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Consolidated Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was 22.1 percent. The effective tax rate on income from continuing operations differs from the statutory tax rate of 21 percent primarily due to:
 tax charges of:
- $96 million net charge primarily related to the accrual of IRS interest (including interest related to uncertain tax positions),
- $82 million associated with the effect of foreign operations,
- $37 million of tax charges and related interest associated with increases in uncertain tax positions primarily related to open tax issues and audits in state and local jurisdictions,
- $27 million of excess tax charges related to share-based compensation payments recorded through the income statement, and
- $15 million of non-deductible transfer pricing charges;
 partially offset by tax benefits of:
- $113 million of reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income to income from continuing operations related to the disposal of available for sale securities,
- $65 million associated with tax exempt income, and
- $44 million of valuation allowance activity related to certain foreign subsidiaries and state jurisdictions.
The effect of foreign operations is primarily related to income and losses in our foreign operations taxed at statutory tax rates different than 21 percent and foreign income subject to U.S. taxation.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, the effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was 59.9 percent. The effective tax rate on income from continuing operations differs from the statutory tax rate of 21 percent primarily due to:
 tax charges of:
- $83 million net charge primarily related to the accrual of IRS interest (including interest related to uncertain tax positions),
- $62 million measurement period adjustment related to the deemed repatriation tax,
- $44 million associated with the effect of foreign operations,
- $21 million of additional U.S. taxes imposed on income of our foreign subsidiaries under international provisions of the Tax Act,
- $21 million valuation allowance activity related to certain foreign subsidiaries and state jurisdictions, and
- $29 million of non-deductible transfer pricing charges;
 partially offset by tax benefits of:
- $72 million of reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income to income from continuing operations related to the disposal of available for sale securities,
- $37 million of tax exempt income, and
- $13 million of excess tax deductions related to share based compensation payments recorded through the income statement.
The effect of foreign operations is primarily related to income and losses in our foreign operations taxed at statutory tax rates different than 21 percent and foreign income subject to U.S. taxation.
For additional information see Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 83
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations
Business Segment Operations
Our business operations consist of General Insurance, Life and Retirement and Other Operations.
General Insurance consists of two operating segments: North America and International. Life and Retirement consists of four operating segments: Individual Retirement, Group Retirement, Life Insurance and Institutional Markets. Other Operations is primarily comprised of corporate, our institutional asset management business and consolidation and eliminations.
On October 26, 2020, AIG announced its intention to separate its Life and Retirement business from AIG.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, AIG’s chief operating decision makers modified their view of AIG’s businesses and how they allocate resources and assess performance. The new operating structure no longer includes a Legacy segment. AIG now reports the results of its businesses through three segments - General Insurance, Life and Retirement and Other Operations. Prior periods were revised to conform to the current period presentation. See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our segment changes.
The following table summarizes Adjusted pre-tax income (loss) from our business segment operations. See also Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
General Insurance
North America - Underwriting loss
$
(1,301)
$
(365)
$
(2,430)
International - Underwriting income (loss)
(707)
General Insurance Net investment income
2,925
3,444
2,843
General Insurance
$
1,901
$
3,533
$
(294)
Life and Retirement
Individual Retirement
1,938
1,977
1,678
Group Retirement
1,013
Life Insurance
Institutional Markets
Life and Retirement
3,531
3,553
3,343
Other Operations
(1,963)
(1,312)
(1,489)
Consolidation and eliminations
(466)
(304)
Adjusted pre-tax income
$
3,003
$
5,470
$
1,599
84 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
General Insurance
General Insurance is managed by our geographic markets of North America and International. Our global presence is reflected in our multinational capabilities to provide our Commercial Lines and Personal Insurance products within these geographic markets.
PRODUCTS AND DISTRIBUTION
Liability: Products include general liability, environmental, commercial automobile liability, workers’ compensation, excess casualty and crisis management insurance products. Casualty also includes risk- sharing and other customized structured programs for large corporate and multinational customers.
Financial Lines: Products include professional liability insurance for a range of businesses and risks, including directors and officers, mergers and acquisitions, fidelity, employment practices, fiduciary liability, cyber risk, kidnap and ransom, and errors and omissions insurance.
Property: Products include commercial and industrial property insurance products and services that cover exposures to man-made and natural disasters, including business interruption.
Global Specialty: Products include aerospace, political risk, trade credit, portfolio solutions, energy-related property insurance products, marine and crop insurance.
Personal Lines: Products include personal auto and property in selected markets and insurance for high net worth individuals offered through AIG’s Private Client Group (PCG) in the U.S. that covers auto, homeowners, umbrella, yacht, fine art and collections. In addition, we offer extended warranty insurance and services covering electronics, appliances, and HVAC.
Accident & Health: Products include voluntary and sponsor-paid personal accident and supplemental health products for individuals, employees, associations and other organizations, as well as a broad range of travel insurance products and services for leisure and business travelers.
General Insurance products in North America and International markets are distributed through various channels, including captive and independent agents, brokers, affinity partners, airlines and travel agents, and retailers. Our distribution network is aided by our competitive position to write multiple-national and cross-border risks in both Commercial Lines and Personal Insurance.
BUSINESS STRATEGY
Profitable Growth: Deploy capital efficiently to act opportunistically and optimize diversity within the portfolio to grow in profitable lines, geographies and customer segments. Look to inorganic growth opportunities in profitable markets and segments to expand our capabilities and footprint.
Reinsurance Optimization: Strategically partner with reinsurers to reduce exposure to losses arising from frequency of large catastrophic events and the severity from individual risk losses. We strive to optimize our reinsurance program to manage volatility and protect the balance sheet from tail events and unpredictable net losses in support of our profitable growth objectives.
Underwriting Excellence: Empower and increase accountability of the underwriter and continue to integrate underwriting, claims and actuarial to enable better decision making. Focus on enhancing risk selection, driving consistent underwriting best practices and building robust monitoring standards to improve underwriting results.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 85
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
COMPETITION and challenges
Operating in a highly competitive industry, General Insurance competes against several hundred companies, specialty insurance organizations, mutual companies and other underwriting organizations in the U.S. In international markets, we compete for business with the foreign insurance operations of large global insurance groups and local companies in specific market areas and product types. Insurance companies compete through a combination of risk acceptance criteria, product pricing, service and terms and conditions. General Insurance seeks to distinguish itself in the insurance industry primarily based on its well-established brand, global franchise, multinational capabilities, financial and capital strength, innovative products, claims expertise to handle complex claims, expertise in providing specialized coverages and customer service.
We serve our business and individual customers on a global basis - from the largest multinational corporations to local businesses and individuals. Our clients benefit from our substantial underwriting expertise.
Our challenges include:
 long-tail Commercial Lines exposures that create added challenges to pricing and risk management;
 over-capacity in certain lines of business that creates downward market pressure on pricing;
 tort environment volatility in certain jurisdictions and lines of business; and
 volatility in claims arising from natural and man-made catastrophes, including public health events, such as the COVID-19 crisis.
OUTLOOK-INDUSTRY AND ECONOMIC FACTORS
Below is a discussion of the industry and economic factors impacting our operating segments:
The ultimate impact of COVID-19 continues to evolve and will depend upon the scope, severity and duration of the crisis as well as the actions taken by governments, legislative bodies or regulators and other third parties in response, all of which are subject to continuing uncertainty. The results for 2020 include COVID-19 related impacts to both our premium volume and our estimates for catastrophe losses. COVID-19 has driven a material reduction in our revenues in 2020, particularly within the Travel line of business (given the travel restrictions imposed as a result of COVID-19 and the global slowdown) and other lines to a lesser degree. The recessionary impact of COVID-19 has and continues to adversely affect our clients, particularly in certain industry segments where demand and exposures dropped significantly and is likely to remain challenging for a period of time, even after the COVID-19 crisis subsides. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business will depend upon the speed at which government mandated safety precautions can be lifted (and the impact of any future shutdowns), the distribution and effectiveness of vaccinations, and the manner and speed with which economic activity rebounds. Although we have seen some benefit in claims experience in lines where economic and social activities have been suppressed (e.g. Personal Auto), this continues to be partly offset by requirements for premium refunds in those lines. The regulatory approach to the crisis and impact on the insurance industry is still developing and its ultimate impact remains uncertain.
General Insurance - North America
In recent periods Commercial Lines have seen growing market support for rate increases in challenged businesses where major carriers are reducing risk appetite and exhibiting increasing market discipline. As a result, multiple markets are now experiencing rate increases. We are seeing rate increases across U.S. Financial Lines and Liability lines of business (outside of Workers’ Compensation), with a common driver being higher industry-wide claims severity trends, as well as within our Property portfolio. We continue to achieve positive rate increases across a number of lines and classes of business as a result of our disciplined underwriting strategy and focus on risk selection. Despite the higher rates, our retention of business remains in line with recent years and in certain instances has increased. These retention rates are often coupled with an exposure limit management strategy to reduce volatility within the portfolio. We continue to proactively identify businesses to grow in light of evolving market conditions using a portfolio management approach.
Personal Insurance growth prospects are supported by the need for full life cycle products and coverage, increases in personal wealth accumulation, and awareness of insurance protection and risk management. We compete in the high net worth market, accident and health insurance, travel insurance, and warranty services and will continue to expand our innovative products and services to distribution partners and clients.
86 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
General Insurance - International
We believe our global presence provides Commercial Lines and Personal Insurance a distinct competitive advantage, as the demand for multinational cross-border coverage and services increases due to the growing number of international customers, while giving us the ability to respond quickly to local market conditions and build client relationships.
The Commercial Lines business is showing signs of change, with capacity reducing and the tightening of terms and conditions. We are continuing to grow our most profitable lines of business and diversify our portfolio across all regions by expanding into new product lines (e.g., cyber), new client types (e.g., middle market) and new distribution channels (e.g., digital and national brokers) while remaining a market leader in key developed and developing markets. Overall, Commercial Lines are showing positive rate increases, particularly in our Global Specialty, Financial Lines and Property portfolio and across international markets where market events or withdrawal of capability and capacity have favorably impacted pricing. We are maintaining our underwriting discipline, reducing gross and net limits, increasing use of reinsurance to reduce volatility, as well as continuing our risk selection strategy to improve profitability.
Personal Insurance focuses on individual customers, as well as group and corporate clients. Although market competition within Personal Insurance has increased, we continue to benefit from the underwriting quality, portfolio diversity, and generally low volatility of the short-tailed risk in these business lines, although some product classes are exposed to catastrophe losses.
General insurance RESULTS
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Underwriting results:
Net premiums written
$
22,959
$
25,092
$
26,407
(9)
%
(5)
%
Decrease in unearned premiums(a)
1,346
1,098
(48)
Net premiums earned
23,662
26,438
27,505
(11)
(4)
Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred(b)
16,803
17,246
20,824
(3)
(17)
Acquisition expenses:
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
3,538
4,482
4,596
(21)
(2)
Other acquisition expenses
1,283
1,292
1,385
(1)
(7)
Total acquisition expenses
4,821
5,774
5,981
(17)
(3)
General operating expenses
3,062
3,329
3,837
(8)
(13)
Underwriting income (loss)
(1,024)
(3,137)
NM
NM
Net investment income
2,925
3,444
2,843
(15)
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss)
$
1,901
$
3,533
$
(294)
(46)
%
NM
%
Loss ratio(b)
71.0
65.2
75.7
5.8
(10.5)
Acquisition ratio
20.4
21.8
21.7
(1.4)
0.1
General operating expense ratio
12.9
12.6
14.0
0.3
(1.4)
Expense ratio
33.3
34.4
35.7
(1.1)
(1.3)
Combined ratio(b)
104.3
99.6
111.4
4.7
(11.8)
Adjustments for accident year loss ratio, as adjusted
and accident year combined ratio, as adjusted:
Catastrophe losses and reinstatement premiums
(10.3)
(4.8)
(10.5)
(5.5)
5.7
Prior year development, net of (additional) return
premium on loss sensitive business
0.1
1.1
(1.5)
(1.0)
2.6
Adjustment for ceded premiums under reinsurance
contracts related to prior accident years and other
-
0.1
0.3
NM
(0.2)
Accident year loss ratio, as adjusted
60.8
61.6
64.0
(0.8)
(2.4)
Accident year combined ratio, as adjusted
94.1
96.0
99.7
(1.9)
(3.7)
(a) In 2018, the underwriting loss included an additional $115 million of net premium earned for multi-year policies related to earlier accident years.
(b) Consistent with our definition of APTI, excludes net loss reserve discount and the portion of favorable or unfavorable prior year reserve development for which we have ceded the risk under retroactive reinsurance agreements and related changes in amortization of the deferred gain.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 87
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
The following table presents General Insurance net premiums written by operating segment, showing change on both reported and constant dollar basis:
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change in
Percentage Change in
U.S. dollars
Original Currency
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
North America
$
9,784
$
11,490
$
10,994
(15)
%
%
(15)
%
%
International(a)
13,175
13,602
15,413
(3)
(12)
(3)
(10)
Total net premiums written
$
22,959
$
25,092
$
26,407
(9)
%
(5)
%
(9)
%
(4)
%
(a)As a result of the merger of AIU Insurance Company, Ltd. (AIUI Japan) and Fuji Fire and Marine Insurance Company (Fuji), Fuji’s fiscal reporting period was conformed to that of AIUI Japan (Japan Merger Impact). Therefore, 2018 included approximately $300 million for two additional months of Net premiums written.
The following tables present General Insurance accident year catastrophes by geography(a) and number of events:
Catastrophes(b)
# of
North
(in millions)
Events
America
International
Total
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Flooding and rainstorms
$
$
$
Windstorms and hailstorms
Wildfires
N/A
(c)
Earthquakes
COVID-19
N/A
(d)
1,093
Civil unrest
Reinstatement premiums
(11)
Total catastrophe-related charges
$
1,726
$
$
2,442
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Flooding and rainstorms
$
$
$
Windstorms and hailstorms
1,133
Wildfire
Civil unrest
-
Reinstatement premiums
(14)
Total catastrophe-related charges
$
$
$
1,278
Year Ended December 31, 2018
Flooding and rainstorms
$
$
$
Windstorms and hailstorms
1,135
1,914
Wildfire
Earthquakes
Volcanic eruptions
Reinstatement premiums
-
(32)
(2)
(34)
Total catastrophe-related charges
$
1,863
$
1,022
$
2,885
(a) Geography: North America primarily includes insurance businesses in the United States, Canada, Bermuda, and our global reinsurance business, AIG Re. International includes regional insurance businesses in Japan, the United Kingdom, Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA region), Asia Pacific, Latin America and Caribbean, and China. International also includes the results of Talbot Holdings, Ltd. as well as AIG’s global specialty business.
(b) Natural catastrophe losses are generally weather or seismic events having a net impact on AIG in excess of $10 million each and man-made catastrophe losses, such as terrorism and civil disorders that exceed the $10 million threshold.
(c) As the losses related to the wildfires continue to evolve given their geographical dispersion, the number of events is yet to be determined.
(d) As COVID-19 continues to evolve and affects many lines of business, the number of events is yet to be determined.
88 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
North America Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Underwriting results:
Net premiums written
$
9,784
$
11,490
$
10,994
(15)
%
%
Decrease in unearned premiums(a)
(20)
(21)
Net premiums earned
10,302
12,136
11,815
(15)
Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred(b)
8,720
8,867
10,641
(2)
(17)
Acquisition expenses:
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
1,365
1,923
1,744
(29)
Other acquisition expenses
(25)
(7)
Total acquisition expenses
1,724
2,401
2,256
(28)
General operating expenses
1,159
1,233
1,348
(6)
(9)
Underwriting loss
$
(1,301)
$
(365)
$
(2,430)
(256)
%
%
Loss ratio(b)
84.6
73.1
90.1
11.5
(17.0)
Acquisition ratio
16.7
19.8
19.1
(3.1)
0.7
General operating expense ratio
11.3
10.2
11.4
1.1
(1.2)
Expense ratio
28.0
30.0
30.5
(2.0)
(0.5)
Combined ratio(b)
112.6
103.1
120.6
9.5
(17.5)
Adjustments for accident year loss ratio, as adjusted
and accident year combined ratio, as adjusted:
Catastrophe losses and reinstatement premiums
(16.7)
(6.8)
(15.9)
(9.9)
9.1
Prior year development, net of (additional) return
premium on loss sensitive business
1.2
1.0
(4.4)
0.2
5.4
Adjustment for ceded premiums under reinsurance
contracts related to prior accident years and other
(0.1)
0.2
0.8
(0.3)
(0.6)
Accident year loss ratio, as adjusted
69.0
67.5
70.6
1.5
(3.1)
Accident year combined ratio, as adjusted
97.0
97.5
101.1
(0.5)
(3.6)
(a) In 2018, the underwriting loss included an additional $115 million of net premium earned for multi-year policies related to earlier accident years.
(b) Consistent with our definition of APTI, excludes net loss reserve discount and the portion of favorable or unfavorable prior year reserve development for which we have ceded the risk under retroactive reinsurance agreements and related changes in amortization of the deferred gain.
Business and Financial Highlights
The North America General Insurance business continues to make progress in strengthening our underwriting, actively managing our portfolio to improve business mix and articulating our revised risk appetite to the marketplace. We are leading the industry across multiple lines in terms of driving rate momentum while simultaneously increasing the level of business retained in targeted lines. As we see increasing disruption in the marketplace, we are well placed to capitalize on opportunities, including within our excess and surplus business which is seeing an increase in submission flow and achieving significant rate improvement.
During the second quarter of 2020, AIG entered into a series of quota share reinsurance agreements, including with Lloyd’s Syndicate 2019, a Lloyd’s syndicate managed by Talbot, to reinsure risks related to PCG. These transactions further AIG’s continued optimization of its General Insurance portfolio, create additional products for clients and diversify AIG’s capital base.
The underwriting loss increased in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on catastrophe losses and a higher accident year loss ratio, which resulted from a combination of an adverse effect from changes in business mix partially offset by a benefit from rate increases in Commercial Lines, partially offset by related lower acquisition expenses, higher favorable prior year loss reserve development and lower general operating expenses due to ongoing expense discipline.
Net premiums written decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the new quota share reinsurance agreements related to PCG, which includes cessions to the newly launched Syndicate 2019, and the impact of COVID-19 most notably in Travel, partially offset by business growth and strong rate driven increases across Commercial Lines.
For a discussion of Reinsurance Activities see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 89
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
North America Underwriting Loss
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Underwriting loss increased primarily due to:
• higher catastrophe losses primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, windstorms and hailstorms, wildfires, civil unrest and other events; and
• higher accident year loss ratio, which is a combination of an adverse effect from changes in business mix partially offset by a benefit from rate increases in Commercial Lines and underwriting actions.
These increases were partially offset by:
• lower acquisition expenses primarily driven by changes in business mix including the impact of COVID-19 as well as new quota share reinsurance agreements;
• higher favorable prior year loss reserve development; and
• lower general operating expense reflecting ongoing expense discipline.
North America Underwriting Loss
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Underwriting loss decreased primarily due to:
• significantly lower catastrophe losses;
• favorable prior year loss reserve development in 2019 compared to unfavorable loss reserve development in 2018;
• the lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted primarily driven by a change in business mix including the Validus and Glatfelter acquisitions, improved new business and renewal terms, reduced net severity of loss events and changes in 2019 reinsurance programs which have reduced volatility; and
• lower general operating expenses as a result of ongoing expense reduction initiatives.
90 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
North America Net Premiums Written
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Net premiums written decreased primarily due to:
• higher ceded premiums due to the new series of quota share reinsurance agreements to reinsurance risks related to PCG;
• the impact of COVID-19 most notably in Travel; and
• underwriting actions taken to improve the portfolio.
These decreases were partially offset by:
• growth in assumed reinsurance business, as well as strong rate driven increases and retention across Commercial Lines.
North America Net Premiums Written
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Net premiums written increased primarily due to the inclusion of the Validus and Glatfelter acquisitions as well as growth within the Validus business.
This increase was partially offset by:
• lower production primarily due to underwriting actions taken to strengthen our portfolio and to maintain pricing discipline; and
• higher ceded premiums due to the changes in 2019 reinsurance programs.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 91
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
North America Combined Ratios
2020 and 2019 Comparison
The increase in the combined ratio reflected an increase in the loss ratio partially offset by a decrease in the expense ratio.
The increase in the loss ratio reflected:
• higher catastrophe losses primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, wildfires, civil unrest and other events; and
• higher accident year loss ratio, as adjusted, driven by changes in North America personal insurance business mix, partially offset by a benefit from rate increases in Commercial Lines and underwriting actions.
The decrease in the expense ratio reflected:
• lower acquisition ratio primarily driven by changes in business mix including the impact of COVID-19 as well as new quota share reinsurance agreements; and
• higher general expense ratio primarily due to lower premiums partially offset by ongoing expense discipline.
North America Combined Ratios
2019 and 2018 Comparison
The decrease in the combined ratio reflected a decrease in both the loss ratio and the expense ratio.
The decrease in the loss ratio reflected:
• significantly lower catastrophe losses;
• favorable prior year loss reserve development compared to unfavorable loss reserve development in the prior year; and
• lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted, primarily driven by a change in business mix including the Validus and Glatfelter acquisitions, improved new business and renewal terms, reduced net severity of loss events and changes in 2019 reinsurance programs which have reduced volatility.
The decrease in the expense ratio reflected lower general operating expense ratio driven by ongoing expense reduction initiatives.
92 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
International Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Underwriting results:
Net premiums written
$
13,175
$
13,602
$
15,413
(3)
%
(12)
%
Decrease in unearned premiums
(74)
Net premiums earned
13,360
14,302
15,690
(7)
(9)
Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred
8,083
8,379
10,183
(4)
(18)
Acquisition expenses:
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
2,173
2,559
2,852
(15)
(10)
Other acquisition expenses
(7)
Total acquisition expenses
3,097
3,373
3,725
(8)
(9)
General operating expenses
1,903
2,096
2,489
(9)
(16)
Underwriting income (loss)
$
$
$
(707)
(39)
%
NM
%
Loss ratio
60.5
58.6
64.9
1.9
(6.3)
Acquisition ratio
23.2
23.6
23.7
(0.4)
(0.1)
General operating expense ratio
14.2
14.7
15.9
(0.5)
(1.2)
Expense ratio
37.4
38.3
39.6
(0.9)
(1.3)
Combined ratio
97.9
96.9
104.5
1.0
(7.6)
Adjustments for accident year loss ratio, as adjusted
and accident year combined ratio, as adjusted:
Catastrophe losses and reinstatement premiums
(5.3)
(3.2)
(6.5)
(2.1)
3.3
Prior year development, net of (additional) return
premium on loss sensitive business
(0.7)
1.1
0.6
(1.8)
0.5
Adjustment for ceded premiums under reinsurance
contracts related to prior accident years
-
0.1
-
NM
0.1
Accident year loss ratio, as adjusted
54.5
56.6
59.0
(2.1)
(2.4)
Accident year combined ratio, as adjusted
91.9
94.9
98.6
(3.0)
(3.7)
(a) As a result of the Japan Merger Impact, 2018 includes two additional months of operating earnings increasing Net premiums written, Net premiums earned, Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred, and Underwriting income (loss) by approximately $300 million, $300 million, $200 million and $15 million, respectively.
Business and Financial Highlights
The International General Insurance business is focused on underwriting profits and improved efficiency, further improving underwriting margins, and growing profitably in businesses and geographies that support our growth strategy.
Underwriting income decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on catastrophe losses, unfavorable prior year loss reserve development principally in Financial Lines as compared to favorable prior year loss reserve development in Global Specialty and Personal Auto in the prior year, partially offset by lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted and lower general operating expenses.
Net premiums written, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, higher ceded premiums due to changes in the 2020 reinsurance program and lower premiums from run-off business partially offset by business growth and rate increases in Commercial Lines.
For a discussion of Reinsurance Activities see Enterprise Risk Management.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 93
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
International Underwriting Income
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Underwriting income decreased primarily due to:
• impact of COVID-19 on catastrophe losses; and
• unfavorable prior year loss reserve development principally in Financial Lines compared to favorable prior year loss reserve development in Global Specialty and Personal Auto in the prior year.
These increases were partially offset by:
• lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted primarily driven by strong premium rate increases in Commercial Lines, benefits from underwriting actions and better risk selection; and
• lower general operating expenses reflecting ongoing expense discipline.
International Underwriting Income (Loss)
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Underwriting income in 2019 compared to underwriting loss in 2018 primarily reflected:
• lower catastrophe losses;
• lower general operating expense driven by the Japan Merger Impact in 2018 and ongoing expense reduction initiatives;
• lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted primarily driven by reduced exposure to severe loss events;
• inclusion of the Validus acquisition; and
• higher favorable prior year loss reserve development.
94 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
International Net Premiums Written
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Net premiums written, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, decreased due to:
• the impact of COVID-19, most notably in Travel as well as certain other Personal and Commercial Lines;
• higher ceded premiums due to changes in 2020 reinsurance program; and
• lower premiums from portfolios in run-off.
These decreases were partially offset by:
• rate increases across most Commercial Lines, in particular Financial Lines and Global Specialty; and
• growth in Warranty.
International Net Premiums Written
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Net premiums written, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, decreased due to:
• lower Accident & Health business in Asia Pacific;
• lower production primarily due to underwriting actions taken to strengthen our portfolio and to maintain pricing discipline, partially offset by profitable business growth across lines and geographies;
• the Japan Merger Impact in 2018; and
• higher ceded premiums due to changes in the 2019 reinsurance program.
These decreases were partially offset by:
• inclusion of the Validus acquisition.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 95
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | General Insurance
International Combined Ratios
2020 and 2019 Comparison
The increase in the combined ratio reflected an increase in the loss ratio partially offset by a decrease in the expense ratio.
The increase in the loss ratio reflected:
• the impact of COVID-19 on catastrophe losses; and
• unfavorable prior year loss reserve development principally in Financial Lines compared to favorable prior year loss reserve development in Global Specialty and Personal Auto in the prior year.
These increases were partially offset by lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted primarily driven by strong premium rate increases in Commercial Lines, benefits from underwriting actions and better risk selection.
The decrease in the expense ratio reflected lower general operating expenses due to ongoing expense discipline and a lower acquisition ratio primarily driven by change in business mix.
International Combined Ratios
2019 and 2018 Comparison
The decrease in the combined ratio reflected a decrease in both the loss ratio and the expense ratio.
This decrease in the loss ratio was primarily driven by:
• significantly lower catastrophe losses; and
• lower accident year loss ratio, as adjusted primarily driven by reduced exposure to severe loss events.
This decrease in the expense ratio reflected a lower general operating expense ratio driven by ongoing expense reduction initiatives.
96 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
,
Life and Retirement
Life and Retirement consists of four operating segments: Individual Retirement, Group Retirement, Life Insurance and Institutional Markets. We offer a broad portfolio of products in the U.S. through a multichannel distribution network and life and health products in the UK and Ireland.
PRODUCTS AND DISTRIBUTION
Variable Annuities: Products include variable annuities that offer a combination of growth potential, death benefit features and income protection features. Variable annuities are distributed primarily through banks, wirehouses, and regional and independent broker-dealers.
Index Annuities: Products include fixed index annuities that provide growth potential based in part on the performance of a market index as well as optional living guaranteed features that provide lifetime income protection. Fixed index annuities are distributed primarily through banks, broker-dealers, independent marketing organizations and independent insurance agents.
Fixed Annuities: Products include single premium fixed annuities, immediate annuities and deferred income annuities. Certain fixed deferred annuity products offer optional income protection features. The fixed annuities product line maintains an industry-leading position in the U.S. bank distribution channel by designing products collaboratively with banks and offering an efficient and flexible administration platform.
Retail Mutual Funds: Includes our mutual fund offerings and related administration and servicing operations. Retail Mutual Funds are distributed primarily through broker-dealers.
Group Retirement: Products and services consist of group mutual funds, group annuities, individual annuity and investment products, financial planning and advisory services, and plan administrative and compliance services.
In March 2019, the products and services marketed by The Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company were rebranded under the AIG Retirement Services name to allow the business to fully leverage the strength and scale of the AIG brand. Legal entity names, however, remain unchanged: The Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company and its subsidiaries, VALIC Financial Advisors, Inc. and VALIC Retirement Services Company.
AIG Retirement Services career financial advisors and independent financial advisors provide retirement plan participants with enrollment support and comprehensive financial planning services.
Life Insurance: In the U.S., products primarily include term life and universal life insurance distributed through independent marketing organizations, independent insurance agents, financial advisors and direct marketing. International operations include the distribution of life and health products in the UK and Ireland.
Institutional Markets: Products primarily include stable value wrap products, structured settlement and pension risk transfer annuities (direct and assumed reinsurance), corporate- and bank-owned life insurance, high net worth products and guaranteed investment contracts (GICs). Institutional Markets products are primarily distributed through specialized marketing and consulting firms and structured settlement brokers.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 97
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) Funding Agreements are issued through our Individual Retirement, Group Retirement and Institutional Markets operating segments. Funding agreements are issued by our U.S. Life and Retirement companies to FHLBs in their respective districts at fixed or floating rates over specified periods, which can be prepaid at our discretion. Proceeds are generally invested in fixed income securities and other suitable investments to generate spread income. These investment contracts do not have mortality or morbidity risk and are similar to GICs.
BUSINESS STRATEGY
Deliver client-centric solutions through our unique franchise by bringing together a broad portfolio of life insurance, retirement and institutional products offered through an extensive, multichannel distribution network. Life and Retirement focuses on ease of doing business, offering valuable solutions, and expanding and deepening its distribution relationships across multiple channels.
Position market leading businesses to serve growing needs by continually enhancing product solutions, service delivery and digital capabilities while using data and analytics in an innovative manner to improve customer experience.
Enhance Operational Effectiveness by simplifying processes and operating environments to increase competitiveness, improve service and product capabilities and facilitate delivery of our target customer experience. We continue to invest in technology to improve operating efficiency and ease of doing business for our distribution partners and customers. We believe that simplifying our operating models will enhance productivity and support further profitable growth.
Manage our Balance Sheet through a rigorous approach to our products and portfolio. We match our product design and high quality investments with our asset and liability exposures to support our cash and liquidity needs under various operating scenarios.
Deliver Value Creation and Manage Capital by striving to deliver solid earnings and returns on capital through disciplined pricing, sustainable underwriting improvements, expense efficiency, and diversification of risk, while optimizing capital allocation and efficiency within insurance entities to enhance return on common equity.
98 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
COMPETITION and challenges
Life and Retirement operates in the highly competitive insurance and financial services industry in the U.S. and select international markets, competing against various financial services companies, including banks and other life insurance and mutual fund companies. Competition is primarily based on product pricing and design, distribution, financial strength, customer service and ease of doing business.
Our business remains competitive due to its long-standing market leading positions, innovative products, distribution relationships across multiple channels, customer-focused service and strong financial ratings.
Our primary challenges include:
 a sustained low interest rate environment, which makes it difficult to profitably price new products and puts margin pressure on existing business due to lower reinvestment yields;
 increased competition in our primary markets, including aggressive pricing of annuities by private equity-backed annuity writers, increased competition and consolidation of employer groups in the group retirement planning market, and competitors with different profitability targets in the pension risk transfer space as well as other product lines;
 increasingly complex new and proposed regulatory requirements, which have affected industry growth and costs;
 upgrading our technology and underwriting processes while managing general operating expenses; and
 decreased premiums and deposits and adverse mortality experience due to COVID-19.
OUTLOOK-INDUSTRY AND ECONOMIC FACTORS
Below is a discussion of the industry and economic factors impacting our specific operating segments:
The impact of COVID-19 is evolving and will ultimately depend upon the scope, severity and duration of the crisis as well as the actions taken by governments, legislative bodies or regulators and other third parties in response, as well as the distribution and effectiveness of vaccinations, all of which continue to be subject to significant uncertainty at this time. The results for 2020 include COVID-19 related impacts on a number of areas including but not limited to DAC/SIA amortization, mortality, reserves and investment returns. During 2020, we experienced significant decreases on our premiums and deposits primarily due to distribution channel disruptions related to COVID-19 and low interest rates. The regulatory approach to the crisis and impact on the insurance industry is continuing to evolve and its ultimate impact remains uncertain.
On October 26, 2020, AIG announced its intention to separate its Life and Retirement business from AIG. No decisions have yet been made regarding the structure of the initial disposition of up to a 19.9% interest in the Life and Retirement business. In addition, any separation transaction will be subject to the satisfaction of various conditions and approvals, including approval by the AIG Board of Directors, receipt of insurance and other required regulatory approvals, and satisfaction of any applicable requirements of the SEC. No assurance can be given regarding the form that a separation transaction may take or the specific terms or timing thereof, or that a separation will in fact occur.
For additional information please see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Business and Operations - No assurances can be given that the separation of our Life and Retirement business will occur or as to the specific terms or timing thereof. In addition, the separation could cause the emergence or exacerbate the effects of other risks to which AIG is exposed.
Individual Retirement
Increasing life expectancy and reduced expectations for traditional retirement income from defined benefit programs and fixed income securities are leading Americans to seek additional financial security as they approach retirement. The strong demand for individual index and fixed deferred annuities with guaranteed income features has attracted increased competition in this product space. In response to the continued low interest rate environment, which has added pressure to profit margins, we have developed guaranteed income benefits for variable, fixed index, and fixed deferred annuities with margins that are less sensitive to the level of interest rates.
Changes in the capital markets (interest rate environment, equity markets, volatility) can have a significant impact on sales, surrender rates, investment returns, guaranteed income features, and net investment spreads in the annuity industry.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 99
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Group Retirement
Group Retirement competes in the defined contribution market under the AIG Retirement Services brand. AIG Retirement Services is a leading retirement plan provider in the U.S. for K-12 schools and school districts, higher education, healthcare, government and other not-for-profit institutions. The defined contribution market is a highly efficient and competitive market that requires support for both plan sponsors and individual participants. To meet this challenge, AIG Retirement Services is investing in a client-focused technology platform to support improved compliance and self-service functionality. AIG Retirement Services’ model pairs self-service tools with its career financial advisors who provide individual plan participants with enrollment support and comprehensive financial planning services.
Changes in the interest rate and equity market environment can have a significant impact on investment returns, fee income, advisory and other income, guaranteed income features, and net investment spreads, and a moderate impact on sales and surrender rates.
Life Insurance
Consumers have a significant need for life insurance, whether it is used for income replacement for their surviving family, estate planning or wealth transfer. Additionally, consumers use life insurance to provide living benefits in case of chronic, critical or terminal illnesses, and to supplement retirement income.
In response to consumer needs and a sustained low interest rate environment, our Life Insurance product portfolio will continue to promote products with lower long-duration interest rate risk and mitigate exposure to products that have long-duration interest rate risk through sales levels and hedging strategies.
As life insurance ownership remains at historical lows in the U.S. and the UK, efforts to expand the reach and increase the affordability of life insurance are critical. The industry is investing in consumer-centric efforts to reduce traditional barriers to securing life protection by simplifying the sales and service experience. Digitally enabled processes and tools provide a fast, friendly and simple path to life insurance protection.
Institutional Markets
Institutional Markets serves a variety of needs for corporate clients. Demand is driven by a number of factors including the macroeconomic and regulatory environment. We expect to see continued growth in the pension risk transfer market (direct and assumed reinsurance) as corporate plan sponsors look to transfer asset or liability, longevity, administrative and operational risks associated with their defined benefit plans.
Changes in the interest rate environment can have a significant impact on investment returns and net investment spreads, as well as reduce the tax efficiency associated with institutional life insurance products, dampening organic growth opportunities.
For additional discussion of the impact of market interest rate movement on our Life and Retirement business see Executive Summary - AIG’s Outlook - Industry and Economic Factors - Impact of Changes in the Interest Rate Environment.
life and retirement RESULTS
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
4,624
$
3,789
$
2,788
%
%
Policy fees
2,874
2,923
2,701
(2)
Net investment income
8,881
8,733
8,238
Advisory fee and other income
(2)
(4)
Total adjusted revenues
17,275
16,356
14,680
Benefits, losses and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
6,884
5,824
4,471
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
3,551
3,603
3,522
(1)
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
(6)
(4)
General operating and other expenses*
2,522
2,542
2,478
(1)
Interest expense
(4)
(2)
Total benefits, losses and expenses
13,744
12,803
11,337
Adjusted pre-tax income
$
3,531
$
3,553
$
3,343
(1)
%
%
* Includes general operating expenses, non-deferrable commissions, other acquisition expenses, advisory fee expenses and other expenses.
100 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
For information on the impact of actuarial assumptions on our Life and Retirement results, see Insurance Reserves - Life and Annuity Reserves and DAC - Update of Actuarial Assumptions by Business Segment.
Our insurance companies generate significant revenues from investment activities. As a result, the operating segments in Life and Retirement are subject to variances in net investment income on the asset portfolios that support insurance liabilities and surplus.
For additional information on our investment strategy, asset-liability management process and invested asset composition see Investments.
Individual Retirement Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
$
$
%
%
Policy fees
Net investment income
4,131
4,122
3,821
-
Advisory fee and other income
(6)
(7)
Benefits and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
(3)
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
1,751
1,726
1,677
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
(29)
Non deferrable insurance commissions
(2)
Advisory fee expenses
(6)
(8)
General operating expenses
(9)
Interest expense
(6)
(6)
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss)
$
1,938
$
1,977
$
1,678
(2)
%
%
Fixed annuities base net investment spread:
Base yield*
4.16
%
4.54
%
4.60
%
(38)
bps
(6)
bps
Cost of funds
2.63
2.68
2.65
(5)
Fixed annuities base net investment spread
1.53
%
1.86
%
1.95
%
(33)
bps
(9)
bps
* Includes returns from base portfolio including accretion and income (loss) from certain other invested assets.
Business and Financial Highlights
The market environment continues to reflect uncertainties in the annuity business resulting from a sustained low interest rate environment as well as the COVID-19 crisis. Interest rates declined in 2020 and remain at or near historical lows. Premiums and deposits decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year. Net flows decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to lower sales in fixed and index annuities and lower Retail Mutual Fund sales, partially offset by lower surrenders and withdrawals. Excluding prior year deposits from FHLB funding agreements, premiums and deposits increased in 2019 compared to 2018. Net flows in 2019 remained negative but improved compared to 2018 primarily due to higher deposits driven by increased fixed and index annuities sales, offset by lower sales for the variable annuities and Retail Mutual Funds.
Adjusted pre-tax income decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower base net investment yield driven by lower interest rates resulting in spread compression, lower gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected, a higher net unfavorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions, in addition to DAC and reserve model adjustments compared to the prior year. Partially offsetting these decreases were higher private equity income, higher call and tender income and lower general operating expenses. Adjusted pre-tax income increased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily driven by decreases in Variable Annuity DAC amortization and reserves due to stronger equity market performances, growth in income from base portfolio due to higher invested assets, higher gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected, and prior year DAC and reserve model adjustments. Partially offsetting these increases were lower Variable Annuity policy and advisory fee income, net of expenses due to Variable Annuity and Retail Mutual Fund negative net flows.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 101
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Individual Retirement Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income decreased primarily due to:
 higher net unfavorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions compared to the prior year, in addition to DAC and reserve model adjustments.
Partially offsetting these decreases were:
 higher net investment returns due to higher private equity income, and higher call and tender income, offset by lower base investment yield due to lower interest rates resulting in spread compression, and lower gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected; and
 lower general operating expenses primarily due to lower travel and other employee related expenses.
Individual Retirement Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income increased primarily due to:
 higher net investment returns including growth in income from base net investment spread due to higher invested assets, driven by increased sales, higher gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected, and income from an initial public offering of a holding in the private equity portfolio, partially offset by lower affordable housing returns, and prior year non-recurring payments on structured securities; and
 stronger equity market performance, which contributed to decreases in Variable Annuity DAC amortization and reserves, prior year DAC and reserve model adjustment, and lower Fixed Annuity DAC amortization due to lower surrenders, partially offset by higher Index Annuity DAC amortization and reserves driven by growth in sales and DAC model adjustments.
Partially offsetting these increases were:
 lower policy and advisory fee income net of expenses due to negative Variable Annuity and Retail Mutual Fund net flows and a decrease in Variable Annuity and Retail Mutual Fund average AUM related to the equity market decline at the end of 2018.
102 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Individual Retirement GAAP Premiums, Premiums and Deposits, Surrenders and Net Flows
For Individual Retirement, premiums primarily represent amounts received on life-contingent payout annuities. Premiums increased in 2020 compared to 2019 and 2018. Premiums are generally not a significant driver of Individual Retirement results.
Premiums and deposits is a non-GAAP financial measure that includes, in addition to direct and assumed premiums, deposits received on investment-type annuity contracts, FHLB funding agreements and mutual funds under administration.
Net flows for annuity products in Individual Retirement represent premiums and deposits less death, surrender and other withdrawal benefits. Net flows for mutual funds represent deposits less withdrawals. Deposits from FHLB funding agreement are excluded from net flows of Individual Retirement in 2018, as net flows from this funding agreement is not considered part of the metric to measure Individual Retirement’s core recurring performance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Individual Retirement GAAP premiums to premiums and deposits:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Premiums
$
$
$
Deposits
10,228
14,804
15,578
Other
(9)
(9)
(9)
Premiums and deposits
$
10,370
$
14,899
$
15,621
The following table presents surrenders as a percentage of average reserves:
Years Ended December 31,
Surrenders as a percentage of average reserves
Fixed annuities
5.9
%
7.2
%
8.1
%
Variable and index annuities
5.6
6.4
6.6
The following table presents reserves for fixed annuities and variable and index annuities by surrender charge category:
At December 31,
Variable
Variable
Fixed
and Index
Fixed
and Index
(in millions)
Annuities
Annuities
Annuities
Annuities
No surrender charge
$
27,394
$
30,763
$
27,714
$
24,477
Greater than 0% - 2%
2,323
11,573
2,052
9,514
Greater than 2% - 4%
2,787
15,264
3,198
14,854
Greater than 4%
16,335
32,056
16,396
32,096
Non-surrenderable
1,704
2,157
-
Total reserves
$
50,543
$
90,223
$
51,517
$
80,941
Individual Retirement annuities are typically subject to a four- to seven-year surrender charge period, depending on the product. For fixed annuities, the proportion of reserves subject to surrender charge at December 31, 2020 was flat compared to December 31, 2019. The increase in reserves with no surrender charge for variable and index annuities at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was principally due to normal aging of business.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 103
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
A discussion of the significant variances in premiums and deposits and net flows for each product line follows:
Individual Retirement Premiums and Deposits (P&D) and Net Flows
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
 Fixed Annuities premiums and deposits decreased primarily due to distribution channel disruptions related to COVID-19 and sustained low interest rate environment. Net flows were negative primarily due to lower premiums and deposits partially offset by lower surrenders.
 Variable and Index Annuities premiums and deposits decreased primarily due to a decrease in index annuity sales due to distribution channel disruptions related to COVID-19 partially offset by higher variable annuity sales. Variable annuity net flows remained negative but improved primarily due to an increase in sales and lower surrenders. Index annuity net flows decreased primarily due to lower sales and higher surrenders.
 Retail Mutual Funds premiums and deposits decreased due to continued negative industry trends in U.S. actively managed equity funds and disruptions caused by COVID-19, and reduction of flows within our largest fund. Net flows remained negative and deteriorated due to lower deposits offset by lower surrenders.
Individual Retirement Premiums and Deposits and Net Flows
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
 Fixed Annuities premiums and deposits increased primarily due to higher broker dealer and Independent Market Organization distribution sales driven by increased sales of products with living benefit features. Net flows improved primarily due to higher premiums and deposits, and lower surrenders.
 Variable and Index Annuities premiums and deposits increased primarily due to higher index annuity sales driven by growth in all key distribution channels partially offset by a decline in variable annuity premiums and deposits driven by lower broker dealer and bank distribution sales. Index annuity net flows increased primarily due to higher sales partially offset by higher surrenders. Variable annuity net flows remained negative and deteriorated primarily due to a decline in sales.
 Funding Agreements premiums and deposits in 2018 reflected deposits from the FHLB funding agreements, which were excluded from reported net flows.
 Retail Mutual Funds net flows remained negative and deteriorated reflecting lower deposits, offset by lower surrenders and withdrawals due to industry trends in the U.S. and the impact of underperformance within our largest fund
104 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Group Retirement Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
$
$
%
(53)
%
Policy fees
(4)
Net investment income
2,236
2,240
2,175
-
Advisory fee and other income
Benefits and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
(24)
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
1,123
1,147
1,122
(2)
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
(91)
(15)
Non deferrable insurance commissions
(3)
Advisory fee expenses
General operating expenses
Interest expense
(5)
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss)
$
1,013
$
$
%
-
%
Base net investment spread:
Base yield*
4.26
%
4.53
%
4.50
%
(27)
bps
bps
Cost of funds
2.65
2.72
2.73
(7)
(1)
Base net investment spread
1.61
%
1.81
%
1.77
%
(20)
bps
bps
* Includes returns from base portfolio including accretion and income (loss) from certain other invested assets.
Business and Financial Highlights
Group Retirement is focused on implementing initiatives to grow its business. However, external factors, including increased competition and the consolidation of healthcare providers and other employers in target markets, continue to impact Group Retirement’s customer retention. Premiums and deposits decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year. Net flows remained negative but improved in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to lower surrenders partially offset by lower deposits. Excluding deposits from FHLB funding agreement, premiums and deposits decreased in 2019 compared to 2018. Net flows remained negative but improved in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to lower surrenders partially offset by decreased deposits.
Adjusted pre-tax income increased in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to a net favorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions compared to a net unfavorable adjustment in the prior year, higher private equity income, higher yield enhancement income and higher policy and advisory fee income, net of expenses, due to an increase in separate account and mutual fund average assets. Partially offsetting these increases were lower gains on base net investment spread primarily due to lower reinvestment yields, lower gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected, higher general operating expenses and higher variable annuity DAC amortization and reserves due to equity market performance. Adjusted pre-tax income remained relatively flat in 2019 compared to 2018.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 105
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Group Retirement Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income increased primarily due to:
 a net favorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions compared to a net unfavorable adjustment in the prior year;
 higher policy and advisory fee income, net of expenses, due to an increase in separate account and mutual fund average assets; and
 higher net investment income due to higher private equity income, and higher yield enhancement income partially offset by lower gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected.
Partially offsetting these increases were:
 a decrease in base net investment spread primarily due to lower reinvestment yields and lower accretion partially offset by higher average invested assets and lower interest credited;
 higher general operating expenses primarily due to increased regulatory expenses partially offset by savings from COVID-19 travel restrictions; and
 increases in variable annuity DAC amortization and reserves due to lower equity market performance compared to prior year.
Group Retirement Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income increased primarily due to:
• an increase in base net investment spread primarily due to higher average invested assets;
• lower variable annuity DAC amortization and reserves due to stronger equity market performance; and
• higher net investment returns in our alternative investment portfolio, including income from an initial public offering of a holding in the private equity portfolio and higher gains on securities for which the fair value option was elected, partially offset by the prior year receipt of non-recurring payments on structured securities and lower returns on affordable housing income.
Partially offsetting these increases were:
• a net unfavorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions compared to a net favorable adjustment in the prior year; and
• higher general operating expenses primarily due to continued investment in people and technology.
106 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Group Retirement GAAP Premiums, Premiums and Deposits, Surrenders and Net Flows
For Group Retirement, premiums primarily represent amounts received on life-contingent payout annuities. Premiums in 2020, which primarily represents immediate annuities, increased compared to 2019 and decreased compared to 2018. Premiums are not a significant driver of Group Retirement results.
Premiums and deposits is a non-GAAP financial measure that includes, in addition to direct and assumed premiums, deposits received on investment-type annuity contracts, FHLB funding agreements and mutual funds under administration.
Net flows for annuity products included in Group Retirement represent premiums and deposits less death, surrender and other withdrawal benefits. Net flows for mutual funds represent deposits less withdrawals. Deposits from FHLB funding agreement was excluded from net flows of Group Retirement in 2018, as net flows from this funding agreement is not considered part of the metric to measure Group Retirement’s core recurring performance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Group Retirement GAAP premiums to premiums and deposits:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Premiums
$
$
$
Deposits
7,477
8,330
8,605
Premiums and deposits
$
7,496
$
8,346
$
8,639
The following table presents Group Retirement surrenders as a percentage of average reserves and mutual funds under administration:
Years Ended December 31,
Surrenders as a percentage of average reserves and mutual funds
8.6
%
10.7
%
11.3
%
The following table presents reserves for Group Retirement annuities by surrender charge category:
At December 31,
(in millions)
(a)
(a)
No surrender charge(b)
$
77,507
$
71,912
Greater than 0% - 2%
1,140
Greater than 2% - 4%
Greater than 4%
6,119
6,038
Non-surrenderable
Total reserves
$
85,636
$
80,376
(a) Excludes mutual fund assets under administration of $25.0 billion and $21.7 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(b) Group Retirement amounts in this category include general account reserves of approximately $6.3 billion and $6.2 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively, which are subject to 20 percent annual withdrawal limitations at the participant level and general account reserves of $5.8 billion and $5.4 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, which are subject to 20 percent annual withdrawal limitations at the plan level.
Group Retirement annuity deposits are typically subject to a five- to seven-year surrender charge period, depending on the product. At December 31, 2020, Group Retirement annuity reserves with no surrender charge increased compared to December 31, 2019 primarily due to growth in assets under management while reserves with a 0% - 2% surrender charge decreased primarily due to normal aging of business. The surrender rate in 2020 decreased compared to the prior year due to lower individual surrenders as well as fewer large plan surrenders.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 107
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
A discussion of the significant variances in premiums and deposits and net flows follows:
Group Retirement Premiums and Deposits and Net Flows
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Net flows remained negative but improved primarily due to lower individual surrenders partially offset by decreased deposits. There were approximately $1.0 billion of large plan related surrenders in 2020 compared to approximately $1.3 billion of large plan surrenders for 2019. External factors including consolidation of healthcare providers and other employers in target markets continue to impact Group Retirement customer retention, although this was partially mitigated by short term impacts from market conditions related to COVID-19.
Group Retirement Premiums and Deposits and Net Flows
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Net flows remained negative but improved primarily due to lower surrenders partially offset by decreased deposits. There were approximately $1.3 billion of large plan surrenders for 2019 compared to approximately $1.6 billion of large plan surrenders for 2018. External factors including consolidation of healthcare providers and other employers in target markets continue to impact Group Retirement customer retention. Premiums and deposits in 2018 reflected deposits from FHLB funding agreement, which were excluded from reported net flows.
108 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Life Insurance Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
1,915
$
1,805
$
1,747
%
%
Policy fees
1,384
1,495
1,267
(7)
Net investment income
1,526
1,483
1,450
Other income
(28)
Benefits and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
3,569
3,189
2,905
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
-
(2)
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
(30)
(78)
NM
Non deferrable insurance commissions
General operating expenses
(5)
(1)
Interest expense
-
Adjusted pre-tax income
$
$
$
(57)
%
(30)
%
Business and Financial Highlights
Life Insurance is focused on selling profitable new products through strategic channels to enhance future returns. Adjusted pre-tax income decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to higher mortality driven primarily by COVID-19 and a net unfavorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions partially offset by higher net investment income. Adjusted pre-tax income decreased in 2019 compared to the prior year primarily due to prior year favorable actuarial adjustments to universal life and prior year favorable ceded premium reinsurance adjustments, unfavorable reinsurance valuation allowance adjustment in 2019 and less favorable mortality. Partially offsetting these decreases were higher gains on calls and higher net investment income including gains on alternative investments due to higher private equity income.
Life Insurance Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income decreased primarily due to:
 higher mortality driven by COVID-19; and
 a higher net unfavorable adjustment from the review and update of actuarial assumptions.
Partially offsetting these decreases were:
 higher net investment income, primarily driven by higher gains on calls and higher equity partnership income.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 109
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Life Insurance Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax income decreased primarily due to:
 prior year favorable U.S. reserve and reinsurance adjustments and an unfavorable reinsurance valuation allowance adjustment in 2019; and
 less favorable mortality experience in the U.S.
Partially offsetting these decreases were:
 higher investment income primarily due to higher base portfolio income driven by growth in invested assets, higher returns in our alternative investment portfolio, including income from an initial public offering of a holding in the private equity portfolio, and higher gains on calls.
Life Insurance GAAP Premiums and Premiums and Deposits
Premiums for Life Insurance represent amounts received on traditional life insurance policies, primarily term life and international life and health. Premiums, excluding the effect of foreign exchange, increased in 2020 compared to 2019 and 2018. Premiums for 2018 included favorable ceded premium reinsurance refinements in domestic life business. Premiums and deposits for Life Insurance is a non-GAAP financial measure that includes direct and assumed premiums as well as deposits received on universal life insurance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Life Insurance GAAP premiums to premiums and deposits:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Premiums
$
1,915
$
1,805
$
1,747
Deposits
1,648
1,667
1,657
Other
Premiums and deposits
$
4,413
$
4,282
$
4,138
110 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
A discussion of the significant variances in premiums and deposits follows:
Life Insurance Premiums and Deposits
(in millions)
Premiums and deposits, excluding the effect of foreign exchange, increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to growth in international life and group premiums.
Premiums and deposits, excluding the effect of foreign exchange, increased in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to growth in domestic term life and international life, including the acquisition of Ellipse in the U.K.
Institutional markets Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
2,539
$
1,864
$
%
%
Policy fees
(1)
Net investment income
Other income
-
-
Benefits and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
2,846
2,161
1,220
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
(15)
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
-
-
Non deferrable insurance commissions
-
-
General operating expenses
Interest expense
-
(15)
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss)
$
$
$
%
%
Business and Financial Highlights
Institutional Markets continued to opportunistically grow its portfolio, which drove the increase in net investment income. Product distribution continues to be strong and the business is focused on maintaining pricing discipline.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 111
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Institutional Markets Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Increases in premiums and policyholder benefits were primarily due to higher pension risk transfer business written in 2020 compared to 2019.
Adjusted pre-tax income increased primarily due to:
 growth in the portfolio from new business, higher alternative investment returns due to higher equity partnership returns and yield enhancement income, partially offset by the impact of the new business on policyholder benefits and losses incurred;
 decrease in interest crediting results from impact of lower interest rates on floating-rate GICs and related hedging; and
 favorable mortality experience.
Institutional Markets Adjusted Pre-Tax Income
(in millions)
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Increase in premiums and policyholder benefits were primarily due to pension risk transfer business written during 2018 and 2019. Growth in reserves and AUM drove the increase in net investment income with similar impact to policyholder benefits and interest credited.
Adjusted pre-tax income increased primarily due to:
 higher net investment income due to higher invested assets resulting from growth in pension risk transfer and GICs.
112 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Life and Retirement
Institutional markets GAAP Premiums and Premiums and Deposits
Premiums for Institutional Markets primarily represent amounts received on pension risk transfer or structured settlement annuities with life contingencies. Premiums increased in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily driven by the pension risk transfer business (direct and assumed reinsurance) written in 2020. Premiums increased in 2019 compared to the prior year primarily driven by the pension risk transfer business written in 2019.
Premiums and deposits for Institutional Markets is a non-GAAP financial measure that includes direct premiums as well as deposits received on investment-type annuity contracts, including GICs. Deposits also include FHLB funding agreements.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Institutional Markets GAAP premiums to premiums and deposits:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Premiums
$
2,539
$
1,864
$
Deposits
2,281
2,190
Other
Premiums and deposits
$
4,846
$
2,822
$
3,207
A discussion of the significant variances in premiums and deposits follows:
Institutional Markets Premiums and Deposits
(in millions)
Premiums and deposits increased in 2020 due to higher pension risk transfer (direct and assumed reinsurance) sales and higher deposits on GICs.
Premiums and deposits decreased in 2019 compared to the prior year due to lower deposits offset by higher pension risk transfer sales. Deposits in 2018 include $1.4 billion of FHLB agreements. The shift in premium and deposit mix is consistent with Institutional Markets’ strategy to opportunistically grow and diversify its portfolio.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 113
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Other Operations
Other Operations
Other Operations primarily consists of income from assets held by AIG Parent and other corporate subsidiaries, deferred tax assets related to tax attributes, corporate expenses and intercompany eliminations, our institutional asset management business and results of our consolidated investment entities, General Insurance portfolios in run-off previously reported within Legacy as well as the historical results of our legacy insurance lines ceded to Fortitude Re.
Other Operations Results
Years Ended December 31,
Percentage Change
(in millions)
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
Revenues:
Premiums
$
$
$
(30)
%
%
Policy fees
(53)
Net investment income:
Interest and dividends
2,015
1,984
(55)
Alternative investments
(67)
Other investment income
(64)
Investment expenses
(47)
(76)
(52)
(46)
Total net investment income
1,087
2,598
2,406
(58)
Other income
(39)
(12)
Total adjusted revenues
1,385
3,060
2,866
(55)
Benefits, losses and expenses:
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
1,650
1,802
(51)
(8)
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
(57)
(9)
Acquisition expenses:
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
(22)
(32)
Other acquisition expenses
(89)
Total acquisition expenses
(30)
(27)
General operating expenses
Corporate and Other
1,004
1,099
1,034
(9)
Asset Management
-
(51)
Amortization of intangible assets
-
Total General operating expenses
1,086
1,181
1,134
(8)
Interest expense:
Interest - Corporate and Other
1,148
1,089
1,065
Interest - Asset Management*
(8)
NM
Total interest expense
1,306
1,260
1,091
Total benefits, losses and expenses
3,348
4,372
4,355
(23)
-
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss) before consolidation and
eliminations
(1,963)
(1,312)
(1,489)
(50)
Consolidation and eliminations
(466)
(304)
(53)
NM
Adjusted pre-tax loss
$
(2,429)
$
(1,616)
$
(1,450)
(50)
%
(11)
%
Adjusted pre-tax income (loss) by activities:
Corporate and Other
$
(2,041)
$
(1,378)
$
(1,504)
(48)
%
%
Asset Management
Consolidation and eliminations
(466)
(304)
(53)
NM
Adjusted pre-tax loss
$
(2,429)
$
(1,616)
$
(1,450)
(50)
%
(11)
%
* Interest - Asset Management primarily represents interest expense on consolidated investment entities of $148 million, $158 million and $11 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
114 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Business Segment Operations | Other Operations
2020 and 2019 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax loss increased primarily due to:
 lower net investment income due to the deconsolidation of Fortitude Re on June 2, 2020; and
 higher interest expenses driven by debt issuances in the second quarter of 2020.
2019 and 2018 Comparison
Adjusted pre-tax loss increased primarily due to:
 lower net investment income associated with available for sale securities, higher corporate general operating expenses due to higher compensation and technology costs; and
 higher interest expenses driven by corporate debt issuances in the first quarter of 2019 and 2018, and debt associated with consolidated investment entities.
The increase in adjusted pre-tax loss was partially offset by:
 higher net investment income associated with consolidated investment entities.
 higher earnings on portfolios in run-off due to an increase in net investment income as a result of gains on fair value option securities and a decrease in policyholder benefits and losses incurred due to non-recurring loss recognition incurred on accident and health business (other than long-term care) in 2018.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 115
ITEM 7 | Investments
Investments
Overview
Our investment strategies are tailored to the specific business needs of each operating unit by targeting an asset allocation mix that supports estimated cash flows of our outstanding liabilities and provides diversification from an asset class, sector, issuer, and geographic perspective. The primary objectives are generation of investment income, preservation of capital, liquidity management and growth of surplus. The majority of assets backing our insurance liabilities consist of fixed maturity securities.
The impact of COVID-19 is evolving rapidly and will depend upon the scope, severity and duration of the crisis as well as the actions taken by governments, legislative bodies or regulators and other third parties in response, all of which are continuing to evolve and are subject to continuing uncertainty. Weak economic conditions resulting from COVID-19 have been met with intervention taken by governments and monetary authorities aimed at stimulating growth, resulting in a sharp recovery on our overall investment portfolio to pre-COVID-19 conditions. In certain segments of our diversified investment portfolio, there have been exposures to certain segments of the economy significantly affected by the crisis, which has, in certain periods, resulted in the recognition of credit losses and increases in our allowance for credit losses. Further recognition of credit losses and increases in our allowances for credit losses could result if businesses remain closed (or are closed again due to resurgences in infections) and the impact of the crisis on the global economy worsens.
Investment Strategies
Investment strategies are assessed at the segment level and involve considerations that include local and general market conditions, duration and cash flow management, risk appetite and volatility constraints, rating agency and regulatory capital considerations, and tax and legal investment limitations.
Some of our key investment strategies are as follows:
 Our fundamental strategy across the portfolios is to seek investments with similar characteristics to the associated insurance liabilities to the extent practicable. AIG embeds Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) considerations in its fundamental investment analysis of the companies or projects we invest in to ensure that they have sustainable earnings over the full term of our investment. AIG considers internal and external factors and evaluates changes in consumer behavior, industry trends related to ESG factors as well as the ability of the management of companies to respond appropriately to these changes in order to maintain their competitive advantage.
 We seek to originate investments that offer enhanced yield through illiquidity premiums, such as private placements and commercial mortgage loans, which also add portfolio diversification. These assets typically afford credit protections through covenants, ability to customize structures that meet our insurance liability needs, and deeper due diligence given information access.
 Given our global presence, we have access to assets that provide diversification from local markets. To the extent we purchase these investments, we generally hedge any currency risk using derivatives, which could provide opportunities to earn higher risk adjusted returns compared to assets in the functional currency.
116 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Investments
 AIG Parent, included in Other Operations, actively manages its assets and liabilities, counterparties and duration. AIG Parent’s liquidity sources are held primarily in the form of cash, short-term investments and publicly traded, investment grade rated fixed maturity securities that can be readily monetized through sales or repurchase agreements. This strategy allows us to both diversify our sources of liquidity and reduce the cost of maintaining sufficient liquidity.
 Within the U.S., the Life and Retirement and General Insurance investments are generally split between reserve backing and surplus portfolios.
- Insurance reserves are backed by mainly investment grade fixed maturity securities that meet our duration, risk-return, tax, liquidity, credit quality and diversification objectives. We assess asset classes based on their fundamental underlying risk factors, including credit (public and private), commercial real estate and residential real estate regardless of whether such investments are bonds, loans, or structured products.
- Surplus investments seek to enhance portfolio returns and are generally comprised of a mix of fixed maturity investment grade and below investment grade securities and various alternative asset classes, including private equity, real estate equity, and hedge funds. Over the past few years, hedge fund investments have been reduced with more emphasis given to private equity, real estate and below investment grade credit.
Outside of the U.S., fixed maturity securities held by insurance companies consist primarily of investment-grade securities generally denominated in the currencies of the countries in which we operate.
Asset Liability Management
The investment strategy within the General Insurance companies focuses on growth of surplus, maintenance of sufficient liquidity for unanticipated insurance claims, and preservation of capital. General Insurance invests primarily in fixed maturity securities issued by corporations, municipalities and other governmental agencies; structured securities collateralized by, among other assets, residential and commercial real estate; and commercial mortgage loans. Fixed maturity securities of the General Insurance companies’ North America operations have an average duration of 3.3 years. Fixed maturity securities of the General Insurance companies’ international operations have an average duration of 4.4 years.
While invested assets backing reserves of the General Insurance companies are primarily invested in conventional liquid fixed maturity securities, we have continued to allocate to asset classes that offer higher yields through structural and illiquidity premiums, particularly in our North America operations. In addition, we continue to invest in both fixed rate and floating rate asset-backed investments to manage our exposure to potential changes in interest rates and inflation. We seek to diversify the portfolio across asset classes, sectors, and issuers to mitigate idiosyncratic portfolio risks.
In addition, a portion of the surplus of General Insurance is invested in a diversified portfolio of alternative investments that seek to balance liquidity, volatility and growth of surplus. There is a higher allocation to equity-oriented investments in General Insurance surplus relative to other AIG portfolios given the underlying inflation risks inherent in that business. Although these alternative investments are subject to periodic earnings fluctuations, they have historically achieved yields in excess of the fixed maturity portfolio yields and have provided added diversification to the broader portfolio.
The investment strategy of the Life and Retirement companies is to provide net investment income to back liabilities that result in stable distributable earnings and enhance portfolio value, subject to asset liability management, capital, liquidity, and regulatory constraints.
The Life and Retirement companies use asset-liability management as a primary tool to monitor and manage risk in their businesses. The Life and Retirement companies maintain a diversified, high-to-medium quality portfolio of fixed maturity securities issued by corporations, municipalities and other governmental agencies; structured securities collateralized by, among other assets, residential and commercial real estate; and commercial mortgage loans that, to the extent practicable, match the duration characteristics of the liabilities. We seek to diversify the portfolio across asset classes, sectors, and issuers to mitigate idiosyncratic portfolio risks. The investment portfolio of each product line is tailored to the specific characteristics of its insurance liabilities, and as a result, duration varies between distinct portfolios. The interest rate environment has a direct impact on the asset liability management profile of the businesses, and an extended low interest rate environment may result in a lengthening of liability durations from initial estimates, primarily due to lower lapses, which may require us to further extend the duration of the investment portfolio. A further lengthening of the portfolio will be assessed in the context of available market opportunities as longer duration markets may not provide similar diversification benefits as shorter duration markets.
Fixed maturity securities of the Life and Retirement companies’ domestic operations have an average duration of 8.8 years.
In addition, the Life and Retirement companies seek to enhance surplus portfolio returns through investments in a diversified portfolio of alternative investments. Although these alternative investments are subject to periodic earnings fluctuations, they have historically achieved returns in excess of the fixed maturity portfolio returns.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 117
ITEM 7 | Investments
NAIC Designations of Fixed Maturity Securities
The Securities Valuation Office (SVO) of the NAIC evaluates the investments of U.S. insurers for statutory reporting purposes and assigns fixed maturity securities to one of six categories called ‘NAIC Designations.’ In general, NAIC Designations of ‘1’ highest quality, or ‘2’ high quality, include fixed maturity securities considered investment grade, while NAIC Designations of ‘3’ through ‘6’ generally include fixed maturity securities referred to as below investment grade. NAIC designations for non-agency RMBS and CMBS are calculated using third party modeling results provided through the NAIC. These methodologies result in an improved NAIC Designation for such securities compared to the rating typically assigned by the three major rating agencies. The following tables summarize the ratings distribution of AIG subsidiaries’ fixed maturity security portfolio by NAIC Designation, and the distribution by composite AIG credit rating, which is generally based on ratings of the three major rating agencies.
For a full description of the composite AIG credit ratings see - Credit Ratings.
The following table presents the fixed maturity security portfolio categorized by NAIC Designation, at fair value:
December 31, 2020
(in millions)
Total
Total
Below
Investment
Investment
NAIC Designation
Grade
Grade
Total
Other fixed maturity securities
$
103,101
$
84,892
$
187,993
$
10,049
$
6,975
$
1,610
$
$
18,746
$
206,739
Mortgage-backed, asset-backed and collateralized
63,310
4,154
67,464
2,096
2,573
70,037
Total*
$
166,411
$
89,046
$
255,457
$
10,359
$
7,095
$
1,657
$
2,208
$
21,319
$
276,776
* Excludes $10.6 million of fixed maturity securities for which no NAIC Designation is available.
The following table presents the fixed maturity security portfolio categorized by composite AIG credit rating, at fair value:
December 31, 2020
(in millions)
Total
Total
Below
Investment
CCC and
Investment
Composite AIG Credit Rating
AAA/AA/A
BBB
Grade
BB
B
Lower
Grade
Total
Other fixed maturity securities
$
107,016
$
80,877
$
187,893
$
9,670
$
6,999
$
2,177
$
18,846
$
206,739
Mortgage-backed, asset-backed and collateralized
53,818
4,480
58,298
10,696
11,739
70,037
Total*
$
160,834
$
85,357
$
246,191
$
10,352
$
7,360
$
12,873
$
30,585
$
276,776
* Excludes $10.6 million of fixed maturity securities for which no NAIC Designation is available.
Credit Ratings
At December 31, 2020, approximately 89 percent of our fixed maturity securities were held by our domestic entities. Approximately 88 percent of these securities were rated investment grade by one or more of the principal rating agencies. Our investment decision process relies primarily on internally generated fundamental analysis and internal risk ratings. Third-party rating services’ ratings and opinions provide one source of independent perspective for consideration in the internal analysis.
Moody’s Investors Service Inc. (Moody’s), Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, a subsidiary of S&P Global Inc. (S&P), or similar foreign rating services rate a significant portion of our foreign entities’ fixed maturity securities portfolio. Rating services are not available for some foreign-issued securities. Our Credit Risk Management department closely reviews the credit quality of the foreign portfolio’s non-rated fixed maturity securities. At December 31, 2020, approximately 95 percent of such investments were either rated investment grade or, on the basis of our internal analysis, were equivalent from a credit standpoint to securities rated investment grade. Approximately 27 percent of the foreign entities’ fixed maturity securities portfolio is comprised of sovereign fixed maturity securities supporting policy liabilities in the country of issuance.
Composite AIG Credit Ratings
With respect to our fixed maturity securities, the credit ratings in the table below and in subsequent tables reflect: (i) a composite of the ratings of the three major rating agencies, or when agency ratings are not available, the rating assigned by the NAIC SVO (99 percent of total fixed maturity securities), or (ii) our equivalent internal ratings when these investments have not been rated by any of the major rating agencies or the NAIC. The “Non-rated” category in those tables consists of fixed maturity securities that have not been rated by any of the major rating agencies, the NAIC or us.
For a discussion of credit risks associated with Investments see Enterprise Risk Management.
118 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Investments
The following table presents the composite AIG credit ratings of our fixed maturity securities calculated on the basis of their fair value:
Available for Sale
Other
Total
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Rating:
Other fixed maturity
securities
AAA
$
11,758
$
11,821
$
1,803
$
2,121
$
13,561
$
13,942
AA
36,146
31,141
-
36,188
31,141
A
57,255
49,437
57,267
49,448
BBB
80,878
75,598
-
-
80,878
75,598
Below investment grade
18,087
15,905
-
18,087
15,912
Non-rated
1,301
-
-
1,301
Total
$
204,893
$
185,203
$
1,857
$
2,139
$
206,750
$
187,342
Mortgage-backed, asset-
backed and collateralized
AAA
$
31,133
$
29,419
$
$
$
31,480
$
29,784
AA
15,287
14,816
15,482
15,017
A
6,711
6,861
6,856
7,026
BBB
4,137
4,154
4,480
4,252
Below investment grade
9,281
10,575
2,165
3,630
11,446
14,205
Non-rated
Total
$
66,603
$
65,883
$
3,434
$
4,543
$
70,037
$
70,426
Total
AAA
$
42,891
$
41,240
$
2,150
$
2,486
$
45,041
$
43,726
AA
51,433
45,957
51,670
46,158
A
63,966
56,298
64,123
56,474
BBB
85,015
79,752
85,358
79,850
Below investment grade
27,368
26,480
2,165
3,637
29,533
30,117
Non-rated
1,359
1,062
1,443
Total
$
271,496
$
251,086
$
5,291
$
6,682
$
276,787
$
257,768
Available-for-Sale Investments
The following table presents the fair value of our available-for-sale securities:
Fair Value at
Fair Value at
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Bonds available for sale:
U.S. government and government sponsored entities
$
4,126
$
5,380
Obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions
16,124
15,318
Non-U.S. governments
15,345
14,869
Corporate debt
169,298
149,636
Mortgage-backed, asset-backed and collateralized:
RMBS
31,465
32,805
CMBS
16,133
14,430
CDO/ABS
19,005
18,648
Total mortgage-backed, asset-backed and collateralized
66,603
65,883
Total bonds available for sale*
$
271,496
$
251,086
* At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of bonds available for sale held by us that were below investment grade or not rated totaled $28.2 billion and $27.8 billion, respectively.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 119
ITEM 7 | Investments
The following table presents the fair value of our aggregate credit exposures to non-U.S. governments for our fixed maturity securities:
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Japan
$
1,510
$
1,651
Canada
United Kingdom
France
1,013
Germany
Indonesia
Israel
United Arab Emirates
Qatar
Chile
Other
8,181
7,797
Total
$
15,345
$
14,869
The following table presents the fair value of our aggregate European credit exposures by major sector for our fixed maturity securities:
December 31, 2020
Non-
December 31,
Financial
Financial
Structured
(in millions)
Sovereign
Institution
Corporates
Products
Total
Total
Euro-Zone countries:
France
$
$
1,883
$
1,533
$
-
$
4,206
$
4,304
Germany
2,870
-
3,691
3,329
Netherlands
1,105
1,320
2,804
2,626
Ireland
1,524
2,162
2,132
Belgium
1,147
-
1,538
1,254
Spain
-
1,122
Luxembourg
-
Italy
-
Finland
-
Austria
-
-
-
Other Euro-Zone
-
Total Euro-Zone
$
2,708
$
4,384
$
9,103
$
1,631
$
17,826
$
16,812
Remainder of Europe:
United Kingdom
$
$
4,413
$
9,794
$
2,039
$
17,066
$
15,798
Switzerland
1,025
-
1,778
1,879
Sweden
-
Norway
-
Russian Federation
-
Other - Remainder of Europe
-
Total - Remainder of Europe
$
1,682
$
5,865
$
11,094
$
2,039
$
20,680
$
19,495
Total
$
4,390
$
10,249
$
20,197
$
3,670
$
38,506
$
36,307
Investments in Municipal Bonds
At December 31, 2020, the U.S. municipal bond portfolio was composed primarily of essential service revenue bonds and high-quality tax-exempt bonds with 92 percent of the portfolio rated A or higher.
120 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Investments
The following table presents the fair values of our available for sale U.S. municipal bond portfolio by state and municipal bond type:
December 31, 2020
State
Local
Total
December 31,
General
General
Fair
(in millions)
Obligation
Obligation
Revenue
Value
Total Fair Value
State:
California
$
$
$
2,118
$
3,301
$
2,928
New York
2,819
3,135
3,059
Texas
1,553
1,512
Illinois
1,106
1,072
Massachusetts
Ohio
-
Georgia
Virginia
-
Florida
-
Washington
Pennsylvania
Washington, D.C.
-
Missouri
-
-
All other states(a)
2,237
2,852
2,820
Total(b)(c)
$
2,137
$
1,711
$
12,276
$
16,124
$
15,318
(a) We did not have material credit exposure to the government of Puerto Rico.
(b) Excludes certain university and not-for-profit entities that issue their bonds in the corporate debt market. Includes industrial revenue bonds.
(c) Includes $527 million of pre-refunded municipal bonds.
Investments in Corporate Debt Securities
The following table presents the industry categories of our available for sale corporate debt securities:
Fair Value at
Fair Value at
Industry Category
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Financial institutions:
Money center/Global bank groups
$
10,512
$
10,701
Regional banks - other
Life insurance
3,175
3,166
Securities firms and other finance companies
Insurance non-life
5,805
5,492
Regional banks - North America
7,505
6,825
Other financial institutions
15,581
13,608
Utilities
23,470
19,424
Communications
11,137
9,939
Consumer noncyclical
24,826
19,997
Capital goods
8,773
8,006
Energy
13,293
13,379
Consumer cyclical
13,213
10,989
Basic
5,894
5,617
Other
25,175
21,500
Total*
$
169,298
$
149,636
* At both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, approximately 90 percent and 89 percent of these investments were rated investment grade.
Our investments in the energy category, as a percentage of total investments in available-for-sale fixed maturities, were 4.9 percent and 5.3 percent at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. While the energy investments are primarily investment grade and are actively managed, the category continues to experience volatility that could adversely affect credit quality and fair value.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 121
ITEM 7 | Investments
Investments in RMBS
The following table presents AIG’s RMBS available for sale securities:
Fair Value at
Fair Value at
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Agency RMBS
$
15,816
$
15,721
Alt-A RMBS
7,278
8,484
Subprime RMBS
2,575
2,654
Prime non-agency
3,847
4,451
Other housing related
1,949
1,495
Total RMBS(a)(b)
$
31,465
$
32,805
(a) Includes approximately $7.6 billion and $8.7 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, of certain RMBS that had experienced deterioration in credit quality since their origination. For additional discussion on Purchased Credit Impaired Securities see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(b) The weighted average expected life was five years at December 31, 2020 and six years at December 31 2019.
Our underwriting practices for investing in RMBS, other asset-backed securities (ABS) and CDOs take into consideration the quality of the originator, the manager, the servicer, security credit ratings, underlying characteristics of the mortgages, borrower characteristics, and the level of credit enhancement in the transaction.
Investments in CMBS
The following table presents our CMBS available for sale securities:
Fair Value at
Fair Value at
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
CMBS (traditional)
$
12,917
$
11,250
Agency
2,078
2,051
Other
1,138
1,129
Total
$
16,133
$
14,430
The fair value of CMBS holdings remained stable throughout 2020. The majority of our investments in CMBS are in tranches that contain substantial protection features through collateral subordination. The majority of CMBS holdings are traditional conduit transactions, broadly diversified across property types and geographical areas.
Investments in ABS/CDOs
The following table presents our ABS/CDO available for sale securities by collateral type:
Fair value at
Fair value at
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Collateral Type:
ABS
$
9,178
$
9,274
Bank loans (collateralized loan obligation)
9,793
9,330
Other
Total
$
19,005
$
18,648
122 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Investments
Unrealized Losses of Fixed Maturity Securities
The following table shows the aging of the unrealized losses of fixed maturity securities, the extent to which the fair value is less than amortized cost or cost, and the number of respective items in each category:
December 31, 2020
Less Than or Equal
Greater Than 20%
Greater Than 50%
to 20% of Cost(b)
to 50% of Cost(b)
of Cost(b)
Total
Aging(a)
Unrealized
Unrealized
Unrealized
Unrealized
(dollars in millions)
Cost(c)
Loss
Items(e)
Cost(c)
Loss
Items(e)
Cost(c)
Loss
Items(e)
Cost(c)
Loss(d)
Items(e)
Investment grade
bonds
0-6 months
$
13,409
$
1,788
$
$
$
$
$
13,426
$
1,797
7-11 months
6,270
-
-
-
6,313
12 months or more
4,547
4,569
Total
$
24,226
$
3,141
$
$
$
$
$
24,308
$
3,162
Below investment
grade bonds
0-6 months
$
1,390
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,422
$
7-11 months
4,953
1,224
-
-
-
4,974
1,232
12 months or more
1,038
1,493
Total
$
7,381
$
2,253
$
$
$
$
$
7,889
$
2,337
Total bonds
0-6 months
$
14,799
$
2,406
$
$
$
$
$
14,848
$
2,443
7-11 months
11,223
1,917
-
-
-
11,287
1,931
12 months or more
5,585
1,071
6,062
1,125
Total(e)
$
31,607
$
5,394
$
$
$
$
$
32,197
$
5,499
(a) Represents the number of consecutive months that fair value has been less than cost by any amount.
(b) Represents the percentage by which fair value is less than cost at December 31, 2020.
(c) For bonds, represents amortized cost net of allowance.
(d) The effect on Net income of unrealized losses after taxes will be mitigated upon realization because certain realized losses will result in current decreases in the amortization of certain DAC.
(e) Item count is by CUSIP by subsidiary.
The allowance for credit losses was $14 million for investment grade bonds, and $172 million for below investment grade bonds as of December 31, 2020.
Change in Unrealized Gains and Losses on Investments
The change in net unrealized gains and losses on investments in 2020 was primarily attributable to increases in the fair value of fixed maturity securities. For 2020, net unrealized gains related to fixed maturity securities increased by $9.5 billion due primarily to lower rates partially offset by a widening of credit spreads.
The change in net unrealized gains and losses on investments in 2019 was primarily attributable to increases in the fair value of fixed maturity securities. For 2019, net unrealized gains related to fixed maturity securities increased by $14.2 billion due primarily to a decrease in rates and a narrowing of credit spreads.
For further discussion of our investment portfolio see also Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 123
ITEM 7 | Investments
Commercial Mortgage Loans
At December 31, 2020, we had direct commercial mortgage loan exposure of $36.4 billion.
The following table presents the commercial mortgage loan exposure by location and class of loan based on amortized cost:
Number
Percent
of
Class
of
(dollars in millions)
Loans
Apartments
Offices
Retail
Industrial
Hotel
Others
Total
Total
December 31, 2020
State:
New York
$
2,624
$
5,237
$
$
$
$
-
$
8,821
%
California
1,343
3,771
New Jersey
1,756
2,344
Texas
1,165
-
2,184
Florida
-
1,504
Massachusetts
-
-
1,339
Illinois
-
1,128
Washington, D.C.
-
-
-
Pennsylvania
-
Ohio
-
-
Other states
1,992
1,192
-
5,036
Foreign
3,975
1,020
1,025
1,322
8,290
Total*
$
13,969
$
10,712
$
5,249
$
3,766
$
2,268
$
$
36,424
%
December 31, 2019
State:
New York
$
2,377
$
4,913
$
$
$
$
-
$
8,221
%
California
1,341
3,756
New Jersey
1,635
2,190
Texas
1,163
-
2,124
Florida
1,616
Massachusetts
-
-
1,359
Illinois
-
Washington, D.C.
-
-
-
Pennsylvania
-
Ohio
-
Other states
2,073
1,276
5,274
Foreign
4,237
1,189
1,177
8,521
Total*
$
13,699
$
10,642
$
5,332
$
3,663
$
2,312
$
$
36,170
%
* Does not reflect allowance for credit losses.
For additional discussion on commercial mortgage loans see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
124 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Investments
Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses
The following table presents the components of Net realized capital gains (losses):
Years Ended December 31,
Excluding
Fortitude Re
Fortitude Re
Funds
Funds
Withheld
(in millions)
Withheld Assets
Assets(c)
Total
Total
Total
Sales of fixed maturity securities
$
$
$
1,014
$
$
(145)
Sales of equity securities
-
-
-
-
Other-than-temporary impairments
-
-
-
(174)
(251)
Intent to sell(a)
(3)
-
(3)
-
-
Change in allowance for credit losses on fixed maturity securities
(270)
(10)
(280)
-
-
Change in allowance for credit losses on loans
(105)
(103)
(46)
(92)
Foreign exchange transactions
(182)
Variable annuity embedded derivatives, net of related hedges
-
(294)
All other derivatives and hedge accounting
(672)
(249)
(921)
(22)
Loss on sale of private equity funds
-
-
-
-
(321)
Other(b)
-
Net realized capital gains (losses) - excluding Fortitude Re
funds withheld embedded derivative
(56)
(51)
Net realized capital gains (losses) on Fortitude Re funds withheld
embedded derivative
-
(2,645)
(2,645)
-
-
Net realized capital gains (losses)
$
(56)
$
(2,182)
$
(2,238)
$
$
(51)
(a) For 2019, Intent to sell was included in Other-than-temporary impairments.
(b) In 2019, includes $200 million from the sale and concurrent leaseback of our corporate headquarters and $300 million as a result of sales in investment real estate properties. In 2018, primarily includes $96 million and $49 million of realized gains on the sale of shares of OneMain Holdings, Inc. and an investment in Castle Holdings LLC’s aircraft assets, respectively.
(c) Represents activity subsequent to the deconsolidation of Fortitude Re on June 2, 2020.
Net realized capital losses in 2020 compared to net realized capital gains in the prior year due primarily to higher derivative losses in the current period compared to the prior year.
Net realized capital gains in 2019 compared to net realized capital losses in 2018 due to gains on the sales of securities and foreign exchange compared to losses on sales of securities and foreign exchange in 2018, as well as lower impairments in 2019 and losses on private equity sales in 2018. Partially offsetting these gains were derivative losses in 2019 compared to gains in 2018.
Variable annuity embedded derivatives, net of related hedges, reflected gains in 2020 compared to losses in the prior year primarily due to changes in the non-performance or “own credit” risk adjustment used in the valuation of the variable annuities with guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits (GMWB) embedded derivative, which are not hedged as part of our economic hedging program.
Net realized capital gains (losses) on Fortitude Re funds withheld assets primarily reflect increases in the valuation of the modified coinsurance and funds withheld assets. Increases in the valuation of these assets result in losses to AIG as the appreciation on the assets must under those reinsurance arrangements be transferred to Fortitude Re.
For additional discussion of market risk management related to these product features see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - Life and Retirement Companies’ Key Risks - Variable Annuity, Index Annuity and Universal Life Risk Management and Hedging Programs. For more information on the economic hedging target and the impact to pre-tax income of this program see Insurance Reserves - Life and Annuity Reserves and DAC - Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits and Hedging Results in this MD&A.
For further discussion of our investment portfolio see also Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 125
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Insurance Reserves
Liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses (Loss Reserves)
The following table presents the components of our gross and net loss reserves by segment and major lines of business(a):
At December 31,
Net liability for
Reinsurance
Gross liability
Net liability for
Reinsurance
Gross liability
unpaid losses
recoverable on
for unpaid
unpaid losses
recoverable on
for unpaid
and loss
unpaid losses and
losses and
and loss
unpaid losses and
losses and
adjustment
loss adjustment
loss adjustment
adjustment
loss adjustment
loss adjustment
(in millions)
expenses
expenses
expenses
expenses
expenses
expenses
General Insurance:
U.S. Workers' Compensation (net of discount)
$
3,905
$
5,653
$
9,558
$
4,330
$
5,494
$
9,824
U.S. Excess Casualty
3,746
4,584
8,330
4,285
5,073
9,358
U.S. Other Casualty
3,520
4,568
8,088
4,064
4,695
8,759
U.S. Financial Lines
4,838
2,193
7,031
5,154
2,221
7,375
U.S. Property and Special Risks
6,181
2,571
8,752
4,950
2,807
7,757
U.S. Personal Insurance
1,116
1,626
2,742
1,287
2,275
UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines
6,826
1,225
8,051
6,234
1,268
7,502
UK/Europe Property and Special Risks
2,679
1,215
3,894
2,573
1,191
3,764
UK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance
2,219
2,724
1,962
2,481
Other product lines(b)
6,202
5,410
11,612
9,841
2,053
11,894
Unallocated loss adjustment expenses(b)
1,526
1,106
2,632
2,136
3,018
Total General Insurance
42,758
30,656
73,414
46,816
27,191
74,007
Other Operations Run-Off:
U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance Lines
(net of discount)
3,500
3,705
3,587
3,753
Other run-off product lines
Blackboard
Unallocated loss adjustment expenses
Total Other Operations Run-Off
3,775
4,306
3,878
4,321
Total
$
43,289
$
34,431
$
77,720
$
47,259
$
31,069
$
78,328
(a) Includes net loss reserve discount of $725 million and $1.5 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. For discussion of loss reserve discount see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(b) Other product lines and Unallocated loss adjustment expenses includes $3.8 billion within Gross liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expense and Reinsurance recoverable on unpaid losses and loss adjustment expense as of December 31, 2020, and $3.9 billion within the Gross liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expense as of December 31, 2019, for the Fortitude Re reinsurance.
Prior Year Development
The following table summarizes incurred (favorable) unfavorable prior year development net of reinsurance by segment:
(in millions)
General Insurance:
North America*
$
(157)
$
(136)
$
International
(158)
(107)
Total General Insurance
$
(76)
$
(294)
$
Other Operations Run-Off
-
(4)
Total prior year (favorable) unfavorable development
$
(74)
$
(294)
$
* Includes the amortization attributed to the deferred gain at inception from the National Indemnity Company (NICO) adverse development reinsurance agreement of $211 million, $232 million and $233 million in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Consistent with our definition of APTI, the amount excludes the portion of (favorable)/unfavorable prior year reserve development for which we have ceded the risk under the NICO reinsurance agreements of $(228) million, $(278) million and $834 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and related changes in amortization of the deferred gain of $25 million, $(13) million and $162 million over those same periods.
126 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Net Loss Development - 2020
During 2020, we recognized favorable prior year loss reserve development of $74 million. The development was primarily driven by:
North America
Favorable development on U.S. Workers’ Compensation business, both guaranteed cost business and large deductible, where we reacted to favorable loss trends in recent accident years;
Favorable development from amortization of the deferred gain on the adverse development reinsurance agreement with NICO for accident years 2015 and prior;
 Favorable development across the combination of primary and excess casualty coverages;
Favorable development in Property, Specialty and other miscellaneous coverages;
Unfavorable development in U.S. Financial Lines, notably D&O, Employment Practices Liability (EPLI), Mergers and Acquisitions, Cyber and Non-Medical Professional Errors & Omissions business where we reacted to increasing frequency and severity in recent accident years;
Unfavorable development in Personal Lines where we reacted to adverse development in Homeowners and Umbrella.
International
 Unfavorable development on Financial Lines driven by low frequency and high severity seen in D&O, especially in UK/Europe and Australia;
 Favorable development on Property and Special Risks globally driven by UK/Europe;
 Favorable development on Europe and Japan Personal Insurance driven by favorable frequency and severity trends.
Our analyses and conclusions about prior year reserves also help inform our judgments about the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratios we selected.
For further details of prior year development by line of business, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of actuarial methods employed for major classes of business, see also Critical Accounting Estimates.
The following tables summarize incurred (favorable) unfavorable prior year development net of reinsurance, by segment and major lines of business, and by accident year groupings:
Years Ended December 31, 2020
(in millions)
Total
2018 & Prior
General Insurance North America:
U.S. Workers' Compensation
$
(396)
$
(18)
$
(378)
U.S. Excess casualty
U.S. Other casualty
(207)
(211)
U.S. Financial Lines
U.S. Property and Special Risks
(48)
(26)
(22)
U.S. Personal insurance
Other product lines
(26)
(33)
Total General Insurance North America
$
(157)
$
$
(219)
General Insurance International:
UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines
$
$
$
UK/Europe Property and Special Risks
(155)
(61)
(94)
UK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance
(39)
(39)
-
Other product lines
(26)
Total General Insurance International
$
$
(26)
$
Other Operations Run-Off
-
Total prior year (favorable) unfavorable development
$
(74)
$
$
(110)
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 127
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Net Loss Development - 2019
During 2019, we recognized favorable prior year loss reserve development of $294 million. The development was primarily driven by:
North America
 Favorable development on 2017 Hurricanes and 2017 California wildfires subrogation recoverables in Commercial Property and Personal Lines;
 Favorable development from amortization of the deferred gain on the adverse development reinsurance agreement with NICO for accident years 2015 and prior;
 Favorable development on U.S. Workers’ Compensation business, both guaranteed cost business and large deductible and Defense Base Act business (covering government contractors serving at military bases overseas) where we reacted to favorable loss trends in recent accident years;
 Unfavorable development in U.S. Financial Lines, notably D&O, Employment Practices Liability (EPLI) and Non-Medical Professional Errors & Omissions business where we reacted to increasing frequency and severity in recent accident years; and
 Unfavorable development in Primary General Liability where we reacted to adverse frequency and severity trends especially in Construction.
International
 Favorable development on Europe Property and Special Risks, Europe and Japan Personal Insurance and Other product lines; and
 Unfavorable development on European Casualty & Financial Lines, notably Commercial Auto, Employers Liability, Directors & Officers, and Financial Institutions business.
Net Loss Development - 2018
During 2018, we recognized adverse prior year net loss reserve development of $362 million. This unfavorable development was primarily a result of the following:
 Unfavorable development in U.S. Excess Casualty, driven by the combination of construction defect and construction wrap claims from accident year 2015 and prior where we reacted to significant increases in severity and longer claim reporting patterns, as well as higher than expected loss severity in accident years 2016 and 2017, which led to an increase in estimates for these accident years;
 Unfavorable development in U.S. Financial Lines, primarily from D&O and EPLI policies covering Corporate and National Insureds as well as Private and Not-for-Profit insureds. This development was predominantly in accident years 2014-2017 and resulted largely from increases in severity as the frequency of class action lawsuits increased in those years.
 Favorable development in U.S. Commercial Property and Specialty Lines due to reductions in our estimates for 2017 Catastrophes and favorable development from the attritional losses in Commercial Property and Specialty.
 Unfavorable development in U.S. Personal Lines reflecting an increase in estimates in respect of the California wildfires and Hurricane Irma in 2017.
 Adverse development in Financial Lines in Europe and other areas across the world that have seen increases in the frequency and severity of large losses.
 We note that for certain categories of claims (e.g., construction defect claims and environmental claims) and for reinsurance recoverable, losses may sometimes be reclassified to an earlier or later accident year as more information about the date of occurrence becomes available to us. These reclassifications are shown as development in the respective years in the tables above.
Significant Reinsurance Agreements
In the first quarter of 2017, we entered into an adverse development reinsurance agreement with NICO, under which we transferred to NICO 80 percent of the reserve risk on substantially all of our U.S. Commercial long-tail exposures for accident years 2015 and prior. Under this agreement, we ceded to NICO 80 percent of the losses on subject business paid on or after January 1, 2016 in excess of $25 billion of net paid losses, up to an aggregate limit of $25 billion. We account for this transaction as retroactive reinsurance. This transaction resulted in a gain, which under GAAP retroactive reinsurance accounting is deferred and amortized into income over the settlement period. NICO created a collateral trust account as security for their claim payment obligations to us, into which they deposited the consideration paid under the agreement, and Berkshire Hathaway Inc. has provided a parental guarantee to secure NICO’s obligations under the agreement.
For a description of AIG’s catastrophe reinsurance protection for 2020, see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - General Insurance Companies’ Key Risks - Natural Catastrophe Risk.
128 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
The table below shows the calculation of the deferred gain on the adverse development reinsurance agreement as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, showing the effect of discounting of loss reserves and amortization of the deferred gain.
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Gross Covered Losses
Covered reserves before discount
$
16,534
$
19,064
$
23,033
Inception to date losses paid
25,198
22,954
19,331
Attachment point
(25,000)
(25,000)
(25,000)
Covered losses above attachment point
$
16,732
$
17,018
$
17,364
Deferred Gain Development
Covered losses above attachment ceded to NICO (80%)
$
13,386
$
13,614
$
13,891
Consideration paid including interest
(10,188)
(10,188)
(10,188)
Pre-tax deferred gain before discount and amortization
3,198
3,426
3,703
Discount on ceded losses(a)
(911)
(1,251)
(1,719)
Pre-tax deferred gain before amortization
2,287
2,175
1,984
Inception to date amortization of deferred gain at inception
(904)
(693)
(461)
Inception to date amortization attributed to changes in deferred gain(b)
(86)
(101)
(141)
Deferred gain liability reflected in AIG's balance sheet
$
1,297
$
1,381
$
1,382
a) For the period from inception to December 31, 2020, the accretion of discount and a reduction in effective interest rates was offset by changes in estimates of the amount and timing of future recoveries under the adverse development reinsurance agreement.
(b) Excluded from our definition of APTI.
The following table presents the rollforward of activity in the deferred gain from the adverse development reinsurance agreement:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Balance at beginning of year, net of discount
$
1,381
$
1,382
$
1,167
(Favorable) unfavorable prior year reserve development ceded to NICO(a)
(228)
(277)
Amortization attributed to deferred gain at inception(b)
(211)
(232)
(233)
Amortization attributed to changes in deferred gain(c)
(110)
Changes in discount on ceded loss reserves
(180)
Balance at end of year, net of discount
$
1,297
$
1,381
$
1,382
(a) Prior year reserve development ceded to NICO under the retroactive reinsurance agreement is deferred under GAAP.
(b) Represents amortization of the deferred gain recognized in APTI.
(c) Excluded from APTI and included in GAAP.
The lines of business subject to this agreement have been the source of the majority of the prior year adverse development charges over the past several years. The agreement has resulted in lower capital charges for reserve risks at our U.S. insurance subsidiaries. In addition, net investment income declined as a result of lower invested assets.
Fortitude Re was established during the first quarter of 2018 in a series of reinsurance transactions related to our Run-Off operations. Those reinsurance transactions were designed to consolidate most of our Insurance Run-Off Lines into a single legal entity. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $30.5 billion of reserves from our Life and Retirement Run-Off Lines and approximately $4.1 billion of reserves from our General Insurance Run-Off Lines related to business written by multiple wholly-owned AIG subsidiaries, had been ceded to Fortitude Re under these reinsurance transactions.
Of the Fortitude Re reinsurance agreements, the largest is the Amended and Restated Combination Coinsurance and Modified Coinsurance Agreement by and between our subsidiary AGL and Fortitude Re. Under this treaty, approximately $23.3 billion of AGL reserves as of December 31, 2020 were ceded to Fortitude Re representing a mix of life and annuity risks. Fortitude Re provides 100 percent reinsurance of the ceded risks. AGL continues to administer the policies, including handling claims, although it is anticipated that much of the administration will move to a Fortitude Re administrative subsidiary over time, subject to regulatory approvals being obtained and the satisfaction of other conditions. Until such time, Fortitude Re has certain rights to consult on and participate in such administration, and AGL retains the risk of collection of any third party reinsurance covering the ceded business. At effectiveness of the treaty, an amount equal to the aggregate ceded reserves was deposited by AGL into a modified coinsurance account of AGL to secure the obligations of Fortitude Re. Fortitude Re receives or makes quarterly payments that represent the net gain or loss under
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 129
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
the treaty for the relevant quarter, including any net investment gain or loss on the assets in the modified coinsurance account. An AIG affiliate will serve as portfolio manager of assets in the modified coinsurance account for a minimum of three years after the June 2, 2020 closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale.
For a summary of significant reinsurers see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - Reinsurance Activities - Reinsurance Recoverable.
LIFE AND ANNUITY FUTURE POLICY BENEFITS, POLICYHOLDER CONTRACT DEPOSITS and dac
The following section provides discussion of life and annuity future policy benefits, policyholder contract deposits and deferred policy acquisition costs.
Update of Actuarial Assumptions
The life insurance companies review and update actuarial assumptions at least annually, generally in the third quarter. Assumption setting standards vary between investment-oriented products and traditional long-duration products.
Investment-oriented products
The life insurance companies review and update estimated gross profit assumptions used to amortize DAC and related items (which may include VOBA, SIA and unearned revenue reserves) as well as assessments used to accrue guaranteed benefit reserves for investment-oriented products at least annually. Estimated gross profit projections include assumptions for investment-related returns and spreads, product-related fees and expenses, mortality gains and losses, policyholder behavior and other factors. In estimating future gross profits, lapse assumptions require judgment and can have a material impact on DAC amortization. If the assumptions used for estimated gross profits change significantly, DAC and related reserves are recalculated using the new projections, and any resulting adjustment is included in income. Updating such projections may result in acceleration of amortization in some products and deceleration of amortization in other products.
The life insurance companies also review assumptions related to their respective GMWB living benefits that are accounted for as embedded derivatives and measured at fair value. The fair value of these embedded derivatives is based on actuarial assumptions, including policyholder behavior, as well as capital market assumptions.
Various assumptions were updated, including the following effective September 30, 2020:
• We decreased our reversion to the mean rates of return (gross of fees) to 3.12 percent from 3.62 percent for the variable annuity product line in Individual Retirement and to 2.87 percent from 3.29 percent for the variable annuity product line in Group Retirement primarily due to recent equity market movements. Our separate account long-term asset growth rate assumption related to equity market performance remained unchanged at 7.0 percent; and
• Ultimate projected yields on the vast majority of our invested assets were lowered on life and annuity deposits. Life deposit projected yields ranged from an increase of 9 basis points to a decrease of 14 basis points while annuity insurance deposits saw decreases of up to 24 basis points. Projected yields are graded from a weighted average net GAAP book yield of existing assets supporting the business based on the value of the assets to a weighted average yield based on the duration of the assets excluding assets that mature during the grading period. The grading period is three years for deferred annuity products and five years for life insurance products due to deferred annuities having a shorter duration than life products.
Traditional long-duration products
For long-duration traditional products discussed below, which include whole life insurance, term life insurance, accident and health insurance, long-term care insurance, and life-contingent single premium immediate annuities and structured settlements, a “lock-in” principle applies. The assumptions used to calculate the benefit liabilities and DAC are set when a policy is issued and do not change with changes in actual experience, unless a loss recognition event occurs. A loss recognition event occurs when current liabilities together with expected future premiums are not sufficient to provide for all future benefits, expenses, and DAC amortization, net of reinsurance. A loss recognition event is driven by observed changes in actual experience or estimates differing significantly from “locked-in” assumptions. Underlying assumptions, including interest rates, are reviewed periodically and updated as appropriate for loss recognition testing purposes. As a result of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, all business that is in loss recognition is fully reinsured by an unaffiliated entity.
The net increases (decreases) to pre-tax income and adjusted pre-tax income as a result of the update of actuarial assumptions for 2020, 2019 and 2018 are shown in the following tables.
130 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
The following table presents the decrease in pre-tax income resulting from the third quarter update of actuarial assumptions in the life insurance companies, by line item as reported in Results of Operations:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Policy fees
$
(106)
$
(32)
$
(237)
Interest credited to policyholder account balances
(6)
-
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs
Non deferrable insurance commissions
-
-
Policyholder benefits and losses incurred
(235)
(363)
(244)
Decrease in adjusted pre-tax income
(107)
(173)
(208)
Change in DAC related to net realized capital losses
(44)
(17)
Net realized capital gains
(55)
Decrease in pre-tax income
$
(9)
$
(10)
$
(228)
The following table presents the increase (decrease) in adjusted pre-tax income resulting from the third quarter update of actuarial assumptions for the life insurance companies, by segment and product line:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Life and Retirement:
Individual Retirement
Fixed annuities
$
(77)
$
$
Variable and indexed annuities
(145)
(92)
Total Individual Retirement
(75)
(63)
(52)
Group Retirement
(17)
Life Insurance
(101)
(64)
(67)
Institutional Markets
-
-
Total Life and Retirement
(107)
(144)
(102)
Other Operations Run-Off
-
(29)
(106)
Total decrease in adjusted pre-tax income from update of assumptions
$
(107)
$
(173)
$
(208)
In 2020, adjusted pre-tax income included a net unfavorable adjustment of $107 million, primarily in fixed annuities driven by changes to earned rates causing spread compression partially offset by favorable updates to full surrender assumptions, and in Life Insurance primarily due to mortality modeling enhancements.
In 2019, adjusted pre-tax income included a net unfavorable adjustment of $173 million, primarily in index annuities driven by an update to lapse assumptions, and in Life Insurance primarily due to methodology enhancements related to projected premium, certain riders and death benefit features, and reinsurance reserving. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by favorable updates to full surrender assumptions in Individual Retirement fixed annuities.
In 2018, adjusted pre-tax income included a net unfavorable adjustment of $208 million, primarily in variable annuities driven by reductions to the GMWB full surrender assumption, in Life Insurance primarily due to strengthening of reserves for certain riders and interest crediting model refinements, and in Legacy Accident & Health Insurance loss recognition. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by favorable adjustments in Life Insurance primarily due to lower lapse and mortality assumptions and a reduction in IBNR reserves and in Individual Retirement due to lower lapse assumptions in fixed annuities and refinements to partial withdrawal assumptions in variable annuities.
The adjustments related to the update of actuarial assumptions in each period are discussed by business segment below.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 131
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Update of Actuarial Assumptions by Business Segment
Individual Retirement
The update of actuarial assumptions resulted in net favorable (unfavorable) adjustments to adjusted pre-tax income of Individual Retirement of $(75) million, $(63) million and $(52) million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In fixed annuities, the update of estimated gross profit assumptions resulted in a net unfavorable adjustment of $(77) million, which reflected lower projected investment earnings, partially offset by lower assumed lapses. In 2019 and 2018, net favorable adjustments of $82 million and $40 million, respectively, reflected lower lapse assumptions including the economic impact to competitor rate on the interest sensitive lapse component, partially offset by lower interest spread assumptions.
In variable and index annuities, the update of estimated gross profit assumptions resulted in a net favorable adjustment of $2 million in 2020, driven by updated withdrawal benefit utilization assumptions. These adjustments were partially offset by lower projected investment earnings. In 2019, a net unfavorable adjustment of $145 million, primarily due to lapse updates in index annuities and updated general account earned rates on variable annuities. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by updated lapse assumptions in variable annuities. In 2018, a net unfavorable adjustment of $92 million primarily due to refinements to the guaranteed benefit partial withdrawal assumptions in variable annuities and the multi-year index strategy crediting parameters in index annuities. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by lower guaranteed benefit lapse assumptions in variable annuities.
Group Retirement
In Group Retirement, the update of estimated gross profit assumptions resulted in a favorable adjustment of $68 million in 2020, primarily in the variable annuities line from extending the DAC amortization projection period, partially offset by updates to expense and lapse assumptions. The DAC amortization projection period was extended to reflect business still in-force at the end of the previous projection period, resulting in an increase in modeled future profits and an increase in the current DAC balance. In 2019, Group Retirement recorded an unfavorable adjustment of $17 million, primarily due to lapse updates in index annuities and variable annuities. In 2018, a favorable adjustment of $17 million was primarily due to improved premium persistency assumptions.
Life Insurance
In Life Insurance, the update of actuarial assumptions resulted in a net unfavorable adjustment of $101 million in 2020, primarily driven by updates to Universal Life mortality assumptions. The mortality updates better align the assumptions with experience and reduce future profits which increases the reserves for affected products. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by refinements to reserve modeling. In 2019, a net unfavorable adjustment of $64 million was primarily due to methodology enhancements related to projected premium, certain riders and death benefit features, and reinsurance reserving. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by favorable adjustments driven by updates to mortality assumptions. In 2018, a net unfavorable adjustment of $67 million primarily due to additional reserves for certain riders, decreased lapses and interest crediting model refinements. The unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by favorable adjustments driven by updates to mortality assumptions and a reduction to IBNR reserves.
Other Operations
In Other Operations Run-Off, the update of actuarial assumptions resulted in a net unfavorable adjustment of $29 million in 2019, reflecting updates to loss recognition reserves and methodology enhancements for universal life insurance. In 2018, a net unfavorable adjustment of $106 million was primarily due to $105 million of loss recognition expense on accident and health business (other than long-term care) in the Life and Retirement Run-Off Lines resulting from assumption and model refinements. As of closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale on June 2, 2020, the reinsurance transactions with Fortitude Re are no longer considered affiliated transactions, and, therefore the results are fully ceded to Fortitude Re.
132 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits and Hedging Results
Our Individual Retirement and Group Retirement businesses offer variable annuity products with GMWB riders that provide guaranteed living benefit features. The liabilities for GMWB are accounted for as embedded derivatives measured at fair value. The fair value of the embedded derivatives may fluctuate significantly based on market interest rates, equity prices, credit spreads, market volatility, policyholder behavior and other factors.
In addition to risk-mitigating features in our variable annuity product design, we have an economic hedging program designed to manage market risk from GMWB, including exposures to changes in interest rates, equity prices, credit spreads and volatility. The hedging program utilizes derivative instruments, including but not limited to equity options, futures contracts and interest rate swap and swaption contracts, as well as fixed maturity securities with a fair value election.
For additional discussion of market risk management related to these product features see Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risks - Life and Retirement Companies’ Key Risks - Variable Annuity, Index Annuity and Universal Life Risk Management and Hedging Programs.
Differences in Valuation of Embedded Derivatives and Economic Hedge Target
The variable annuity hedging program utilizes an economic hedge target, which represents an estimate of the underlying economic risks in our GMWB riders. The economic hedge target differs from the GAAP valuation of the GMWB embedded derivatives primarily due to the following:
 The economic hedge target includes 100 percent of rider fees in present value calculations; the GAAP valuation reflects only those fees attributed to the embedded derivative such that the initial value at contract issue equals zero;
 The economic hedge target uses best estimate actuarial assumptions and excludes explicit risk margins used for GAAP valuation, such as margins for policyholder behavior, mortality, and volatility; and
 The economic hedge target excludes the non-performance or “own credit” risk adjustment used in the GAAP valuation, which reflects a market participant’s view of our claims-paying ability by incorporating a different spread (the NPA spread) to the curve used to discount projected benefit cash flows. Because the discount rate includes the NPA spread and other explicit risk margins, the GAAP valuation is generally less sensitive to movements in interest rates and other market factors, and to changes from actuarial assumption updates, than the economic hedge target. For more information on our valuation methodology for embedded derivatives within policyholder contract deposits see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The market value of the hedge portfolio compared to the economic hedge target at any point in time may be different and is not expected to be fully offsetting. In addition to the derivatives held in conjunction with the variable annuity hedging program, the Life and Retirement companies have cash and invested assets available to cover future claims payable under these guarantees. The primary sources of difference between the change in the fair value of the hedging portfolio and the economic hedge target include:
 Basis risk due to the variance between expected and actual fund returns, which may be either positive or negative;
 Realized volatility versus implied volatility;
 Actual versus expected changes in the hedge target driven by assumptions not subject to hedging, particularly policyholder behavior; and
 Risk exposures that we have elected not to explicitly or fully hedge.
The following table presents a reconciliation between the fair value of the GAAP embedded derivatives and the value of our economic hedge target:
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Reconciliation of embedded derivatives and economic hedge target:
Embedded derivative liability
$
3,572
$
2,474
Exclude non-performance risk adjustment
(2,958)
(2,504)
Embedded derivative liability, excluding NPA
6,530
4,978
Adjustments for risk margins and differences in valuation
(2,502)
(2,394)
Economic hedge target liability
$
4,028
$
2,584
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 133
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Impact on Pre-tax Income (Loss)
The impact on our pre-tax income (loss) of the variable annuity guaranteed living benefits and related hedging results includes changes in the fair value of the GMWB embedded derivatives, and changes in the fair value of related derivative hedging instruments, both of which are recorded in Other realized capital gains (losses). Realized capital gains (losses), as well as net investment income from changes in the fair value of fixed maturity securities used in the hedging program, are excluded from adjusted pre-tax income of Individual Retirement and Group Retirement.
The change in the fair value of the embedded derivatives and the change in the value of the hedging portfolio are not expected to be fully offsetting, primarily due to the differences in valuation between the economic hedge target, the GAAP embedded derivatives and the fair value of the hedging portfolio, as discussed above. When corporate credit spreads widen, the change in the NPA spread generally reduces the fair value of the embedded derivative liabilities, resulting in a gain, and when corporate credit spreads narrow or tighten, the change in the NPA spread generally increases the fair value of the embedded derivative liabilities, resulting in a loss. In addition to changes driven by credit market-related movements in the NPA spread, the NPA balance also reflects changes in business activity and in the net amount at risk from the underlying guaranteed living benefits.
The following table presents the net increase (decrease) to consolidated pre-tax income (loss) from changes in the fair value of the GMWB embedded derivatives and related hedges, excluding related DAC amortization:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives, excluding update of actuarial
assumptions and NPA
$
(1,145)
$
(156)
$
(244)
Change in fair value of variable annuity hedging portfolio:
Fixed maturity securities*
(154)
Interest rate derivative contracts
1,342
1,029
(470)
Equity derivative contracts
(679)
(1,274)
Change in fair value of variable annuity hedging portfolio
(51)
(312)
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives excluding update of actuarial assumptions and
NPA, net of hedging portfolio
(438)
(207)
(556)
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives due to NPA spread
(314)
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives due to change in NPA volume
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives due to update of actuarial assumptions
Total change due to update of actuarial assumptions and NPA
Net impact on pre-tax income (loss)
$
$
(100)
$
Impact to Consolidated Income Statement
Net investment income, net of related interest credited to policyholder account balances
$
$
$
(154)
Net realized capital gains (losses)
(294)
Net impact on pre-tax income (loss)
$
$
(100)
$
Net change in value of economic hedge target and related hedges
Net impact on economic gains (losses)
$
$
$
* Beginning in July 2019, the fixed maturity securities portfolio used in the hedging program was rebalanced to reposition the portfolio from a duration, sector, and issuer perspective. As part of this rebalancing, fixed maturity securities where we elected the fair value option were sold. Later in the quarter, as new fixed maturity securities were purchased, they were classified as available for sale. The change in fair value of available-for-sale fixed maturity securities recognized as a component of other comprehensive income was $217 million and $57 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The net impact on pre-tax income of $210 million from the GMWB embedded derivatives and related hedges in 2020 (excluding related DAC amortization) was driven by the widening of NPA credit spreads, impact of lower interest rates that resulted in NPA volume gains from higher expected GMWB payments, gains from higher equity markets, and gains from the review and update of actuarial assumptions, partially offset by the impact of lower interest rates on the change in the fair value of embedded derivatives excluding NPA, net of the hedging portfolio. In 2019, the net impact on pre-tax loss of $100 million was driven by tightening of credit spreads on the NPA spread, and impact of lower interest rates on the change in the fair value of embedded derivatives excluding NPA, net of the hedging portfolio, offset by impact of lower interest rates that resulted in NPA volume gains from higher expected GMWB payments, and gains from the review and update of actuarial assumptions. In 2018, the net impact on pre-tax income of $150 million was primarily driven by gains from the impact of widening credit spreads on the NPA spread, and the impact of higher interest rates on the change in fair value of embedded derivatives excluding NPA, and gains from the review and update of actuarial assumptions, partially offset by lower equity markets, net of the hedging portfolio.
134 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
The change in the fair value of the GMWB embedded derivatives, excluding NPA and update of actuarial assumptions, in 2020 reflected losses from decreases in interest rates, partially offset by gains from higher equity markets. In 2019, the change in the fair value of the GMWB embedded derivatives, excluding NPA and update of actuarial assumptions, reflected losses from decreases in interest rates, partially offset by gains from higher equity markets. In 2018, the change in the fair value of the GMWB embedded derivatives, excluding NPA and update of actuarial assumptions, reflected losses from lower equity markets and the impact of moving from an economic to a GAAP discount basis, offset by increases in interest rates.
Fair value gains or losses in the hedging portfolio are typically not fully offset by increases or decreases in liabilities on a GAAP basis, due to the NPA and other risk margins used for GAAP valuation that cause the embedded derivatives to be less sensitive to changes in market rates than the hedge portfolio. On an economic basis, the changes in the fair value of the hedge portfolio were partially offset by the increase in the economic hedge target, as discussed below. In 2020, we estimated a net mark to market gain of approximately $295 million from our hedging activities related to our economic hedge target primarily driven by gains from higher equity markets and gains from the review and update of actuarial assumptions offset by tightening credit spreads. In 2019, we estimated a net mark to market gain of approximately $261 million from our hedging activities related to our economic hedge target primarily driven by gains from the review and update of actuarial assumptions and modeling refinements, offset by tightening credit spreads. In 2018, we estimated a net mark to market gain of approximately $334 million from our hedging activities related to our economic hedge target primarily driven by gains from the widening of credit spreads.
Change in Economic Hedge Target
The increase in the economic hedge target liability in 2020 was primarily due to lower interest rates and tighter credit spreads, offset by benefits from the review and update of assumptions and higher equity markets. The decrease in the economic hedge target liability in 2019 was primarily due to higher equity markets and gains from the review and update of actuarial assumptions offset by lower interest rates and tighter credit spreads. The decrease in the economic hedge target liability in 2018 was primarily due to higher interest rates and wider credit spreads, offset by lower equity markets.
Change in Fair Value of the Hedging Portfolio
The changes in the fair value of the economic hedge target and, to a lesser extent, the embedded derivative valuation under GAAP, were offset in part by the following changes in the fair value of the variable annuity hedging portfolio:
 Changes in the fair value of interest rate derivative contracts, which included swaps, swaptions and futures, resulted in gains driven by lower interest rates in 2020 and 2019. The net losses in 2018 reflected the impact of increases in interest rates, and widening of credit spreads.
 Changes in the fair value of equity derivative contracts, which included futures and options, resulted in losses in 2020 and 2019 and gains in 2018, and varied based on the relative change in equity market returns in the respective periods.
 Changes in the fair value of fixed maturity securities, primarily corporate bonds, are used as a capital-efficient way to economically hedge interest rate and credit spread-related risk. Beginning in July 2019, the change in the fair value of available-for-sale hedging bonds is reported as a component of comprehensive income in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). Prior to July 2019, the change in the fair value of the hedging bonds, which was excluded from the adjusted pre-tax income of the Individual Retirement and Group Retirement segments, was reported in net investment income on the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). The change in the fair value of the corporate bond hedging program in 2020 reflected gains due to decreases in interest rates, and tightening credit spreads. The gains in 2019 reflected the impact of decreases in interest rates, and tightening credit spreads. The losses in 2018 reflected the impact of increases in interest rates, and widening of credit spreads.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 135
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
DAC
The following table summarizes the major components of the changes in DAC, including VOBA, within the Life and Retirement companies:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Balance, beginning of year
$
8,119
$
9,286
$
7,846
Initial allowance upon CECL adoption
-
-
Acquisition costs deferred
1,180
1,128
Amortization expense:
Update of assumptions included in adjusted pre-tax income
Related to realized capital gains and losses
All other operating amortization
(856)
(875)
(1,000)
Increase (decrease) in DAC due to foreign exchange
(23)
Change related to unrealized depreciation (appreciation) of investments
(1,123)
(1,744)
1,030
Balance, end of year, excluding Fortitude Re DAC(a)
7,316
8,119
9,286
DAC on business ceded to Fortitude Re(b)
-
Balance, end of year, including Fortitude Re DAC
$
7,316
$
8,575
$
9,809
(a)DAC balance excluding the amount related to unrealized depreciation (appreciation) of investments was $10.5 billion, $10.1 billion and $9.6 billion at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(b)As of closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale on June 2, 2020, these DAC balances were deemed to be not recoverable and were written off.
The net adjustments to DAC amortization from the update of actuarial assumptions for estimated gross profits, including those reported within change in DAC related to net realized capital gains (losses), represented two percent, two percent and four percent of the DAC balance excluding the amount related to unrealized depreciation (appreciation) of investments as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Reversion to the Mean
The reversion to the mean rate is updated quarterly based on market returns and can change dramatically in periods where market returns move significantly. For December 31, 2020 compared to September 30, 2020, we decreased our reversion to the mean rates of return (gross of fees) to 1.66 percent from 3.12 percent for the variable annuity product line in Individual Retirement, and to 0.55 percent from 2.87 percent for the variable annuity product line in Group Retirement, primarily due to recent equity market movements. The five-year reversion to the mean period did not meet the criteria for adjustment in 2020 which would have otherwise required a reset of the start date used in the calculation of the average gross long-term return rate. The long-term growth assumption used in our reversion to the mean methodology remained unchanged at 7.0 percent in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
For additional discussion of assumptions related to our reversion to the mean methodology see Critical Accounting Estimates - Estimated Gross Profits for Investment-Oriented Products.
DAC and Reserves Related to Unrealized Appreciation of Investments
DAC and Reserves for universal life and investment-oriented products are adjusted at each balance sheet date to reflect the change in DAC, unearned revenue, and benefit reserves with an offset to Other comprehensive income (OCI) as if securities available for sale had been sold at their stated aggregate fair value and the proceeds reinvested at current yields (shadow Investment-Oriented Adjustments). Similarly, for long-duration traditional products, significant unrealized appreciation of investments in a sustained low interest rate environment may cause additional future policy benefit liabilities with an offset to OCI to be recorded.
Shadow adjustments to DAC and unearned revenue generally move in the opposite direction of the change in unrealized appreciation of the available for sale securities portfolio, reducing the reported DAC and unearned revenue balance when market interest rates decline. Conversely, shadow adjustments to benefit reserves generally move in the same direction as the change in unrealized appreciation of the available for sale securities portfolio, increasing reported future policy benefit liabilities balance when market interest rates decline.
136 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Market conditions in 2020 drove an $8.7 billion increase in the unrealized appreciation of fixed maturity securities held to support businesses in the Life and Retirement companies at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the shadow Investment-Oriented Adjustments reflected decreases in amortized balances including DAC and Unearned Revenue Reserves, while accrued liabilities such as policyholder benefit liabilities increased compared to December 31, 2019. Accrued shadow loss recognition reserves decreased from December 31, 2019, primarily due to the discontinuation of recognizing shadow loss recognition reserves related to Fortitude Re funds withheld assets. Although these assets remain on AIG’s balance sheet, subsequent to the June 2, 2020 deconsolidation of Fortitude Re, AIG is no longer exposed to the returns on these assets and corresponding shadow adjustments because the assets economically belong to Fortitude Re as a result of the funds withheld arrangements with Fortitude Holdings.
For further discussion on the sale of Fortitude Holdings see Consolidated Results of Operation.
Reserves
The following table presents a rollforward of insurance reserves by operating segments for Life and Retirement, including future policy benefits, policyholder contract deposits, other policyholder funds, and separate account liabilities, as well as Retail Mutual Funds and Group Retirement mutual fund assets under administration:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Individual Retirement
Balance at beginning of year, gross
$
144,753
$
132,529
$
138,341
Premiums and deposits
10,370
14,899
15,621
Surrenders and withdrawals
(12,023)
(13,135)
(14,048)
Death and other contract benefits
(3,075)
(3,204)
(3,316)
Subtotal
140,025
131,089
136,598
Change in fair value of underlying assets and reserve accretion, net of policy fees
7,285
11,492
(5,302)
Cost of funds*
1,675
1,666
1,538
Other reserve changes
(148)
(305)
Balance at end of year
148,837
144,753
132,529
Reinsurance ceded
(313)
(308)
(318)
Total Individual Retirement insurance reserves and mutual fund assets
$
148,524
$
144,445
$
132,211
Group Retirement
Balance at beginning of year, gross
$
102,049
$
91,685
$
97,306
Premiums and deposits
7,496
8,346
8,639
Surrenders and withdrawals
(8,696)
(10,317)
(10,652)
Death and other contract benefits
(740)
(675)
(606)
Subtotal
100,109
89,039
94,687
Change in fair value of underlying assets and reserve accretion, net of policy fees
9,644
11,939
(4,106)
Cost of funds*
1,125
1,128
1,106
Other reserve changes
(227)
(57)
(2)
Balance at end of year
110,651
102,049
91,685
Total Group Retirement insurance reserves and mutual fund assets
$
110,651
$
102,049
$
91,685
Life Insurance
Balance at beginning of year, gross
$
27,397
$
24,844
$
24,569
Premiums and deposits
4,046
3,931
3,778
Surrenders and withdrawals
(484)
(663)
(1,068)
Death and other contract benefits
(557)
(663)
(653)
Subtotal
30,402
27,449
26,626
Change in fair value of underlying assets and reserve accretion, net of policy fees
(1,133)
(1,138)
(1,124)
Cost of funds*
Other reserve changes
(1,644)
(1,039)
Balance at end of year
27,998
27,397
24,844
Reinsurance ceded
(1,437)
(1,358)
(1,436)
Total Life Insurance reserves
$
26,561
$
26,039
$
23,408
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 137
ITEM 7 | Insurance Reserves
Institutional Markets
Balance at beginning of year, gross
$
23,673
$
21,762
$
20,645
Premiums and deposits
4,846
2,822
3,207
Surrenders and withdrawals
(1,788)
(984)
(2,034)
Death and other contract benefits
(886)
(1,102)
(655)
Subtotal
25,845
22,498
21,163
Change in fair value of underlying assets and reserve accretion, net of policy fees
Cost of funds*
Other reserve changes
Balance at end of year
27,342
23,673
21,762
Reinsurance ceded
(45)
(44)
(44)
Total Institutional Markets reserves
$
27,297
$
23,629
$
21,718
Total insurance reserves and mutual fund assets
Balance at beginning of year, gross
$
297,872
$
270,820
$
280,861
Premiums and deposits
26,758
29,998
31,245
Surrenders and withdrawals
(22,991)
(25,099)
(27,802)
Death and other contract benefits
(5,258)
(5,644)
(5,230)
Subtotal
296,381
270,075
279,074
Change in fair value of underlying assets and reserve accretion, net of policy fees
16,619
23,081
(10,393)
Cost of funds*
3,477
3,524
3,367
Other reserve changes
(1,649)
1,192
(1,228)
Balance at end of year, excluding Fortitude Re reserves
314,828
297,872
270,820
Fortitude Re reserves
28,505
30,441
28,747
Balance at end of year, including Fortitude Re reserves
343,333
328,313
299,567
Fortitude Re reinsurance ceded
(28,505)
-
-
Reinsurance ceded
(1,795)
(1,710)
(1,798)
Total insurance reserves and mutual fund assets
$
313,033
$
326,603
$
297,769
* Excludes amortization of deferred sales inducements.
Insurance reserves, as well as Retail Mutual Funds and Group Retirement mutual fund assets under administration, were comprised of the following balances:
December 31,
December 31,
(in millions)
Future policy benefits
$
48,864
$
48,388
Policyholder contract deposits
160,450
152,018
Other policyholder funds*
Separate account liabilities
100,290
93,272
Total insurance reserves
310,561
294,654
Mutual fund assets
32,772
33,659
Total insurance reserves and mutual fund assets
$
343,333
$
328,313
* Excludes unearned revenue liability.
138 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Liquidity refers to the ability to generate sufficient cash resources to meet our payment obligations. It is defined as cash and unencumbered assets that can be monetized in a short period of time at a reasonable cost. We endeavor to manage our liquidity prudently through various risk committees, policies and procedures, and a stress testing and liquidity risk framework established by our Treasury group with oversight by Enterprise Risk Management (ERM). Our liquidity risk framework is designed to manage liquidity at both AIG Parent and its subsidiaries to meet our financial obligations for a minimum of six months under a liquidity stress scenario.
See Enterprise Risk Management - Risk Appetite, Limits, Identification and Measurement and Enterprise Risk Management - Liquidity Risk Management below for additional information.
Capital refers to the long-term financial resources available to support the operation of our businesses, fund business growth, and cover financial and operational needs that arise from adverse circumstances. Our primary source of ongoing capital generation is derived from the profitability of our insurance subsidiaries. We must comply with numerous constraints on our minimum capital positions. These constraints drive the requirements for capital adequacy at AIG and the individual businesses and are based on internally-defined risk tolerances, regulatory requirements, rating agency and creditor expectations and business needs. Actual capital levels are monitored on a regular basis, and using ERM’s stress testing methodology, we evaluate the capital impact of potential macroeconomic, financial and insurance stresses in relation to the relevant capital constraints of both AIG and our insurance subsidiaries.
We believe that we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to satisfy future requirements and meet our obligations to policyholders, customers, creditors and debt-holders, including those arising from reasonably foreseeable contingencies or events.
Nevertheless, some circumstances may cause our cash or capital needs to exceed projected liquidity or readily deployable capital resources. Additional collateral calls, deterioration in investment portfolios or reserve strengthening affecting statutory surplus, higher surrenders of annuities and other policies, downgrades in credit ratings, catastrophic losses or fluctuations in the capital markets generally may result in significant additional cash or capital needs and loss of sources of liquidity and capital. Other potential events that could cause a liquidity strain include an economic collapse of a nation or region significant to our operations, nationalization, catastrophic terrorist acts, pandemics or other events causing economic or political upheaval. In addition, regulatory and other legal restrictions could limit our ability to transfer funds freely, either to or from our subsidiaries.
For a discussion regarding risks associated with COVID-19, see Part I. Item 1A. - Risk Factors - COVID-19 is adversely affecting, and is expected to continue to adversely affect, our global business, financial condition and results of operations, and its ultimate impact will depend on future developments that are uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope, severity and duration of the crisis, and the governmental, legislative and regulatory actions taken and court decisions rendered in response thereto.
Depending on market conditions, regulatory and rating agency considerations and other factors, we may take various liability and capital management actions. Liability management actions may include, but are not limited to, repurchasing or redeeming outstanding debt, issuing new debt or engaging in debt exchange offers. Capital management actions may include, but are not limited to, issuing preferred stock, paying dividends to our shareholders on the AIG Common Stock, paying dividends to the holders of our Series A Preferred Stock, and repurchases of AIG Common Stock.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 139
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES HIGHLIGHTS
Sources(a)
AIG Parent Funding from Subsidiaries
During 2020, AIG Parent received $1.8 billion in dividends and $108 million in loan repayments from subsidiaries. Of this amount, $1.3 billion consisted of dividends in the form of cash and fixed maturity securities from our General Insurance companies and $473 million consisted of dividends and $108 million in loan repayments in the form of cash from our Life and Retirement companies.
AIG Parent also received a net amount of $1.7 billion in tax sharing payments in the form of cash from our insurance businesses in 2020, including $419 million of such payments in the fourth quarter of 2020. The tax sharing payments may be subject to further adjustment in future periods.
Revolving Credit Facility
On March 20, 2020, AIG Parent borrowed $1.3 billion under its $4.5 billion committed, revolving syndicated credit facility, which amount was repaid in full with interest on June 9, 2020.
Debt Issuance
In May 2020, we issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.500% Notes Due 2025; $1.6 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.400% Notes Due 2030; and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.375% Notes Due 2050.
Other Cash Inflows
During 2020 we received other cash inflows of approximately $2.2 billion in connection with debt unrelated to AIG’s general borrowings, including:
 $2.1 billion of debt of consolidated investment entities not guaranteed by AIG, which includes real estate investments, affordable housing partnerships and other securitization vehicles;
 $126 million of borrowings supported by assets, principally GIAs; and
 $5 million of subsidiary notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable, not guaranteed by AIG.
Majority Interest Fortitude Sale
In June 2020, AIG completed the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale for $2.2 billion. AIG Parent contributed $700 million of the proceeds of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale to certain of its General Insurance subsidiaries and $135 million of the proceeds of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale to certain of its Life and Retirement subsidiaries.
140 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Uses
Debt Reduction(b)
During 2020, $1.7 billion of debt categorized as general borrowings matured, was repaid or redeemed as follows:
 Redemption of $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.35% Callable Notes Due 2045.
 Repayment of $638 million aggregate principal amount of our 3.375% Notes Due 2020 made on August 15, 2020.
 Repayment of $708 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.400% Notes Due 2020 made on December 15, 2020.
We made interest payments on our general borrowings totaling $1.0 billion during 2020.
Other Cash Outflows
During 2020 we made other repayments of approximately $3.1 billion in connection with debt unrelated to AIG’s general borrowings, including:
 $2.8 billion on debt of consolidated investment entities not guaranteed by AIG, which includes real estate investments, affordable housing partnerships and other securitization vehicles;
 $265 million on borrowings supported by assets, principally GIAs; and
 $48 million on subsidiary notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable, not guaranteed by AIG.
Revolving Credit Facility
On June 9, 2020, AIG Parent repaid in full with interest the $1.3 billion borrowed under its $4.5 billion committed, revolving syndicated credit facility.
Dividend
We paid a cash dividend of $365.625 per share on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock during each quarter of 2020 totaling $29 million.
We paid a cash dividend of $0.32 per share on AIG Common Stock during each quarter of 2020 totaling $1.1 billion.
Repurchase of Common Stock(a)
We repurchased approximately 12 million shares of AIG Common Stock during the first quarter of 2020, for an aggregate purchase price of $500 million, under an accelerated stock repurchase (ASR) agreement executed in February 2020.
Majority Interest Fortitude Sale
In June 2020, AIG completed the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale for $2.2 billion. AIG Parent contributed $700 million of the proceeds of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale to certain of its General Insurance subsidiaries and $135 million of the proceeds of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale to certain of its Life and Retirement subsidiaries.
IRS Tax Prepayment
In June 2020, AIG Parent made a prepayment of approximately $548 million to the U.S. Treasury in connection with certain settlement agreements described in Tax Matters below.
(a) In January 2021, we received aggregate proceeds of approximately $92 million in connection with warrant exercises that occurred prior to the expiration of warrants to purchase shares of AIG Common Stock on January 19, 2021. Pursuant to an Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plan, in January 2021, we repurchased approximately $92 million of shares of AIG Common Stock with proceeds received from warrant exercises. As of February 18, 2021, approximately $1.4 billion remained under our share repurchase authorization.
(b) On February 1, 2020, AIG redeemed all of its outstanding 3.300% Notes Due 2021 (the Notes), for a redemption price of 100 percent of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest. As of December 31, 2020, $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of the Notes were outstanding.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 141
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Analysis of Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table presents selected data from AIG's Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Sources:
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
1,038
$
-
$
-
Net cash provided by other investing activities
-
-
5,494
Changes in policyholder contract balances
4,531
5,630
6,634
Issuance of long-term debt
4,196
2,657
Issuance of debt of consolidated investment entities
2,128
3,147
2,077
Issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
-
-
Net cash provided by other financing activities
1,600
-
Total sources
12,434
11,596
16,862
Uses:
Net cash used in operating activities
-
(1,807)
(394)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash and restricted cash acquired
-
-
(5,717)
Net cash used in other investing activities
(6,202)
(5,475)
-
Repayments of long-term debt
(1,923)
(1,504)
(3,044)
Repayments of debt of consolidated investment entities
(2,783)
(1,698)
(628)
Purchase of common stock
(500)
-
(1,739)
Dividends paid on preferred stock
(29)
(22)
-
Dividends paid on common stock
(1,103)
(1,114)
(1,138)
Purchases of warrants
-
-
(11)
Net cash used in other financing activities
-
-
(3,559)
Total uses
(12,540)
(11,620)
(16,230)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and restricted cash
(11)
Increase (decrease) in cash and restricted cash
$
(57)
$
(8)
$
The following table presents a summary of AIG’s Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows:
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions)
Summary:
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
$
1,038
$
(1,807)
$
(394)
Net cash used in investing activities
(6,202)
(5,475)
(223)
Net cash provided by financing activities
5,058
7,258
1,249
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and restricted cash
(11)
Net Increase (decrease) in cash and restricted cash
(57)
(8)
Cash and restricted cash at beginning of year
3,287
3,358
2,737
Change in cash of businesses held for sale
-
(63)
-
Cash and restricted cash at end of year
$
3,230
$
3,287
$
3,358
142 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Cash Flow Activities
Insurance companies generally receive most premiums in advance of the payment of claims or policy benefits. The ability of insurance companies to generate positive cash flow is affected by the frequency and severity of losses under their insurance policies, policy retention rates and operating expenses.
Interest payments totaled $1.1 billion in 2020 compared to $1.3 billion in 2019 and $1.3 billion in 2018. Excluding interest payments, AIG had operating cash inflows of $2.1 billion in 2020 compared to operating cash outflows of $481 million in 2019 and operating cash inflows of $918 million in 2018.
Investing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $6.2 billion compared to net cash used in investing activities of $5.5 billion in 2019 and $0.2 billion in 2018. Net cash used in investing activities in 2018 included our acquisition of Validus for approximately $5.5 billion in cash.
Financing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 reflected:
• approximately $1.1 billion in the aggregate to pay a dividend of $0.32 per share on AIG Common Stock in each quarter of 2020;
• approximately $29 million in the aggregate to pay a dividend of $365.625 per share on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock in each quarter of 2020;
• $500 million to repurchase approximately 12 million shares of AIG Common Stock;
• approximately $2.3 billion in net inflows from the issuance and repayment of long-term debt; and
• approximately $655 million in net outflows from the issuance and repayment of debt of consolidated investment entities.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 reflected:
• approximately $1.1 billion in the aggregate to pay a dividend of $0.32 per share on AIG Common Stock in each quarter of 2019;
• approximately $22 million to pay a dividend of $369.6875 per share, $365.625 per share and $365.625 per share on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2019, respectively;
• approximately $770 million in net outflows from the issuance and repayment of long-term debt;
• approximately $1.4 billion in net inflows from the issuance and repayment of debt of consolidated investment entities; and
• approximately $485 million inflow from the issuance of preferred stock.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2018 reflected:
• approximately $1.1 billion in the aggregate to pay a dividend of $0.32 per share on AIG Common Stock in each quarter of 2018;
• approximately $1.7 billion to repurchase approximately 36.5 million shares of AIG Common Stock;
• approximately $387 million in net outflows from the issuance and repayment of long-term debt; and
• approximately $1.4 billion in net inflows from the issuance and repayment of debt of consolidated investment entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources of AIG Parent and Subsidiaries
AIG Parent
As of December 31, 2020, AIG Parent had approximately $15.0 billion in liquidity sources. AIG Parent’s liquidity sources are primarily held in the form of cash, short-term investments and publicly traded, investment grade rated fixed maturity securities and also include a committed, revolving syndicated credit facility. Fixed maturity securities primarily include U.S. government and government sponsored entity securities, U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities, corporate and municipal bonds and certain other highly rated securities. AIG Parent actively manages its assets and liabilities in terms of products, counterparties and duration. Based upon an assessment of funding needs, the liquidity sources can be readily monetized through sales or repurchase agreements or contributed as admitted assets to regulated insurance companies. AIG Parent liquidity is monitored through the use of various internal liquidity risk measures. AIG Parent’s primary sources of liquidity are dividends, distributions, loans and other payments from subsidiaries and credit facilities. AIG Parent’s primary uses of liquidity are for debt service, capital and liability management, and operating expenses.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 143
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to satisfy our reasonably foreseeable future requirements and meet our obligations to our creditors, debt-holders and insurance company subsidiaries. We expect to access the debt and preferred equity markets from time to time to meet funding requirements as needed.
We utilize our capital resources to support our businesses, with the majority of capital allocated to our insurance operations. Should we have or generate more capital than is needed to support our business strategies (including organic growth or acquisition opportunities) or mitigate risks inherent to our business, we may develop plans to distribute such capital to shareholders via dividends or AIG Common Stock repurchase authorizations or deploy such capital towards liability management.
In the normal course, it is expected that a portion of the capital released by our insurance operations, by our other operations or through the utilization of AIG’s deferred tax assets may be available to support our business strategies, for distribution to shareholders or for liability management.
In developing plans to distribute capital, AIG considers a number of factors, including, but not limited to: AIG’s business and strategic plans, expectations for capital generation and utilization, AIG’s funding capacity and capital resources in comparison to internal benchmarks, as well as rating agency expectations, regulatory standards and internal stress tests for capital.
The following table presents AIG Parent's liquidity sources:
As of
As of
(in millions)
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2019
Cash and short-term investments(a)
$
6,762
$
2,804
Unencumbered fixed maturity securities(b)
3,711
4,777
Total AIG Parent liquidity
10,473
7,581
Available capacity under committed, syndicated credit facility(c)
4,500
4,500
Total AIG Parent liquidity sources
$
14,973
$
12,081
(a) Cash and short-term investments include reverse repurchase agreements totaling $5.4 billion and $2.1 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(b) Unencumbered securities consist of publicly traded, investment grade rated fixed maturity securities. Fixed maturity securities primarily include U.S. government and government sponsored entity securities, U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities, corporate and municipal bonds and certain other highly rated securities.
(c) For additional information relating to this committed, syndicated credit facility see - Credit Facilities below.
Insurance Companies
We expect that our insurance companies will be able to continue to satisfy reasonably foreseeable future liquidity requirements and meet their obligations, including those arising from reasonably foreseeable contingencies or events, through cash from operations and, to the extent necessary, monetization of invested assets. Our insurance companies’ liquidity resources are primarily held in the form of cash, short-term investments and publicly traded, investment grade rated fixed maturity securities.
Each of our material insurance companies’ liquidity is monitored through various internal liquidity risk measures. The primary sources of liquidity are premiums, fees, reinsurance recoverables and investment income and maturities. The primary uses of liquidity are paid losses, reinsurance payments, benefit claims, surrenders, withdrawals, interest payments, dividends, expenses, investment purchases and collateral requirements.
Our General Insurance companies may require additional funding to meet capital or liquidity needs under certain circumstances. Large catastrophes may require us to provide additional support to our affected operations. Downgrades in our credit ratings could put pressure on the insurer financial strength ratings of our subsidiaries, which could result in non-renewals or cancellations by policyholders and adversely affect a subsidiary’s ability to meet its own obligations. Increases in market interest rates may adversely affect the financial strength ratings of our subsidiaries, as rating agency capital models may reduce the amount of available capital relative to required capital.
Management believes that because of the size and liquidity of our Life and Retirement companies’ investment portfolios, normal deviations from projected claim or surrender experience would not create significant liquidity risk. Furthermore, our Life and Retirement companies’ products contain certain features that mitigate surrender risk, including surrender charges. However, in times of extreme capital markets disruption or as a result of fluctuations in the capital markets generally, liquidity needs could outpace resources. As part of their risk management framework, our Life and Retirement companies continue to evaluate and, where appropriate, pursue strategies and programs to improve their liquidity position and facilitate their ability to maintain a fully invested asset portfolio.
144 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Certain of our U.S. insurance companies are members of the FHLBs in their respective districts. Borrowings from FHLBs are used to supplement liquidity or for other uses deemed appropriate by management. Our U.S. General Insurance companies had no outstanding borrowings from FHLBs at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our U.S. Life and Retirement companies had $3.6 billion and $3.5 billion which were due to FHLBs in their respective districts at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, under funding agreements issued through our Individual Retirement, Group Retirement and Institutional Markets operating segments, which were reported in Policyholder contract deposits. Proceeds from funding agreements are generally invested in fixed income securities and other investments intended to generate spread income. These investment contracts do not have mortality or morbidity risk and are similar to GICs. In addition, our U.S. Life and Retirement companies had no outstanding borrowings in the form of cash advances from FHLBs at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Certain of our U.S. Life and Retirement companies have programs, which began in 2012, that lend securities from their investment portfolio to supplement liquidity or for other uses as deemed appropriate by management. Under these programs, these U.S. Life and Retirement companies lend securities to financial institutions and receive cash as collateral equal to 102 percent of the fair value of the loaned securities. Cash collateral received is invested in short-term investments or partially used for short-term liquidity purposes. Additionally, the aggregate amount of securities that a Life and Retirement company is able to lend under its program at any time is limited to five percent of its general account statutory-basis admitted assets. Our U.S. Life and Retirement companies had $3.4 billion and $2.8 billion of securities subject to these agreements at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $3.5 billion and $2.9 billion of liabilities to borrowers for collateral received at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
AIG generally manages capital between AIG Parent and our insurance companies through internal, Board-approved policies and limits, as well as management standards. In addition, AIG Parent has unconditional capital maintenance agreements (CMAs) in place with certain subsidiaries. Nevertheless, regulatory and other legal restrictions could limit our ability to transfer capital freely, either to or from our subsidiaries. In June 2020, upon closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, the CMA between AIG Parent and Fortitude Re was terminated.
AIG Parent and/or certain subsidiaries are parties to several letter of credit agreements with various financial institutions, which issue letters of credit from time to time in support of our insurance companies. These letters of credit are subject to reimbursement by AIG Parent and/or certain subsidiaries in the event of a drawdown by our insurance companies. Letters of credit issued in support of the General Insurance companies totaled approximately $4.6 billion at December 31, 2020. Letters of credit issued in support of the Life and Retirement companies totaled approximately $612 million at December 31, 2020. In June 2020, upon closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, the $550 million of letters of credit issued in support of Fortitude Re and subject to reimbursement by AIG in the event of a drawdown were terminated.
In 2020, our General Insurance companies collectively paid a total of approximately $1.3 billion in dividends in the form of cash and fixed maturity securities to AIG Parent. The fixed maturity securities primarily included U.S. treasuries and securities issued by other U.S. agencies. In June 2020, upon closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, AIG contributed $700 million of the proceeds of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale to certain of its General Insurance subsidiaries.
In 2020, our Life and Retirement companies collectively paid a total of approximately $581 million in dividends and loan repayments in the form of cash to AIG Parent. In June 2020, upon closing of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale, AIG contributed $135 million of the proceeds of the Majority Interest Fortitude Sale to certain of its Life and Retirement subsidiaries.
Tax Matters
In October 2020, the Southern District of New York dismissed the case for the 1997 tax year related to the disallowance of foreign tax credits associated with cross border financing transactions based upon the settlement reached between AIG and the government. The settlement concluded our ongoing dispute related to the disallowance of foreign tax credits associated with cross border financing transactions for all years and as a result of the settlement, we will be required to make a payment to the U.S. Treasury. The amount we currently expect to pay based on settlement terms is approximately $0.7 billion, including obligations of AIG Parent and subsidiaries. This amount is net of payments previously made with respect to cross border financing transactions from tax years 1997 through 2006 and other matters related to 2006 and prior, including a prepayment of approximately $548 million that AIG made to the U.S. Treasury in June 2020. The amount also includes interest that will become due after review of the interest calculations and will reflect benefits from the application of interest netting which AIG has requested. There remains uncertainty with regard to the amount and timing of any additional payments, which could be made during the first half of 2021.
For additional information regarding this matter see Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 145
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Credit Facilities
We maintain a committed, revolving syndicated credit facility (the Facility) as a potential source of liquidity for general corporate purposes. The Facility provides for aggregate commitments by the bank syndicate to provide unsecured revolving loans and/or standby letters of credit of up to $4.5 billion without any limits on the type of borrowings and is scheduled to expire in June 2022.
On March 20, 2020, we borrowed $1.3 billion under the Facility to further increase AIG Parent liquidity. On June 9, 2020, we repaid the $1.3 billion borrowed under the Facility in full with interest. As of December 31, 2020, a total of $4.5 billion remains available under the Facility. Our ability to utilize the Facility is not contingent on our credit ratings. However, our ability to utilize the Facility is conditioned on the satisfaction of certain legal, operating, administrative and financial covenants and other requirements contained in the Facility. These include covenants relating to our maintenance of a specified total consolidated net worth and total consolidated debt to total consolidated capitalization. Failure to satisfy these and other requirements contained in the Facility would restrict our access to the Facility and could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity. We expect to utilize the Facility from time to time, and may use the proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes contractual obligations in total, and by remaining maturity:
December 31, 2020
Payments due by Period
Total
2022 -
2024 -
(in millions)
Payments
Thereafter
Insurance operations
Loss reserves(a)
$
79,356
$
22,220
$
22,458
$
11,586
$
23,092
Insurance and investment contract liabilities
293,158
17,563
32,966
32,173
210,456
Borrowings
1,356
Interest payments on borrowings
Operating leases
Other long-term obligations
-
-
Total
$
375,300
$
40,254
$
55,759
$
44,239
$
235,048
Other
Borrowings
$
26,747
$
1,658
$
3,400
$
4,486
$
17,203
Interest payments on borrowings
14,841
1,074
1,893
1,800
10,074
Operating leases
Other long-term obligations
Total
$
42,815
$
2,886
$
5,542
$
6,427
$
27,960
Consolidated
Loss reserves(a)
$
79,356
$
22,220
$
22,458
$
11,586
$
23,092
Insurance and investment contract liabilities
293,158
17,563
32,966
32,173
210,456
Borrowings(b)
28,103
1,896
3,402
4,746
18,059
Interest payments on borrowings
15,594
1,124
1,992
1,899
10,579
Operating leases(c)
1,635
Other long-term obligations(d)
Total(e)
$
418,115
$
43,140
$
61,301
$
50,666
$
263,008
(a) Represents loss reserves, undiscounted and gross of reinsurance.
(b) Does not reflect $9.4 billion of notes issued by consolidated investment entities, for which recourse is limited to the assets of the respective investment entities and for which there is no recourse to the general credit of AIG.
(c) The company also procured additional office space via operating lease contracts for which lease commencement will occur in 2021. Future undiscounted obligations stemming from those contracts total $389 million, which excludes the effect of renewal options.
(d) Primarily includes contracts to purchase future services and other capital expenditures.
(e) Does not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $2.3 billion or the expected payment of $0.7 billion to be made to the U.S. Treasury associated with settlement agreements reached between AIG and the government. There remains uncertainty with regard to the amount and timing of the expected payment, which could be made during the first half of 2021. See Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
146 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Loss Reserves
Loss reserves relate to our General Insurance companies and represent estimates of future loss and loss adjustment expense payments based on historical loss development payment patterns. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the payments by period presented above could be materially different from actual required payments. We believe that our General Insurance companies maintain adequate financial resources to meet the actual required payments under these obligations.
Insurance and Investment Contract Liabilities
Insurance and investment contract liabilities, including GIC liabilities, relate to our Life and Retirement companies. These liabilities include various investment-type products with contractually scheduled maturities, including periodic payments. These liabilities also include benefit and claim liabilities, of which a significant portion represents policies and contracts that do not have stated contractual maturity dates and may not result in any future payment obligations. For these policies and contracts (i) we are not currently making payments until the occurrence of an insurable event, such as death or disability, (ii) payments are conditional on survivorship or (iii) payment may occur due to a surrender or other non-scheduled event beyond our control.
We have made significant assumptions to determine the estimated undiscounted cash flows of these contractual policy benefits. These assumptions include mortality, morbidity, future lapse rates, expenses, investment returns and interest crediting rates, offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force policies. Due to the significance of the assumptions, the periodic amounts presented could be materially different from actual required payments. The amounts presented in this table are undiscounted and exceed the future policy benefits and policyholder contract deposits included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We believe that our Life and Retirement companies have adequate financial resources to meet the payments actually required under these obligations. These subsidiaries have substantial liquidity in the form of cash and short-term investments. In addition, our Life and Retirement companies maintain significant levels of investment grade rated fixed maturity securities, including substantial holdings in government and corporate bonds, and could seek to monetize those holdings in the event operating cash flows are insufficient. We expect liquidity needs related to GIC liabilities to be funded through cash flows generated from maturities and sales of invested assets.
Borrowings
Our borrowings exclude those incurred by consolidated investments and include hybrid financial instrument liabilities recorded at fair value. We expect to repay the long-term debt maturities and interest accrued on borrowings by AIG through maturing investments and dispositions of invested assets, future cash flows from operations, cash flows generated from invested assets, future debt or preferred stock issuance and other financing arrangements. Borrowings supported by assets of AIG include various notes and bonds payable as well as GIAs that are supported by cash and investments held by AIG Parent and certain non-insurance subsidiaries for the repayment of those obligations.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 147
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Commercial Commitments in total, and by remaining maturity:
December 31, 2020
Amount of Commitment Expiring
Total Amounts
2022 -
2024 -
(in millions)
Committed
Thereafter
Insurance operations
Guarantees:
Standby letters of credit
$
$
$
-
$
-
$
Guarantees of indebtedness
-
-
-
All other guarantees(a)
-
-
-
Commitments:
Investment commitments(b)
7,217
3,419
2,330
1,426
Commitments to extend credit
5,062
1,835
2,167
Letters of credit
-
-
-
Other commercial commitments
-
Total(c)
$
12,503
$
5,466
$
4,501
$
1,660
$
Other
Guarantees:
Liquidity facilities(d)
$
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
Standby letters of credit
-
-
-
All other guarantees
-
-
-
Commitments:
Investment commitments(b)
-
Commitments to extend credit
-
-
-
-
-
Letters of credit
-
-
Other commercial commitments
-
-
-
-
-
Total(c)(e)
$
$
$
$
$
Consolidated
Guarantees:
Liquidity facilities(d)
$
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
Standby letters of credit
-
-
Guarantees of indebtedness
-
-
-
All other guarantees(a)
-
-
-
Commitments:
Investment commitments(b)
7,305
3,454
2,350
1,459
Commitments to extend credit
5,062
1,835
2,167
Letters of credit
-
-
Other commercial commitments
-
Total(c)(e)
$
13,198
$
5,764
$
4,521
$
1,963
$
(a) Excludes potential amounts for indemnification obligations included in asset sales agreements. For further information on indemnification obligations see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(b) Includes commitments to invest in private equity funds, hedge funds and other funds and commitments to purchase and develop real estate in the United States and abroad. The commitments to invest in private equity funds, hedge funds and other funds are called at the discretion of each fund, as needed for funding new investments or expenses of the fund. The expiration of these commitments is estimated in the table above based on the expected life cycle of the related fund, consistent with past trends of requirements for funding. Investors under these commitments are primarily insurance and real estate subsidiaries.
(c) Does not include guarantees, CMAs or other support arrangements among AIG consolidated entities.
(d) Primarily represents liquidity facilities provided in connection with certain municipal swap transactions and collateralized bond obligations.
(e) Excludes commitments with respect to pension plans. The annual pension contribution for 2021 is expected to be approximately $68 million for U.S. and non-U.S. plans.
148 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Arrangements with Variable Interest Entities
We enter into various arrangements with variable interest entities (VIEs) in the normal course of business, and we consolidate a VIE when we are the primary beneficiary of the entity.
For a further discussion of our involvement with VIEs see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Indemnification Agreements
We are subject to financial guarantees and indemnity arrangements in connection with our sales of businesses. These arrangements may be triggered by declines in asset values, specified business contingencies, the realization of contingent liabilities, litigation developments, or breaches of representations, warranties or covenants provided by us. These arrangements are typically subject to time limitations, defined by contract or by operation of law, such as by prevailing statutes of limitation. Depending on the specific terms of the arrangements, the maximum potential obligation may or may not be subject to contractual limitations.
For additional information regarding our indemnification agreements see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We have recorded liabilities for certain of these arrangements where it is possible to estimate them. These liabilities are not material in the aggregate. We are unable to develop a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential payout under some of these arrangements. Overall, we believe the likelihood that we will have to make any material payments under these arrangements is remote.
Debt
The following table provides the rollforward of AIG’s total debt outstanding:
Balance at
Maturities
Effect of
Balance at
Year Ended December 31, 2020
December 31,
and
Foreign
Other
December 31,
(in millions)
Issuances
Repayments
Exchange
Changes
Debt issued or guaranteed by AIG:
AIG general borrowings:
Notes and bonds payable
$
20,467
$
4,065
$
(1,696)
$
$
$
23,068
Junior subordinated debt
1,542
-
-
1,561
AIG Japan Holdings Kabushiki Kaisha
-
-
-
AIGLH notes and bonds payable
-
-
-
-
AIGLH junior subordinated debt
-
-
-
-
Validus notes and bonds payable
-
-
-
(5)
Total AIG general borrowings
23,349
4,065
(1,696)
25,981
AIG borrowings supported by assets:(a)
Series AIGFP matched notes and bonds payable
-
-
-
-
GIAs, at fair value
2,003
(261)
-
(b)
2,033
Notes and bonds payable, at fair value
(4)
-
(b)
Total AIG borrowings supported by assets
2,083
(265)
-
2,118
Total debt issued or guaranteed by AIG
25,432
4,191
(1,961)
28,099
Other subsidiaries' notes, bonds, loans and
mortgages payable - not guaranteed by AIG
(48)
-
-
Total long-term debt
25,479
4,196
(2,009)
28,103
Debt of consolidated investment entities - not
guaranteed by AIG(c)
9,871
2,128
(2,783)
(d)
9,431
Total debt
$
35,350
$
6,324
$
(4,792)
$
$
$
37,534
(a) AIG Parent guarantees all such debt, except for Series AIGFP matched notes and bonds payable, which are direct obligations of AIG Parent. Collateral posted to third parties was $1.4 billion and $1.5 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This collateral primarily consists of securities of the U.S. government and government sponsored entities and generally cannot be repledged or resold by the counterparties.
(b) Primarily represents adjustments to the fair value of debt.
(c) At December 31, 2020, includes debt of consolidated investment entities related to real estate investments of $3.1 billion, affordable housing partnership investments of $2.3 billion and other securitization vehicles of $4.0 billion. At December 31, 2019, includes debt of consolidated investment entities related to real estate investments of $3.2 billion, affordable housing partnership investments of $2.1 billion and other securitization vehicles of $4.6 billion.
(d) Includes the effect of consolidating previously unconsolidated partnerships.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 149
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
TOTAL DEBT OUTSTANDING
(in millions)
Debt Maturities
The following table summarizes maturing long-term debt at December 31, 2020 of AIG for the next four quarters:
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
(in millions)
Total
AIG general borrowings
$
1,500
$
$
-
$
-
$
1,736
AIG borrowings supported by assets
Other subsidiaries' notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable
-
-
Total
$
1,501
$
$
$
$
1,896
See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on debt outstanding.
Credit Ratings
Credit ratings estimate a company’s ability to meet its obligations and may directly affect the cost and availability of financing to that company. The following table presents the credit ratings of AIG and certain of its subsidiaries as of the date of this filing. Figures in parentheses indicate the relative ranking of the ratings within the agency’s rating categories; that ranking refers only to the major rating category and not to the modifiers assigned by the rating agencies.
Short-Term Debt
Senior Long-Term Debt
Moody’s
S&P
Moody’s(a)
S&P(b)
Fitch(c)
American International Group, Inc.
P-2 (2nd of 3)
A-2 (2nd of 8)
Baa 1 (4th of 9)
BBB+ (4th of 9)
BBB+ (4th of 9)
On review for
CreditWatch
Rating Watch
downgrade
Negative
Negative
AIG Financial Products Corp.(d)
P-2
A-2
Baa 1
BBB+
On review for
CreditWatch
downgrade
Negative
(a) Moody’s appends numerical modifiers 1, 2 and 3 to the generic rating categories to show relative position within the rating categories.
(b) S&P ratings may be modified by the addition of a plus or minus sign to show relative standing within the major rating categories.
(c) Fitch ratings may be modified by the addition of a plus or minus sign to show relative standing within the major rating categories.
(d) AIG guarantees all obligations of AIG Financial Products Corp.
150 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
These credit ratings are current opinions of the rating agencies. They may be changed, suspended or withdrawn at any time by the rating agencies as a result of changes in, or unavailability of, information or based on other circumstances. Ratings may also be withdrawn at our request. For a discussion of rating agency actions in response to AIG’s announced intention to separate its Life and Retirement business from AIG, see Recent Rating Agency Actions below.
We are party to some agreements that contain “ratings triggers.” Depending on the ratings maintained by one or more rating agencies, these triggers could result in (i) the termination or limitation of credit availability or a requirement for accelerated repayment, (ii) the termination of business contracts or (iii) a requirement to post collateral for the benefit of counterparties.
In the event of a downgrade of AIG’s long-term senior debt ratings, AIG Financial Products Corp. and related subsidiaries (collectively AIGFP) and certain other AIG entities would be required to post additional collateral under some derivative and other transactions, or certain of the counterparties of AIGFP or of such other AIG entities would be permitted to terminate such transactions early.
The actual amount of collateral that we would be required to post to counterparties in the event of such downgrades, or the aggregate amount of payments that we could be required to make, depends on market conditions, the fair value of outstanding affected transactions and other factors prevailing at the time of the downgrade.
For a discussion of the effects of downgrades in our credit ratings see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Liquidity, Capital and Credit.
FINANCIAL STRENGTH Ratings
Financial Strength ratings estimate an insurance company’s ability to pay its obligations under an insurance policy. The following table presents the ratings of our significant insurance subsidiaries as of the date of this filing.
A.M. Best
S&P
Fitch
Moody’s
National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, Pa.
A
A+
A
A2
Lexington Insurance Company
A
A+
A
A2
American Home Assurance Company
A
A+
A
A2
American General Life Insurance Company
A
A+
A+
A2
The Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company
A
A+
A+
A2
United States Life Insurance Company in the City of New York
A
A+
A+
A2
AIG Europe S.A.
NR
A+
NR
A2
American International Group UK Ltd.
A
A+
NR
A2
AIG General Insurance Co. Ltd.
NR
A+
NR
NR
Validus Reinsurance, Ltd.
A
A
NR
A2
These financial strength ratings are current opinions of the rating agencies. They may be changed, suspended or withdrawn at any time by the rating agencies as a result of changes in, or unavailability of, information or based on other circumstances.
For a discussion of the effects of downgrades in our financial strength ratings see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Liquidity, Capital and Credit.
recent Rating Agency Actions
In response to the announcement by AIG on October 26, 2020 of its intention to separate its Life and Retirement business from AIG, the rating agencies in the tables above took the following actions:
 On October 27, 2020, A.M. Best issued a comment stating that its financial strength and issuer credit ratings on AIG and subsidiaries are unchanged as a result of the announcement.
 On October 28, 2020, Fitch placed the credit ratings of AIG on “Rating Watch Negative.” Fitch also affirmed the financial strength ratings and outlooks on AIG’s insurance subsidiaries.
 On October 28, 2020, Moody’s placed the debt ratings of AIG on review for downgrade. Moody’s also affirmed the financial strength ratings and outlooks on AIG’s insurance subsidiaries.
 On October 27, 2020, S&P placed the credit ratings of AIG and the financial strength ratings of most of the General Insurance subsidiaries on CreditWatch with negative implications. S&P also placed the financial strength ratings of the Life and Retirement subsidiaries on CreditWatch with developing implications.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 151
ITEM 7 | Liquidity and Capital Resources
Regulation and Supervision
For a discussion of our regulation and supervision by different regulatory authorities in the United States and abroad, including with respect to our liquidity and capital resources see Part 1. Item 1. Business - Regulation and Item 1A. Risk Factors - Regulation.
Dividends
On February 12, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG Common Stock of $0.32 per share, payable on March 30, 2020 to shareholders of record on March 16, 2020. On May 4, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG Common Stock of $0.32 per share, payable on June 29, 2020 to shareholders of record on June 15, 2020. On August 3, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG Common Stock of $0.32 per share, payable on September 30, 2020 to shareholders of record on September 17, 2020. On November 5, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG Common Stock of $0.32 per share, payable on December 28, 2020 to shareholders of record on December 14, 2020.
On February 16, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG Common Stock of $0.32 per share, payable on March 30, 2021 to shareholders of record on March 16, 2021.
On February 12, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock of $365.625 per share, payable on March 16, 2020 to holders of record on February 28, 2020. On May 4, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock of $365.625 per share, payable on June 15, 2020 to holders of record on May 29, 2020. On August 3, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock of $365.625 per share, payable on September 15, 2020 to holders of record on August 31, 2020. On November 5, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock of $365.625 per share, payable on December 15, 2020 to holders of record on November 30, 2020.
On February 16, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG’s Series A Preferred Stock of $365.625 per share, payable on March 15, 2021 to holders of record on February 26, 2021.
The payment of any future dividends will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend on various factors, as discussed further in Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Repurchases of AIG Common Stock
Our Board of Directors has authorized the repurchase of shares of AIG Common Stock through a series of actions. As of February 18, 2021, $1.4 billion remained under the authorization.
During the first quarter of 2020, we repurchased approximately 12 million shares of AIG Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $500 million under an ASR agreement executed in February 2020 with a third-party financial institution. We did not repurchase any shares of AIG Common Stock during the second, third or fourth quarters of 2020. In January 2021, we repurchased approximately $92 million of additional shares of AIG Common Stock pursuant to an Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plan.
Shares may be repurchased from time to time in the open market, private purchases, through forward, derivative, accelerated repurchase or automatic repurchase transactions or otherwise. Certain of our share repurchases have been and may from time to time be effected through the Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plans. The timing of any future share repurchases will depend on market conditions, our business and strategic plans, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and other factors, as discussed further in Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Dividend Restrictions
Payments of dividends to AIG by its insurance subsidiaries are subject to certain restrictions imposed by regulatory authorities.
For a discussion of restrictions on payments of dividends by our subsidiaries see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
152 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Enterprise Risk Management
Risk management includes the identification and measurement of various forms of risk, the establishment of risk thresholds and the creation of processes intended to maintain risks within these thresholds while optimizing returns. We consider risk management an integral part of managing our core businesses and a key element of our approach to corporate governance.
Overview
We have an integrated process for managing risks throughout our organization in accordance with our firm-wide risk appetite. Our Board of Directors has oversight responsibility for the management of risk. Our Enterprise Risk Management Department supervises and integrates the risk management functions in each of our business units, providing senior management with a consolidated view of AIG’s major risk positions. Within each business unit, senior leaders and executives approve targeted risk tolerances within the framework provided by ERM. ERM supports our businesses and management by embedding risk management in our key day-to-day business processes and in identifying, assessing, quantifying, monitoring, reporting, and mitigating the risks taken by our businesses and AIG overall. Nevertheless, our risk management efforts may not always be successful and material adverse effects on our business, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity or financial condition may occur.
AIG employs a Three Lines of Defense model. AIG’s business leaders assume full accountability for the risks and controls in their operating units, and ERM performs a review, challenge and oversight function. The third line consists of our Internal Audit Group that provides independent assurance for AIG’s Board.
Risk Governance Structure
Our risk governance structure fosters the development and maintenance of a risk and control culture that encompasses all significant risk categories impacting our lines of business and functions. Accountability for the implementation of risk policies is aligned with individual corporate executives, with the risk committees receiving regular reports regarding compliance with each policy to support risk governance at our corporate level as well as in each business unit. We review our governance and committee structure on a regular basis and make changes as appropriate to continue to effectively manage and govern both our risks and risk-taking activities.
Our Board of Directors oversees the management of risk through its Risk and Capital Committee (RCC) and Audit Committee. These committees regularly interact with other committees of the Board of Directors which are further described below. Our Chief Risk Officer (CRO) reports to both the RCC and our President and Global Chief Operating Officer.
The Group Risk Committee (GRC): The GRC is the senior management group responsible for assessing all significant risk issues on a global basis to protect our financial strength and reputation. The GRC is chaired by our CRO and includes members of the Executive Leadership Team (ELT). Our CRO reports periodically on behalf of the GRC to both the RCC and the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Our CRO is also a member of the ELT providing ERM the opportunity to contribute to, review, monitor and consider the impact of changes in strategy.
Management committees that support the GRC are described below. These committees are comprised of senior executives and experienced business representatives from a range of functions and business units throughout AIG and its subsidiaries. These committees are charged with identifying, analyzing and reviewing specific risk matters within their respective mandates. In addition, various working groups (e.g. reputational risk, control agenda) are in place in support of the GRC to manage and monitor the various risks across the organization.
Financial Risk Group (FRG): The FRG is responsible for the oversight of financial risks taken by AIG and our subsidiaries. Its mandate includes overseeing our aggregate credit, market, interest rate, capital, liquidity and model risks, as well as asset-liability management, derivatives activity, and foreign exchange transactions. It provides the primary corporate-level review function for all proposed transactions and business practices that are significant in size, complex in scope, or that present heightened legal, reputational, accounting or regulatory risks. The FRG is chaired by our CRO. Membership of the FRG also includes our CFO, Chief Investment Officer and Treasurer.
Business Unit Risk Committees: Each of our major insurance businesses have established a risk committee that serves as the senior management committee responsible for risk oversight at the individual business unit level. The risk committees are responsible for the identification, assessment and monitoring of all sources of risk within their respective portfolios. Specific responsibilities include setting risk tolerances or limits, reviewing the capital allocation framework, insurance portfolio optimization, decisions with material impact on the risk profile and providing oversight of risk-adjusted metrics. In performing these responsibilities, the business unit risk committees may leverage input provided by other business unit committees and working groups.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 153
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
In addition to the above, where needed and appropriate, there are risk committees at the legal entity level that support the Business Unit Risk Committees in executing their duties. These duties include ensuring policies are adhered to and transactions are within the AIG risk appetite and have appropriate operational controls or plans for establishing such controls within a reasonable amount of time, as well as ensuring appropriate risk governance at the legal entity level.
Risk Appetite, Limits, Identification and Measurement
Risk Appetite Framework
Our Risk Appetite Framework integrates stakeholder interests, strategic business goals and available financial resources. We balance these by seeking to take measured risks that are expected to generate repeatable, sustainable earnings and create long-term value for our shareholders. The framework includes our risk appetite statement approved by the Board of Directors and a set of supporting tools, including risk tolerances, risk limits and policies, which we use to manage our risk profile and financial resources.
We articulate our aggregate risk-taking by setting risk tolerances and thresholds on capital and liquidity measures. These measures are set at the AIG Parent level as well as the legal entity level and cover consolidated and insurance company capital and liquidity ratios. We must comply with standards for capital adequacy and maintain sufficient liquidity to meet all our obligations as they come due in accordance with our capital management and liquidity management policies. Our risk tolerances take into consideration regulatory requirements, rating agency expectations, and business needs. The GRC routinely reviews the level of risk taken by the consolidated organization in relation to the established risk tolerances. A consolidated risk report is also presented periodically to the RCC by our CRO.
154 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Risk Limits
A key component of our Risk Appetite Framework is having a process in place that establishes and maintains appropriate tolerances and limits on the material risks identified for our core businesses and facilitates the monitoring and meeting of both internal and external stakeholder expectations. Framework objectives include:
 Establishing risk monitoring, providing early warning indicators, and ensuring timely oversight and enforceability of limits;
 Defining a consistent and transparent approach to limits governance; and
 Aligning our business activities with our risk appetite statement.
To support the monitoring and management of AIG’s and its business units’ material risks, ERM has an established limits framework that employs a three-tiered hierarchy:
 Board-level risk tolerances are AIG’s aggregate consolidated capital and parent liquidity limits. They define the minimum level of consolidated capital and parent liquidity that we should maintain. These board-level risk tolerances are approved by the Board and monitored by the RCC.
 AIG management level limits are risk type specific limits at the AIG consolidated level. These limits are defined and calibrated to constrain our concentration in specific risk types, to protect against taking risks that exceed the amount of overall capital AIG has available, and to protect against excess earnings volatility. These limits are approved by our CRO with consultation from the GRC.
 Business unit and legal entity level limits are set to address key risks identified for the business unit and legal entities, protect capital and liquidity at legal entities and/or meet legal entity specific requirements of regulators and rating agencies. These limits are defined by the business unit and legal entity risk officers.
All limits are reviewed by the GRC or relevant business unit risk committees on a periodic basis and revisions, if applicable, are approved by those committees.
The business units are responsible for measuring and monitoring their risk exposures. ERM is responsible for monitoring compliance with limits and providing regular, timely reporting to our senior management and risk committees. Limit breaches are required to be reported in a timely manner and are documented and escalated in accordance with their level of severity or materiality.
Risk Identification and Measurement
We conduct risk identification through a number of processes at the business unit and corporate level focused on capturing our material risks. A key initiative is our integrated bottom-up risk identification and assessment process which is conducted down to the product-line level. In addition, we perform an annual top-down risk assessment to identify top risks and assign owners to ensure these risks are appropriately addressed and managed. These processes are used as a critical input to enhance and develop our analytics for measuring and assessing risks across the organization.
We employ various approaches to measure, monitor and manage risk exposures, including the utilization of a variety of metrics and early warning indicators. We use a proprietary internal capital and stress testing framework to measure our quantifiable risks.
The internal capital framework quantifies our aggregate economic risk at a given confidence interval, after taking into account diversification benefits between risk factors and business lines. We leverage the internal capital framework to help inform our consolidated risk consumption and profile as well as risk and capital allocation for our businesses.
The stress testing framework assesses our aggregate exposure to our most significant financial and insurance risks, including the risks in each of our key insurance company subsidiaries in relation to its capital needs under stress, risks inherent in our non-insurance company subsidiaries, and risks to AIG consolidated capital. The framework measures risk over multiple time horizons and under different levels of stress, and includes multi-factor stresses as well as single factor sensitivities that are designed to reflect AIG’s risk characteristics. We use this information to support the assessment of resources needed at the AIG Parent level to support our subsidiaries and capital resources required to maintain consolidated company target capitalization levels.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 155
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Credit Risk Management
Overview
Credit risk is defined as the risk that our customers or counterparties are unable or unwilling to repay their contractual obligations when they become due. Credit risk may also result from a downgrade of a counterparty’s credit ratings or a widening of its credit spreads.
We devote considerable resources to managing our direct and indirect credit exposures. These exposures may arise from, but are not limited to, fixed income investments, equity securities, deposits, commercial paper investments, reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements, corporate and consumer loans, leases, reinsurance and retrocessional insurance recoverables, counterparty risk arising from derivatives activities, collateral extended to counterparties, insurance risk cessions to third parties, financial guarantees, letters of credit, and certain General Insurance businesses.
Governance
Our credit risks are managed by teams of credit professionals, subject to ERM oversight and various control processes. Their primary role is to ensure appropriate credit risk management in accordance with our credit policies and procedures relative to our credit risk parameters. Our Chief Credit Officer (CCO) and credit executives are primarily responsible for the development, implementation and maintenance of a risk management framework, which includes the following elements related to our credit risks:
 developing and implementing our company-wide credit policies and procedures;
 approving delegated credit authorities to our credit executives and qualified credit professionals;
 developing methodologies for quantification and assessment of credit risks, including the establishment and maintenance of our internal risk rating process;
 managing a system of credit and program limits, as well as the approval process for credit transactions, above limit exposures, and concentrations of risk that may exist or be incurred;
 evaluating, monitoring, reviewing and reporting of credit risks and concentrations regularly with senior management; and
 approving appropriate credit reserves, credit-related other-than-temporary impairments and corresponding methodologies for all credit portfolios.
We monitor and control our company-wide credit risk concentrations and attempt to avoid unwanted or excessive risk accumulations, whether funded or unfunded. To minimize the level of credit risk in some circumstances, we may require mitigants, such as third-party guarantees, reinsurance or collateral, including commercial bank-issued letters of credit and trust collateral accounts. We treat these guarantees, reinsurance recoverables, and letters of credit as credit exposure and include them in our risk concentration exposure data. We also closely monitor the quality of any trust collateral accounts.
For further information on our credit concentrations and credit exposures see Investments - Available-for-Sale Investments.
Our credit risk management framework incorporates the following elements:
Risk Identification
including the ongoing capture and monitoring of all existing, contingent, potential and emerging credit risk exposures, whether funded or unfunded
Risk Measurement
comprising risk ratings, default probabilities, loss given default and expected loss parameters, exposure calculations, stress testing and other risk analytics
Risk Limits
including, but not limited to, a system of single obligor or risk group-based AIG-wide house limits and sub-limits for corporates, financial institutions, sovereigns and sub-sovereigns when appropriate and a defined process for identifying, evaluating, documenting and approving, if appropriate, breaches of and exceptions to such limits
Risk Delegations
a comprehensive credit risk delegation framework from the CCO to authorized credit professionals throughout the company
Risk Evaluation, Monitoring and Reporting
including the ongoing analysis and assessment of credit risks, trending of those risks and reporting of other key risk metrics and limits to the CCO and senior management, as may be required
Credit Reserving
including but not limited to development of a proper framework, policies and procedures for establishing accurate identification of (i) reserves for credit losses and (ii) other-than-temporary impairments for securities portfolios
156 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Market Risk Management
Overview
Market risk is defined as the risk of adverse impact due to systemic movements in one or more of the following market risk drivers: equity and commodity prices, residential and commercial real estate values, interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange, inflation, and their respective levels of volatility.
We are engaged in a variety of insurance, investment and other financial services businesses that expose us to market risk, directly and indirectly. We are exposed to market risks primarily within our insurance and capital markets activities, on both the asset and the liability sides of our balance sheet through on- and off-balance sheet exposures. Within each business, the risk officer is responsible for creating a framework for proper identification of market risks, and ensuring that the risks are appropriately measured, monitored and managed, and are in accordance with the risk governance framework established by the Chief Market Risk Officer (CMRO).
The scope and magnitude of our market risk exposures is managed under a robust framework that contains defined risk limits and minimum standards for managing market risk in a manner consistent with our risk appetite statement. Our market risk management framework focuses on quantifying the financial repercussions of changes in the above mentioned market risk drivers.
Many of our market risk exposures, including exposures to changes in levels of interest rates and equity prices, are associated with the asset and liability exposures of our Life and Retirement companies. These exposures are generally long-term in nature. Examples of liability-related exposures include interest rate sensitive surrenders in our fixed deferred annuity product portfolio. Also, we have equity market risk sensitive surrenders in our variable annuity product portfolio. These interactive asset-liability types of risk exposures are regularly monitored in accordance with the risk governance framework noted above.
Governance
Market risk is overseen at the corporate level within ERM through the CMRO. The CMRO is supported by a dedicated team of professionals within ERM. Market Risk is managed by our finance, treasury and investment management corporate functions, collectively, and in partnership with ERM. The CMRO is primarily responsible for the development and maintenance of a risk management framework that includes the following key components:
 written policies that define the rules for our market risk-taking activities and provide clear guidance regarding their execution and management;
 a limit framework that aligns with our Board-approved risk appetite statement;
 independent measurement, monitoring and reporting for line of business, business unit and enterprise-wide market risks; and
 clearly defined authorities for all individuals and committee roles and responsibilities related to market risk management.
These components facilitate the CMRO’s identification, measurement, monitoring, reporting and management of our market risks.
Risk Identification
Market risk focuses on quantifying the financial repercussions of changes in broad, external, predominantly market-observable variables. Financial repercussions can include an adverse impact on results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and capital of AIG.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 157
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Each of the following systemic risks is considered a market risk:
Equity prices
We are exposed to changes in equity market prices affecting a variety of instruments. Changes in equity prices can affect the valuation of publicly traded equity shares, investments in private equity, hedge funds, mutual funds, exchange-traded funds, alternative risk premia investment strategies, and other equity-linked capital market instruments as well as equity-linked insurance products, including but not limited to index annuities, variable annuities, indexed universal life insurance and variable universal life insurance.
Residential and commercial real estate values
Our investment portfolios are exposed to the risk of changing values in a variety of residential and commercial real estate investments. Changes in residential/commercial real estate prices can affect the valuation of residential/commercial mortgages, residential/commercial mortgage-backed securities and other structured securities with underlying assets that include residential/commercial mortgages, trusts that include residential/commercial real estate and/or mortgages, residential mortgage insurance and reinsurance contracts and commercial real estate investments.
Interest rates
Interest rate risk can arise from a mismatch in the interest rate exposure of assets versus liabilities. Lower interest rates generally result in lower investment income and make some of our product offerings less attractive to investors. Conversely, higher interest rates are typically beneficial for the opposite reasons. However, when rates rise quickly, there can be an asymmetric GAAP accounting effect where the existing securities lose market value, which is largely reported through Other comprehensive income, and the offsetting decrease in the value of certain liabilities may not be recognized. Changes in interest rates can affect the valuation of fixed maturity securities, financial liabilities, insurance contracts including but not limited to universal life, fixed rate annuities, variable annuities and derivative contracts. Additionally, for Variable Annuity, Index Annuity, and Equity Indexed Universal Life products, deviations in actual versus expected policyholder behavior can be driven by fluctuations in various market variables, including interest rates. Policies with guaranteed living benefit options or riders are also subject to the risk of actual benefit utilization being different than expected.
Credit spreads
Credit spreads measure an instrument’s risk premium or yield relative to that of a comparable duration, default-free instrument. Changes in credit spreads can affect the valuation of fixed maturity securities, including but not limited to corporate bonds, asset backed securities, mortgage-backed securities, AIG-issued debt obligations, credit derivatives, derivative credit valuation adjustments and economic valuation of insurance liabilities. Much like higher interest rates, wider credit spreads paired with unchanged expectations about default losses imply higher investment income in the long term. In the short term, quickly rising spreads will cause a loss in the value of existing fixed maturity securities, which is largely reported through Other comprehensive income. A precipitous widening of credit spreads may also signal a fundamental weakness in the credit worthiness of bond obligors, potentially resulting in default losses.
Foreign exchange (FX) rates
We are a globally diversified enterprise with income, assets and liabilities denominated in, and capital deployed in, a variety of currencies. Changes in FX rates can affect the valuation of a broad range of balance sheet and income statement items as well as the settlement of cash flows exchanged in specific transactions.
Commodity prices
Changes in commodity prices (the value of commodities) can affect the valuation of publicly-traded commodities, commodity indices, derivatives on commodities and commodity indices, and other commodity-linked investments and insurance contracts. We are exposed to commodity prices primarily through their impact on the prices and credit quality of commodity producers’ debt and equity securities in our investment portfolio.
Inflation
Changes in inflation can affect the valuation of fixed maturity securities, including AIG-issued debt obligations, derivatives and other contracts explicitly linked to inflation indices, and insurance contracts where the claims are linked to inflation either explicitly, via indexing, or implicitly, through medical costs or wage levels.
158 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Risk Measurement
Our market risk measurement framework was developed with the main objective of communicating the range and scale of our market risk exposures. At the firm-wide level, market risk is measured in a manner that is consistent with AIG’s risk appetite statement. This is designed to ensure that we remain within our stated risk tolerance levels and can determine how much additional market risk taking capacity is available within our framework. The framework measures our overall exposure to change in each of the systemic market risk factors on an economic basis.
In addition, we monitor risks through multiple lenses that include economic, GAAP and statutory reporting frameworks at various levels of business consolidation. This process aims to establish a comprehensive coverage of potential implications from adverse market risk developments.
We use a number of approaches to measure our market risk exposure, including:
Examples include:
Sensitivity analysis
measures the impact from a unit change in a market risk input
• a one basis point increase in yield on fixed maturity securities,
• a one basis point increase in credit spreads of fixed maturity securities, and
• a one percent increase in prices of equity securities.
Scenario analysis
uses historical, hypothetical, or forward-looking macroeconomic scenarios to assess and report exposures
• a 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve, or
• a 20 percent immediate and simultaneous decrease in world-wide equity markets.
Scenarios may also utilize a stochastic framework to arrive at a probability distribution of losses.
Stress testing
a special form of scenario analysis in which the scenarios are designed to lead to a material adverse outcome
is tailored to single-factor exposure and comprehensive stress scenarios that cover multiple risk factors. Stress testing analysis includes evaluation of exposures to instantaneous market shocks as well as to adverse market developments over forward time horizons
• the stock market crash of October 1987 or the widening of yields or spreads of RMBS or CMBS during 2008.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 159
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Market Risk Sensitivities
The following table provides estimates of sensitivity to changes in yield curves, equity prices and foreign currency exchange rates on our financial instruments and excludes approximately $174.2 billion and $169.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, of insurance liabilities. AIG believes that the interest rate sensitivities of these insurance and other liabilities serve as an offset to the net interest rate risk of the financial assets presented in the table below. In addition, the table excludes $39.9 billion of interest rate sensitive assets and $1.5 billion of equity and alternative investments supporting the Fortitude Re funds withheld arrangements as the contractual returns related to the assets are transferred to Fortitude Re, as well as $43.1 billion of related funds withheld payables.
Balance Sheet Exposure
Economic Effect
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
(dollars in millions)
Sensitivity factor
100 bps parallel increase in all yield curves
Interest rate sensitive assets:
Fixed maturity securities
$
239,694
$
255,743
$
(15,325)
$
(16,644)
Mortgage and other loans receivable(a)
38,490
43,441
(1,973)
(2,385)
Derivatives:
Interest rate contracts
(1,895)
(1,530)
Equity contracts
(392)
(360)
Other contracts
(125)
(64)
Total interest rate sensitive assets
$
279,167
(b)
$
300,201
(b)
$
(19,553)
$
(20,891)
Interest rate sensitive liabilities:
Policyholder contract deposits:
Investment-type contracts(a)
$
(128,204)
$
(126,137)
$
10,857
$
8,553
Variable annuity and other embedded
derivatives
(9,797)
(6,909)
2,675
2,118
Long-term debt(a) (c)
(26,747)
(24,092)
2,568
2,127
Total interest rate sensitive liabilities
$
(164,748)
$
(157,138)
$
16,100
$
12,798
Sensitivity factor
20% decline in stock prices and
alternative investments
Derivatives:
Equity contracts(d)
$
$
$
$
Equity and alternative investments:
Real estate investments
7,572
8,491
(1,514)
(1,698)
Private equity
6,294
5,531
(1,259)
(1,106)
Hedge funds
2,110
3,314
(422)
(663)
Common equity
1,042
(208)
(165)
Other investments
(182)
(183)
Total derivatives, equity and alternative
investments
$
18,838
$
19,706
$
(3,145)
$
(3,389)
Policyholder contract deposits:
Variable annuity and other
embedded derivatives(d)
$
(9,797)
$
(6,909)
$
(59)
$
(215)
Total liability
$
(9,797)
$
(6,909)
$
(59)
$
(215)
Sensitivity factor
10% depreciation of all foreign currency
exchange rates against the U.S. dollar
Foreign currency-denominated net
asset position:
Great Britain pound
$
1,281
$
1,812
$
(128)
$
(181)
Canada dollar
(76)
(27)
EURO
(57)
(25)
All other foreign currencies
1,451
1,591
(145)
(160)
Total foreign currency-denominated net
asset position(e)
$
4,061
$
3,929
$
(406)
$
(393)
160 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
(a) The economic effect is the difference between the estimated fair value and the effect of a 100 bps parallel increase in all yield curves on the estimated fair value. The estimated fair values for Mortgage and other loans receivable, Policyholder contract deposits (Investment-type contracts) and Long-term debt were $45,146 million, $144,571 million and $31,175 million at December 31, 2020, respectively. The estimated fair values for Mortgage and other loans receivable, Policyholder contract deposits (Investment-type contracts) and Long-term debt were $43,783 million, $133,246 million and $26,427 million at December 31, 2019, respectively.
(b) At December 31, 2020, the analysis covered $279.2 billion of $324.0 billion interest-rate sensitive assets. As indicated above, excluded were $36.2 billion and $3.6 billion of fixed maturity securities and loans, respectively, supporting the Fortitude Re funds withheld arrangements. In addition, $3.4 billion of loans and $1.6 billion of assets across various asset categories were excluded due to modeling limitations. At December 31, 2019, the analysis covered $300.2 billion of $306.3 billion interest-rate sensitive assets. Excluded were $3.5 billion of loans. In addition, $2.6 billion of assets across various asset categories were excluded due to modeling limitations.
(c) At December 31, 2020, the analysis excluded $643 million of AIGLH borrowings, $348 million of Validus borrowings, $4 million of borrowings from Glatfelter and $361 million of AIG Japan Holdings loans. At December 31, 2019, the analysis excluded $643 million of AIGLH borrowings, $353 million of Validus borrowings, $47 million of borrowings from Glatfelter and $344 million of AIG Japan Holdings loans.
(d) The balance sheet exposures for equity contracts and variable annuity and other embedded derivatives are also reflected under “Interest rate sensitive liabilities” above, and are not additive.
(e) The majority of the foreign currency exposure is reported on a one quarter lag.
The sensitivity analysis is an estimate and should not be viewed as predictive of our future financial performance. We cannot ensure that actual financial impacts in any particular period will not exceed the amounts indicated above.
Interest rate sensitivity is defined as change in value with respect to a 100 basis point parallel shift up in the interest rate environment, calculated as: scenario value minus base value, where base value is the value under the yield curves as of the period end and scenario value is the value reflecting a 100 basis point parallel increase in all yield curves.
We evaluate our interest rate risk without considering effects of correlation of changes in levels of interest rate with other key market risks or other assumptions used for calculating the values of our financial assets and liabilities. This scenario does not measure changes in values resulting from non-parallel shifts in the yield curves, which could produce different results.
We evaluate our equity price risk without considering effects of correlation of changes in equity prices with other key market risks or other assumptions used for calculating the values of our financial assets and liabilities. The stress scenario does not reflect the impact of basis risk, such as projections about the future performance of the underlying contract holder funds and actual fund returns, which we use as a basis for developing our hedging strategy.
Foreign currency-denominated net asset position reflects our aggregated non-U.S. dollar assets less our aggregated non-U.S. dollar liabilities on a GAAP basis, with certain adjustments. We use a bottom-up approach in managing our foreign currency exchange rate exposures with the objective of protecting statutory surplus at the regulated insurance entity level. At the AIG consolidated level, we monitor our foreign currency exposures against single currency and aggregate currency portfolio limits.
Our foreign currency-denominated net asset position at December 31, 2020 increased by $0.1 billion compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in our Canadian dollar position, due to exposure management actions in the US Pool, coupled with a decrease in our British pound position, primarily as a result of debt hedges unwind, as well as an increase in the Euro position, largely due to hedging activity.
For illustrative purposes, we modeled our sensitivities based on a 100 basis point parallel increase in yield curves, a 20 percent decline in equity prices and prices of alternative assets, and a 10 percent depreciation of all foreign currency exchange rates against the U.S. dollar. The estimated results presented in the table above should not be taken as a prediction, but only as a demonstration of the potential effects of such events.
Risk Monitoring and Limits
The risk monitoring responsibilities, owned by the business units, include ensuring compliance with market risk limits and escalation and remediation of limit breaches. Such activities must be reported to the ERM Market Risk team by the relevant business unit. This monitoring approach is aligned with our overall risk limits framework.
To control our exposure to market risk, we rely on a three-tiered hierarchy of limits that the CMRO closely monitors and reports to our CRO, senior management and risk committees.
For further information on our three-tiered hierarchy of limits see Risk Appetite, Limits, Identification and Measurement - Risk Limits.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 161
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Liquidity Risk Management
Overview
Liquidity risk is defined as the risk that our financial condition will be adversely affected by the inability or perceived inability to meet our short-term cash, collateral or other financial obligations as they come due. Failure to appropriately manage liquidity risk can result in insolvency, reduced operating flexibility, increased costs, reputational harm and regulatory action.
AIG and its legal entities seek to maintain sufficient liquidity both during the normal course of business and under defined liquidity stress scenarios to ensure that sufficient cash will be available to meet the obligations as they come due.
AIG Parent liquidity risk tolerance levels are designed to allow us to meet our financial obligations for a minimum of six months under a liquidity stress scenario. We maintain liquidity limits and minimum coverage ratios designed to ensure that funding needs are met under varying stress conditions. If we project that we could breach these tolerances, we assess and determine appropriate liquidity management actions. However, the market conditions in effect at that time may not permit us to achieve an increase in liquidity sources or a reduction in liquidity requirements.
Governance
Liquidity risk is overseen at the corporate level within ERM. The CRO has responsibility for the oversight of the Liquidity Risk Management Framework and delegates the day-to-day implementation of this framework to the AIG Treasurer. Our treasury function manages liquidity risk, subject to ERM oversight and various control processes.
The Liquidity Risk Management Framework is guided by the liquidity risk tolerance as set forth in the Board-approved risk appetite statement. The principal objective of this framework is to establish minimum liquidity requirements that protect our long-term viability and ability to fund our ongoing business, and to meet short-term financial obligations in a timely manner in both normal and stressed conditions.
Our Liquidity Risk Management Framework includes liquidity and funding policies and monitoring tools to address AIG-specific, broader industry and market-related liquidity events.
Risk Identification
The following sources of liquidity and funding risks could impact our ability to meet short-term financial obligations as they come due.
Market/Monetization Risk
Assets may not be readily transformed into cash due to unfavorable market conditions. Market liquidity risk may limit our ability to sell assets at reasonable values or necessary volumes to meet liquidity needs.
Cash Flow Mismatch Risk
Discrete and cumulative cash flow mismatches or gaps over short-term horizons under both expected and adverse business conditions may create future liquidity shortfalls.
Event Funding Risk
Additional funding may be required as the result of a trigger event. Event funding risk comes in many forms and may result from a downgrade in credit ratings, a market event, or some other event that creates a funding obligation or limits existing funding options.
Financing Risk
We may be unable to raise additional cash on a secured or unsecured basis due to unfavorable market conditions, AIG-specific issues, or any other issue that impedes access to additional funding.
Risk Measurement
Comprehensive cash flow projections under normal conditions are the primary component for identifying and measuring liquidity risk. We produce comprehensive liquidity projections over varying time horizons that incorporate all relevant liquidity sources and uses and include known and likely cash inflows and outflows. In addition, we perform stress testing by identifying liquidity stress scenarios and assessing the effects of these scenarios on our cash flow and liquidity.
162 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
We use a number of approaches to measure our liquidity risk exposure, including:
Minimum Liquidity Limits
Minimum Liquidity Limits specify the amount of asset liquidity required to be maintained in order to meet obligations as they arise over a specified time horizon under stressed liquidity conditions.
Coverage Ratios
Coverage Ratios measure the adequacy of available liquidity sources, including the ability to monetize assets to meet the forecasted cash flows over a specified time horizon. The portfolio of assets is selected based on our ability to convert those assets into cash under the assumed stressed conditions and within the specified time horizon.
Cash Flow Forecasts
Cash Flow Forecasts measure the liquidity needed for a specific legal entity over a specified time horizon.
Stress Testing
Asset liquidity and Coverage Ratios are re-measured under defined liquidity stress scenarios that will impact net cash flows, liquid assets and/or other funding sources.
Relevant liquidity reporting is produced and reported regularly to AIG Parent and business unit risk committees. The frequency, content, and nature of reporting will vary for each business unit and legal entity, based on its complexity, risk profile, activities and size.
Operational Risk Management
Overview
Operational risk is defined as the risk of loss, or other adverse consequences, resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people, systems, or from external events. Operational risk includes legal, regulatory, technology, compliance, third-party and business continuity risks, but excludes business and strategy risks.
Operational risk is inherent in each of our business units and functions and can have many impacts, including but not limited to: unexpected economic losses or gains, reputational harm due to negative publicity, regulatory action from supervisory agencies and operational and business disruptions, and/or damage to customer relationships.
Governance
AIG and its consolidated subsidiaries establish and maintain operational risk and controls governance forums that include representatives from the relevant business units and functions to appropriately manage significant operational risk exposures.
Operational risk is overseen at the corporate level within ERM through the Head of Governance and Operational Controls. The Head of Governance and Operational Controls is responsible for the development and maintenance of the operational risk framework that includes policies, standards and deployment of systems.
Risk Identification, Measurement and Monitoring
The Operational Risk Management (ORM) function within ERM oversees adherence to the operational risk policy and risk and control framework, which includes risk identification, assessment, measurement, management and monitoring of operational risk exposures. ORM supports the Head of Governance and Operational Controls and has responsibility to provide an aggregate view of our operational risk profile. In line with the Three Lines of Defense Model, the ORM program includes, but is not limited to, several key components outlined below:
 Risk Event Capture - enables every employee to identify, document, and escalate operational risk events, with a view to enhancing processes, promoting lessons learned and embedding a culture of risk management.
 Risk Assessments - allows for the assessment, measurement and management of the key operational risks within our business units and helps inform on the efficacy of our control environment.
 Key Risk Indicators - enhances the ongoing monitoring and mitigation of operational risks and facilitate risk reporting.
 Issues Management - enables a consistent tracking of issues across the firm, including policy and process exceptions, control deficiencies and findings from risk and control assessment activities.
 Scenario Analyses - executed by first- and second-line professionals to identify potential risks that could result in financial losses to the firm and support the prioritization of operational risk treatment.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 163
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
ORM, working together with other control and assurance functions (e.g., Compliance, Financial Controls Unit / Sarbanes Oxley, Global Business Continuity, and Internal Audit) through the risk and control framework, provides an independent view of operational risks for each business, and works with the business unit and corporate function CRO and Owner of the Control Agenda (OCA). The OCA’s responsibilities include coordinating identification, assessment, control and mitigation of risks to the operating environment and promoting awareness to facilitate implementation of the above programs. This includes coverage of operational risks related to core insurance activities, corporate functions, investing, model risk, technology, third-party providers, as well as compliance and regulatory matters. Based on the results of the risk identification and assessment efforts above, business leaders are accountable for tracking and remediating identified issues in line with our risk-monitoring procedures. Governance committees support these efforts and promote transparency enabling improved management decision making.
Cybersecurity Risk
Cybersecurity risk is an important, constant, and evolving focus for AIG and the insurance and financial services industries in general. The goal of unauthorized parties, using a variety of attack methods, is to gain access to AIG’s data and systems to obtain confidential information, destroy data, disrupt or degrade service, sabotage systems or cause other damage. One such example, is the increased sophistication and activities of unauthorized parties using phishing in an attempt to access our and our service providers’ systems, usually in an effort to obtain sensitive information, which is an ever-present and increasing attack vector against AIG and our service providers. Cybersecurity risks may also derive from unintentional human error or intentional malice on the part of AIG employees or third parties who have authorized access to AIG’s systems or information.
ERM works closely with and supports the risk management practices of Information Technology, the Information Security Office and the business units and functions that form the lines of defense against the cybersecurity risks that we face. This includes the risks that emerge as a result of the execution of our business strategies and our corresponding exposure to new products, clients, service providers, industry segments and regions. AIG seeks to mitigate these risks through initiatives such as investments in technological infrastructure, education and training for employees and vendors, and monitoring of industry developments. As part of our overarching cybersecurity strategy, ERM monitors and assesses the programs designed to remediate our exposures and enhance our systems and applications security.
AIG’s Board of Directors and its Technology Committee are regularly briefed by management on AIG’s cybersecurity matters, including threats, policies, practices and ongoing efforts to improve security. As part of our disclosure controls and procedures, the Cyber Incident Management team, a cross functional group, is responsible for ensuring that the members of management responsible for disclosure controls are informed in a timely manner of known cybersecurity risks and incidents that may materially impact our operations so that timely notifications and public disclosures can be made as appropriate. There is no guarantee that the measures AIG takes and the resources AIG devotes to protect against cybersecurity risk will provide absolute security or recoverability of AIG’s systems given the complexity and frequency of the risk which AIG may not always be able to anticipate or adequately address. For additional information regarding the data protection and cybersecurity regulations to which we are subject, see Item 1. Business - Regulation - U.S. Regulation - Privacy, Data Protection and Cybersecurity and - International Regulation - Privacy, Data Protection and Cybersecurity. For additional discussion of cybersecurity risks, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Business and Operations.
164 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Insurance Risks
Overview
Insurance risk is defined as the risk of actual claims experience and/or policyholder behavior being materially different than initially expected at the inception of an insurance contract. Uncertainties related to insurance risk can lead to deviations in magnitude and/or timing of prospective cash flows associated with our liabilities compared to what we expected.
Except as described above, we manage our business risk oversight activities through our insurance operations. A primary goal in managing our insurance operations is to achieve an acceptable risk-adjusted return on equity. To achieve this goal, we must be disciplined in risk selection, premium adequacy, and appropriate terms and conditions to cover the risk accepted.
We operate our insurance businesses on a global basis, and we are exposed to a wide variety of risks with different time horizons. We manage these risks throughout the organization, both centrally and locally, through a number of processes and procedures, including, but not limited to:
 pricing and risk selection models including regular monitoring;
 pricing approval processes;
 pre-launch approval of product design, development and distribution;
 underwriting approval processes and authorities;
 modeling and reporting of aggregations and limit concentrations at multiple levels (policy, line of business, product group, country, individual/group, correlation and catastrophic risk events);
 risk transfer tools such as reinsurance, both internal and third-party;
 review and challenge of reserves to ensure comprehensive analysis with established escalation procedures to provide appropriate transparency in reserving decisions and judgments made in the establishment of reserves;
 management of relationship between assets and liabilities, including hedging;
 model risk management and validation processes; and
 experience monitoring and assumption updates.
We closely manage insurance risk by monitoring and controlling the nature and geographic location of the risks in each underwritten line of business, concentrations in industries, the terms and conditions of the underwriting and the premiums we charge for taking on the risk. We analyze concentrations of risks using various modeling techniques, including both probability distributions (stochastic) and/or single-point estimates (deterministic) approaches.
Governance
Insurance risks are monitored at the business unit level and overseen by the business unit’s chief risk officer. As part of our established governance practices, key decisions and considerations related to insurance risks can, and in certain instances, must be raised and deferred for discussion and consideration to the business unit’s risk committees that are chaired by the business unit’s chief risk officer. In addition, in some business units, pricing committees review insurance risk considerations associated with pricing of new insurance products. The insurance risk oversight framework includes the following key components:
 articulation of risk appetite by line of business that integrates strategy, financial objectives and capital resources;
 written policies that define the rules for our insurance risk-taking activities;
 a limit / threshold framework focused on key insurance risks that aligns with our Board-approved risk appetite statement;
 clearly defined authorities for all individuals and committee roles and responsibilities related to insurance risk management; and
 identification of client segments that meet our selection criteria and a focus on distribution channels that target these customers.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 165
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Risk Identification
 General Insurance companies - risks covered include property, casualty, fidelity/surety, accident and health, aviation, mortgage insurance, professional liability, cyber and management liability. We manage risks in the General Insurance business through aggregations and limitations of concentrations at multiple levels: policy, line of business, geography, industry and legal entity.
 Life and Retirement companies - risks include mortality and morbidity in the individual and group life insurance and health coverage products, longevity risk in the individual retirement, group retirement and institutional markets products, and policyholder behavior across all product lines. We manage risks through product design, sound medical and non-medical underwriting and at times hedging instruments in the market.
We purchase reinsurance for our insurance and reinsurance operations. Reinsurance facilitates insurance risk management (retention, volatility, concentrations) and capital planning. We may purchase reinsurance on a pooled basis. Pooling of our reinsurance risks enables us to purchase reinsurance more efficiently at a consolidated level, manage global counterparty risk and relationships and manage global catastrophe risks.
Risk Measurement, Monitoring and Limits
Additionally, there are risk-specific assessment tools in place to better manage the variety of insurance risks to which we are exposed.
We monitor concentrations of exposure through insurance limits and thresholds aggregated along dimensions such as geography, industry, or counterparty.
The risk monitoring responsibilities of the business units include ensuring compliance with insurance risk limits and escalation and remediation of limit breaches. Such activities are reported to management by all business units for informative decision-making on a regular basis. This monitoring approach is aligned with our overall risk limits framework. Risk limits have a consistent framework used across AIG, its business units, and legal entities.
For further information on our three-tiered hierarchy of limits see Risk Appetite, Limits, Identification and Measurement - Risk Limits.
General Insurance Companies’ Key Risks
We manage our risks through risk review and selection processes, exposure limitations, exclusions, deductibles, self-insured retentions, coverage limits, attachment points, and reinsurance. This management is supported by sound underwriting practices, pricing procedures and the use of actuarial analysis to help determine overall adequacy of provisions for insurance. Underwriting practices and pricing procedures incorporate historical experience, changes in underlying exposure, current regulation and judicial decisions as well as proposed or anticipated regulatory changes or societal trends.
166 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
For General Insurance companies, risks primarily include the following:
 Loss Reserves - The potential inadequacy of the liabilities we establish for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses is a key risk faced by the General Insurance companies. There is significant uncertainty in factors that may drive the ultimate development of losses compared to our estimates of losses and loss adjustment expenses. We manage this uncertainty through internal controls and oversight of the loss reserve setting process, as well as reviews by external experts. For further information see Critical Accounting Estimates - Insurance Liabilities - Loss Reserves.
 Underwriting - The potential inadequacy of premiums charged for future risk periods on risks underwritten in our portfolios can impact the General Insurance companies’ ability to achieve an underwriting profit. We develop pricing based on our estimates of losses and expenses, but factors such as market pressures and the inherent uncertainty and complexity in estimating losses may result in premiums that are inadequate to generate underwriting profit. This may be driven by adverse economic conditions, unanticipated emergence of risks or increase in frequency of claims, or unexpected or increased costs or expenses.
 Catastrophe Exposure - Our business is exposed to various catastrophic events in which multiple losses can occur and affect multiple lines of business in any calendar year. Natural disasters, such as hurricanes, earthquakes and other catastrophes, have the potential to adversely affect our operating results. Other risks, such as man-made catastrophes or pandemic disease, could also adversely affect our business and operating results to the extent they are covered by our insurance products. Concentration of exposure in certain industries or geographies may cause us to suffer disproportionate losses.
 Single Risk Loss Exposure - Our business is exposed to loss events that have the potential to generate losses from a single insured client. Events such as fires or explosions can result in loss activity for our clients. The net risk to us is managed to acceptable limits established by the Chief Underwriting Officer through a combination of internal underwriting standards and external reinsurance. Furthermore, single risk loss exposure is managed and monitored on both a segregated and aggregated basis.
 Reinsurance - Since we use reinsurance to limit our losses, we are exposed to risks associated with reinsurance including the unrecoverability of expected payments from reinsurers due to either an inability or unwillingness to pay, contracts that do not respond properly to the event or actual reinsurance coverage that is different than anticipated. The inability or unwillingness to pay is considered credit risk and is monitored through our credit risk management framework.
Natural Catastrophe Risk
We manage catastrophe exposure with multiple approaches such as setting risk limits based on aggregate Probable Maximum Loss (PML) modeling, monitoring overall exposures and risk accumulations, modifying our gross underwriting standards, and purchasing catastrophe reinsurance through both the traditional reinsurance and capital markets in addition to other reinsurance protections.
We use third-party catastrophe risk models and other tools to evaluate and simulate frequency and severity of catastrophic events and associated losses to our portfolios of exposures. We apply adjustments to modeled losses to account for loss adjustment expenses, model biases, data quality and non-modeled risks.
We perform post-catastrophe event studies to identify model inefficiencies, underwriting gaps, and improvement opportunities. Lessons learned from post-catastrophe event studies are incorporated into the modeling and underwriting processes of risk pricing and selection. The majority of policies exposed to catastrophic risks are one-year contracts that allow us to adjust our underwriting guidelines, pricing and exposure accumulation in a relatively short period.
We recognize that climate change has implications for insurance industry exposure to natural catastrophe risk. With multiple levels of risk management processes in place, we actively analyze the latest climate science and policies to anticipate potential changes to our risk profile, pricing models and strategic planning. For example, we continually consider changes in climate and weather patterns as an integral part of the underwriting process. In addition, we provide insurance products and services to help our clients be proactive against the threat of climate change. Our internal product development, underwriting, and modeling, will continue to adapt to and evolve with the developing risk exposures attributed to climate change.
Our natural catastrophe exposure to primary modeled perils is principally driven by the U.S. and secondarily Japan, though our overall exposure is diversified across multiple countries and perils. For example, we have exposures to additional perils such as European windstorms and wildfire exposures across multiple countries. Within the U.S., we have significant hurricane exposure in Florida, the Gulf of Mexico, the Northeast U.S. and mid-Atlantic regions. Within the U.S., we have significant earthquake exposure in California and the Pacific Northwest regions. Earthquakes impacting the Pacific Northwest region may result in a higher share of industry losses than other regions primarily due to our relative share of exposure in these regions.
The table below details our modeled estimates of PML, net of reinsurance, on an annual aggregate basis. The 1-in-100 and 1-in-250 PMLs are the annual aggregate probable maximum losses with probability of 1 percent and 0.4 percent in a year, respectively. Estimates as of December 31, 2020 reflect our in-force portfolio for exposures as of October 1, 2020 and all inuring reinsurance covers as of December 31, 2020, except for the catastrophe reinsurance programs, which are as of January 1, 2021.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 167
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
The following table presents an overview of annual aggregate modeled losses for world-wide all perils and exposures arising from our largest primarily modeled perils:
At December 31, 2020
Net of
Net of
Percent of Total
(in millions)
Reinsurance
Reinsurance, After Tax(f)
Shareholder Equity
Exposures:
World-wide all peril (1-in-250)(a)
$
4,901
$
3,872
5.8
%
U.S. Hurricane (1-in-100)(b)
1,310
1,035
1.6
U.S. Earthquake (1-in-250)(c)
1,240
1.5
Japanese Typhoon (1-in-100)(d)
0.7
Japanese Earthquake (1-in-250)(e)
0.7
(a) The world-wide all peril loss estimate includes wildfire exposure.
(b) The U.S. hurricane loss estimate includes losses to Commercial and Personal Property from hurricane hazards of wind and storm surge.
(c) The U.S. earthquake loss estimates represent exposure to Commercial and Personal Property, Workers’ Compensation (U.S.) and A&H business lines.
(d) Japan Typhoon loss estimate represents exposure to Commercial and Personal Property.
(e) Japan Earthquake loss estimate represents exposure to Commercial and Personal Property and A&H business lines.
(f) Taxed at the statutory tax rate of 21 percent for both the U.S. and Japanese modeled losses. The majority of Japan exposures are ceded to our U.S. Pool.
AIG, along with other property casualty insurance and reinsurance companies, uses industry-recognized catastrophe models and applies proprietary modeling processes and assumptions to arrive at loss estimates. The use of different methodologies and assumptions could materially change the projected losses. Since there is no industry standard for assumptions and preparation of insured data for use in these models, our modeled losses may not be comparable to estimates made by other companies.
Also, the modeled results are based on the assumption that all reinsurers fulfill their obligations to us under the terms of the reinsurance arrangements. However, reinsurance recoverables may not be fully collectible. Therefore, these estimates are inherently uncertain and may not accurately reflect our net exposure, inclusive of credit risk, to these events.
Our 2021 property catastrophe reinsurance program is a worldwide program providing both aggregate and per occurrence protection, with differing per occurrence and aggregate attachment points for North America, Japan, and Rest of World (for these purposes, Hawaii is included in Rest of World and Mexico and the Caribbean are included in North America). The program includes $2.05 billion of aggregate limit that is shared across the regional towers.
Our coverage for North America includes:
 $1.275 billion of per occurrence protection covering our U.S and Caribbean personal lines business, with varying attachment points in specific geographies ranging from $50 million to $150 million
 Per occurrence protection of up to $1 billion excess of $200 million (or excess $500 million for Southeast US and Gulf State Named Storm losses), primarily covering commercial exposures but also personal lines exposures not covered by the above personal lines protection
 Aggregate protection utilizing the $2.05 billion of shared limit attaching excess $500 million with per occurrence deductibles of $25 million, $50 million or $75 million, depending on region/event, primarily covering commercial exposures
Our coverage for exposure outside North America includes:
 Japan per occurrence coverage of $550 million excess of $200 million and includes both personal and commercial exposure
 Rest of World per occurrence coverage of $300 million excess of $100 million, including both personal and commercial exposure
 Rest of World and Japan $2.05 billion of aggregate shared limit attaching excess of $160 million and $250 million, respectively, with per occurrence deductibles of $20 million
Although the shared limit coverage for North America, Japan and Rest of World has varying retentions per region, the maximum aggregate retention globally, after the impact of the per occurrence deductibles, is $750 million for 2021.
We have also purchased property per risk covers that provide protection against large losses globally, which include those emanating from non-critical catastrophe events (all events except for named windstorm and earthquake) globally as well as critical catastrophe events (named windstorm and earthquake) outside North America.
For Validus Re, our catastrophe protection comes from a variety of reinsurance protections but is largely providing $475 million of limit excess $300 million of retention from world-wide exposure via an aggregate excess of loss cover with an additional $450 million of limit excess $700 million via the Tailwind Re Cat Bond for U.S., Puerto Rico and Canada named storm losses.
168 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Actual results in any period are likely to vary, perhaps materially, from the modeled scenarios. The occurrence of one or more severe events could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity.
For additional information see also Item 1A. Risk Factors - Reserves and Exposures.
Terrorism Risk
We actively monitor terrorism risk and manage exposures to losses from terrorist attacks. We have set risk limits based on modeled losses from certain terrorism attack scenarios. Terrorism risks are modeled using a third-party vendor model for various terrorism attack modes and scenarios. Adjustments are made to account for vendor model gaps and the nature of the General Insurance companies’ exposures. Examples of modeled scenarios are conventional bombs of different sizes, anthrax attacks and nuclear attacks.
Our largest terrorism concentrations are in New York City, and estimated losses are largely driven by the Property and Workers’ Compensation lines of business. At our largest exposure location, modeled losses for a five-ton bomb attack net of the TRIPRA and reinsurance recoveries are estimated to be $1.7 billion based on the exposures as of October 1, 2020.
Our exposure to terrorism risk in the U.S. is mitigated by TRIPRA in addition to limited private reinsurance protections. TRIPRA covers terrorist attacks within the United States or U.S. missions and against certain U.S. carriers or vessels and excludes certain lines of business as specified by applicable law. In 2020, TRIPRA covers 80 percent of insured losses above a deductible. The current estimate of our deductible is approximately $1.8 billion for 2020.
We offer terrorism coverage in many other countries through various insurance products and participate in country terrorism pools when applicable. International terrorism exposure is estimated using scenario-based modeling and exposure concentration is monitored routinely. Targeted reinsurance purchases are made for some lines of business to cover potential losses due to terrorist attacks. We also rely on the government-sponsored and government-arranged terrorism reinsurance programs, including pools, in force in applicable non-U.S. jurisdictions.
Life and Retirement Companies’ Key Risks
We manage risk through product design, experience monitoring, pricing and underwriting discipline, risk limits and thresholds, reinsurance and active monitoring and management of the alignment between risk and cash flow profiles of assets and liabilities, and hedging instruments.
For Life and Retirement companies, risks include the following:
 Longevity risk - represents the risk of an increase in liabilities associated with an insurance product, e.g. an annuity policy or a payout benefit as a result of actual mortality experience being lower than the expected mortality experience. This risk could arise from medical advancement and longer-term societal health changes. This risk exists in a number of our product lines but is most significant for our annuity products.
 Morbidity risk - represents the risk arising from actual morbidity (e.g. illness, disability or disease) incidence rate being higher than expected or the length of the claims extending longer than expected resulting in a higher overall benefit payout. This risk could arise from longer-term adverse societal health changes or from medical advances in detection and treatment for various diseases and medical conditions resulting in higher claims. This risk exists in a number of our product lines such as accident and health and long-term care businesses which for the most part are in run-off, and ceded to Fortitude Re and the U.S. group benefits which AIG has exited.
 Mortality (including Pandemic) risk - represents the risk of unexpected loss arising from current actual mortality experience being higher than expected mortality experience. This risk could arise from pandemics or other events, including longer-term societal changes or slower emergence of mortality improvements that cause higher-than-expected current mortality rates. This risk exists in a number of our product lines, but is most significant for our life insurance products.
 Policyholder behavior risk (including full and partial surrender/lapses) - represents the risk that actual policyholder behavior differs from expected behavior in a manner that has an adverse effect on our operating results. There are many related assumptions made when products are sold, including how long the contracts will persist and other assumptions which impact the expected utilization of contract benefits, options and guarantees. Actual experience can vary significantly from these assumptions. This risk is impacted by a number of factors including changes in market conditions, especially changes in the levels of yields, equity prices, tax law, regulations, competitive landscape and policyholder preferences. This risk exists in many of our product lines, but most notably within the individual annuity and life portfolio of business.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 169
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
The emergence of significant adverse experience compared to the experience we expected and priced for could require an adjustment to benefit reserves and/or DAC, which could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial results of operations for a particular period.
For additional discussion of the impact of actual and expected experience on DAC and benefit reserves see Critical Accounting Estimates - Future Policy Benefits for Life and Accident and Health Insurance Contracts and Critical Accounting Estimates - Guaranteed Benefit Features of Variable Annuity Products. For additional discussion of business risks see Item 1A. Risk Factors - Business and Operations.
Variable Annuity, Index Annuity and Universal Life Risk Management and Hedging Programs
Our Individual and Group Retirement businesses offer variable and index annuity products with guaranteed living benefit (GLB) riders that guarantee a certain level of lifetime income. Variable and certain index annuity GLBs are accounted for as embedded derivatives measured at fair value, with changes in the fair value recorded in Other realized capital gains (losses). GLB features subject the Life and Retirement companies to market risk, including exposure to changes in levels of interest rates, equity prices, credit spreads and market volatility.
Product design is the first step in managing our exposure to these market risks. Risk mitigation features of our variable annuity product designs include GLB rider fees indexed to an equity market volatility index, which can provide additional fee assessments in periods of increased market volatility, required minimum allocations to fixed accounts to reduce overall equity exposure, and for some of the variable annuity products, the utilization of volatility control funds, which have an ability to adjust equity exposures in these funds in response to changes in market volatility, even under sudden or extreme market movements.
We utilize asset liability management and hedging programs to manage economic exposure to market risks that are not fully mitigated through product designs. Our hedging program is designed to offset certain changes in the economic value of embedded derivatives associated with our variable annuity, index annuity and index universal life liabilities, within established thresholds. The hedging program is designed to provide additional protection against large and combined movements in levels of interest rates, equity prices, credit spreads and market volatility under multiple scenarios.
Our hedging program utilizes an economic hedge target, which represents our estimate of the underlying economic risks in the embedded derivatives. For example, for variable annuity GLBs, the hedge targets are calculated as a difference between present value of the future expected benefit payments for the GLB and the present value of future GLB rider fees, with present values determined over numerous equally weighted stochastic scenarios. This stochastic projection method uses best estimate assumptions for policyholder behavior (including mortality, lapses, withdrawals and benefit utilization) in conjunction with market scenarios calibrated to observable equity and interest rate option prices. Policyholder behaviors are regularly monitored to compare current assumptions to actual experience and, if appropriate, changes are made to the policyholder behavior assumptions. The risk of changes in policyholder behavior is not explicitly hedged, and such differences between expected and actual policyholder behaviors will result in hedge ineffectiveness.
Due to differences between the calculation of the value of the economic hedge target and the U.S. GAAP valuation of the embedded derivative, which include differences in the treatment of rider fees and exclusion of certain risk margins and other differences in discount rates, we expect relative movements in the value of the economic hedge target and the U.S. GAAP embedded derivative valuation will vary over time with changes in levels of equity markets, interest rates, credit spreads and volatility.
For information on the impact on our consolidated pre-tax income from the change in fair value of the embedded derivatives and the hedging portfolio, as well as additional discussion of differences between the economic hedge target and the valuation of the embedded derivatives see Insurance Reserves - Life and Annuity Reserves and DAC - Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits and Hedging Results.
In designing the hedging portfolio for our variable annuity hedging program, we make assumptions and projections about the future performance of the underlying mutual funds. We use these assumptions to project future policy level account value changes. We map the mutual funds to a set of publicly traded indices that we believe best represent the liability to be hedged. Basis risk exists due to the variance between fund returns projected under these assumptions and actual fund returns, which may result in variances between changes in the value of the hedging portfolio and changes in the economic value of the hedge target. Net hedge results and the associated cost of hedging are also impacted by differences between realized volatility and implied volatility.
170 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Our hedging programs associated with index annuity and index universal life products, are designed to manage market risk associated with the index crediting strategies offered on these product platforms. These hedging programs are designed to offset economic risk arising in conjunction with index returns, associated with the crediting strategies that will be occurring during the current crediting rate reset period. Similarly, as with the variable annuities, there are differences between the calculation of the value of the economic hedge target and the U.S. GAAP valuation of the index annuity and index life embedded derivatives, which can lead to variances in their relative movements.
To manage the capital market exposures embedded within the economic hedge target, we identify and hedge market sensitivities to changes in equity markets, interest rates, volatility and for variable annuities, credit spreads. Each hedge program purchases derivative instruments or securities having sensitivities that offset corresponding sensitivities in the associated economic hedge targets, within internally defined threshold limits. Since the relative movements of the hedging portfolio and the economic hedge target vary over time or with market changes, the net exposure can be outside the threshold limits, and adjustments to the hedging portfolio are made periodically to return the net exposure to within the threshold limits.
Our hedging programs utilize various derivative instruments, including but not limited to equity options, futures contracts, interest rate swaps and swaptions, as well as other hedging instruments. In addition, within the variable annuities hedging program, we purchase certain fixed income securities. To minimize counterparty credit risk, the majority of the derivative instruments utilized within the hedging programs are cleared through global exchanges. Over the counter derivatives utilized within the hedging programs are highly collateralized.
The hedging programs are monitored on a daily basis to ensure that the economic hedge targets and the associated derivative portfolios are within the threshold limits, pursuant to the approved hedging strategies. Daily risk monitoring verifies that the net risk exposures are within the approved net risk exposure threshold limits. In addition, monthly stress tests are performed to determine the program’s effectiveness relative to the applicable limits, under an array of combined severe market stresses in equity prices, interest rates, volatility and credit spreads. Finally, hedging strategies are reviewed regularly to gauge their effectiveness and continued applicability in managing our market exposures in the context of our overall risk appetite.
Reinsurance Activities
Reinsurance is used primarily to manage overall capital adequacy and mitigate the insurance loss (Life and Non-Life) exposure related to certain events, such as natural and man-made catastrophes, death events, or single policy level events. Our subsidiaries operate worldwide primarily by underwriting and accepting risks for their direct account on a gross basis and reinsuring a portion of the exposure on either an individual risk or an aggregate basis to the extent those risks exceed the desired retention level. In addition, as a condition of certain direct underwriting transactions, we may be required by clients, agents or regulation to cede all or a portion of risks to specified reinsurance entities, such as captives, other insurers, local reinsurers and compulsory pools.
Reinsurance markets include:
 Traditional local and global reinsurance markets including those in the United States, Bermuda, London and Europe, accessed directly and through reinsurance intermediaries;
 Capital markets through insurance-linked securities and collateralized reinsurance transactions, such as catastrophe bonds, sidecars and similar vehicles; and
 Other insurers that engage in both direct and assumed reinsurance.
The form of reinsurance we may choose from time to time will generally depend on whether we are seeking:
 proportional reinsurance, whereby we cede a specified percentage of premiums and losses to reinsurers;
 non-proportional or excess of loss reinsurance, whereby we cede all or a specified portion of losses in excess of a specified amount on a per risk, per occurrence (including catastrophe reinsurance) or aggregate basis; or
 facultative contracts that reinsure individual policies.
We continually evaluate the relative attractiveness of different forms of reinsurance contracts and different markets that may be used to achieve our risk and profitability objectives.
Reinsurance contracts do not relieve our subsidiaries from their direct obligations to insureds. However, an effective reinsurance program substantially mitigates our exposure to potentially significant losses.
In certain markets, we are required to participate on a proportional basis in reinsurance pools based on our relative share of direct writings in those markets. Such mandatory reinsurance generally covers higher-risk consumer exposures such as assigned-risk automobile and earthquake, as well as certain commercial exposures such as workers’ compensation.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 171
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Reinsurance Recoverable
AIG’s reinsurance recoverable assets are comprised of:
 Paid losses recoverable - balances due from reinsurers for losses and loss adjustment expenses paid by our subsidiaries and billed, but not yet collected.
 Ceded loss reserves - ultimate ceded reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses, including reserves for claims reported but not yet paid and estimates for IBNR.
 Ceded reserves for unearned premiums.
 Life and Annuity reinsurance recoverables (ceded policy and claim reserves and policyholder contract deposits).
At December 31, 2020, total reinsurance recoverable assets were $73.5 billion. These assets include general reinsurance paid losses recoverable of $2.8 billion, ceded loss reserves of $34.5 billion including reserves for IBNR claims, and ceded reserves for unearned premiums of $4.1 billion, as well as life reinsurance recoverable of $32.1 billion. The methods used to estimate IBNR and to establish the resulting ultimate losses involve projecting the frequency and severity of losses over multiple years. These methods are continually reviewed and updated by management. Any adjustments are reflected in income. We believe that the amount recorded for ceded loss reserves at December 31, 2020 reflects a reasonable estimate of the ultimate losses recoverable. Actual losses may, however, differ from the reserves currently ceded.
The Reinsurance Credit Department (RCD) conducts periodic detailed assessments of the financial strength and condition of current and potential reinsurers, both foreign and domestic. The RCD monitors both the financial condition of reinsurers as well as the total reinsurance recoverable ceded to reinsurers, and sets limits with regard to the amount and type of exposure we are willing to take with reinsurers. As part of these assessments, we attempt to identify whether a reinsurer is appropriately licensed, assess its financial capacity and liquidity, and evaluate the local economic and financial environment in which a foreign reinsurer operates. The RCD reviews the nature of the risks ceded and the need for measures, including collateral to mitigate credit risk. For example, in our treaty reinsurance contracts, we frequently include provisions that require a reinsurer to post collateral or use other measures to reduce exposure when a referenced event occurs. Furthermore, we limit our unsecured exposure to reinsurers through the use of credit triggers such as insurer financial strength rating downgrades, declines in regulatory capital, or relevant RBC ratios fall below certain levels. We also set maximum limits for reinsurance recoverable exposure, which in some cases is the recoverable amount plus an estimate of the maximum potential exposure from unexpected events for a reinsurer. In addition, credit executives within ERM review reinsurer exposures and credit limits and approve reinsurer credit limits above specified levels. Finally, even where we conclude that uncollateralized credit risk is acceptable, we require collateral from active reinsurance counterparties where it is necessary for our subsidiaries to recognize the reinsurance recoverable assets for statutory accounting purposes. At December 31, 2020, we held $79.4 billion of collateral, in the form of funds withheld, securities in reinsurance trust accounts and/or irrevocable letters of credit, in support of reinsurance recoverable assets from unaffiliated reinsurers.
The following table presents information for each reinsurer representing in excess of five percent of our total reinsurance recoverable assets:
At December 31, 2020
A.M.
Gross
Percent of
Uncollateralized
S&P
Best
Reinsurance
Reinsurance
Collateral
Reinsurance
(in millions)
Rating(a)
Rating(a)
Assets
Assets(b)
Held(c)
Assets
Reinsurer:
Fortitude Re
NR
NR
$
34,578
47.0
%
$
34,578
$
-
Berkshire Hathaway Group of Companies
AA+
A++
$
15,397
(d)
20.9
%
$
15,226
$
Swiss Reinsurance Group of Companies
AA-
A+
$
4,066
5.5
%
$
1,592
$
2,474
(a) The financial strength ratings reflect the ratings of the various reinsurance subsidiaries of the companies listed as of January 20, 2021.
(b) Total reinsurance assets include both Property Casualty and Life and Retirement reinsurance recoverable.
(c) Excludes collateral held in excess of recoverable balances.
(d) Includes $13.8 billion recoverable under the 2011 retroactive asbestos reinsurance transaction and the 2017 adverse development reinsurance agreement.
At December 31, 2020, we had no significant reinsurance recoverable due from any individual reinsurer that was financially troubled. Reduced profitability associated with lower interest rates, market volatility and catastrophe losses (including COVID-19), could potentially result in reduced capacity or rating downgrades for some reinsurers. The RCD, in conjunction with the credit executives within ERM, reviews these developments, monitors compliance with credit triggers that may require the reinsurer to post collateral, and seeks to use other appropriate means to mitigate any material risks arising from these developments.
For further discussion of reinsurance recoverable see Critical Accounting Estimates - Reinsurance Recoverable.
172 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
ITEM 7 | Enterprise Risk Management
Other BUSINESS RiskS
Derivative Transactions
We utilize derivatives principally to enable us to hedge exposure associated with changes in levels of interest rates, currencies, credit, commodities, equity prices and other risks. Credit risk associated with derivative counterparties exists for a derivative contract when that contract has a positive fair value to us. The maximum potential exposure will increase or decrease during the life of the derivative commitments as a function of maturity and market conditions. All derivative transactions must be transacted within counterparty limits that have been approved by ERM.
We evaluate counterparty credit quality via an internal analysis that is consistent with the AIG Credit Policy. We utilize various credit enhancements, including letters of credit, guarantees, collateral, credit triggers, credit derivatives, margin agreements and subordination to reduce the credit risk related to outstanding financial derivative transactions. We require credit enhancements in connection with specific transactions based on, among other things, the creditworthiness of the counterparties, and transaction size and maturity. Furthermore, we enter into certain agreements that have the benefit of set-off and close-out netting provisions, such as ISDA Master Agreements. These provisions provide that, in the case of an early termination of a transaction, we can set off receivables from a counterparty against payables to the same counterparty arising out of all covered transactions. As a result, where a legally enforceable netting agreement exists, the fair value of the transaction with the counterparty represents the net sum of estimated fair values.
The fair value of our interest rate, currency, credit, commodity and equity swaps, options, swaptions, and forward commitments, futures, and forward contracts reported as a component of Other assets, was approximately $0.8 billion at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Where applicable, these amounts have been determined in accordance with the respective master netting agreements.
The following table presents the fair value of our derivatives portfolios in asset positions by internal counterparty credit rating:
At December 31,
(in millions)
Rating:
AAA
$
$
AA
A
BBB
Below investment grade*
Total
$
$
* Below investment grade includes not rated.
For additional discussion related to derivative transactions see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 173
Glossary
Glossary
Accident year The annual calendar accounting period in which loss events occurred, regardless of when the losses are actually reported, booked or paid.
Accident year combined ratio, as adjusted The combined ratio excluding catastrophe losses and related reinstatement premiums, prior year development, net of premium adjustments, and the impact of reserve discounting.
Accident year loss ratio, as adjusted The loss ratio excluding catastrophe losses and related reinstatement premiums, prior year development, net of premium adjustments, and the impact of reserve discounting.
Acquisition ratio Acquisition costs divided by net premiums earned. Acquisition costs are those costs incurred to acquire new and renewal insurance contracts and also include the amortization of VOBA and DAC. Acquisition costs vary with sales and include, but are not limited to, commissions, premium taxes, direct marketing costs and certain costs of personnel engaged in sales support activities such as underwriting.
Additional premium represents a premium on an insurance policy over and above the initial premium imposed at the beginning of the policy. An additional premium may be assessed if the insured’s risk is found to have increased significantly.
Adjusted revenues exclude Net realized capital gains (losses), income from non-operating litigation settlements (included in Other income for GAAP purposes) and changes in fair value of securities used to hedge guaranteed living benefits (included in Net investment income for GAAP purposes). Adjusted revenues is a GAAP measure for our segments.
Assets under administration include assets under management and Retail Mutual Funds and Group Retirement mutual fund assets that we sell or administer.
Assets under management include assets in the general and separate accounts of our subsidiaries that support liabilities and surplus related to our life and annuity insurance products and the notional value of stable value wrap contracts.
Attritional losses are losses recorded in the current accident year, which are not catastrophe losses.
Base Spread Net investment income excluding income from alternative investments and other enhancements, less interest credited excluding amortization of sales inducement assets.
Base Yield Net investment income excluding income from alternative investments and other enhancements, as a percentage of average base invested asset portfolio, which excludes alternative investments, other bond securities and certain other investments for which the fair value option has been elected.
Book value per common share, excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets and deferred tax assets (DTA) (Adjusted book value per common share) is a non-GAAP measure and is used to show the amount of our net worth on a per-common share basis. Adjusted book value per common share is derived by dividing total AIG common shareholders’ equity, excluding AOCI adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets and DTA (Adjusted Common Shareholders’ Equity), by total common shares outstanding.
Casualty insurance Insurance that is primarily associated with the losses caused by injuries to third persons, i.e., not the insured, and the legal liability imposed on the insured as a result.
Combined ratio Sum of the loss ratio and the acquisition and general operating expense ratios.
CSA Credit Support Annex A legal document generally associated with an ISDA Master Agreement that provides for collateral postings which could vary depending on ratings and threshold levels.
Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA)/Non-Performance Risk Adjustment (NPA) The CVA/NPA adjusts the valuation of derivatives to account for nonperformance risk of our counterparty with respect to all net derivative assets positions. Also, the CVA/NPA reflects the fair value movement in AIGFP's asset portfolio that is attributable to credit movements only, without the impact of other market factors such as interest rates and foreign exchange rates. Finally, the CVA/NPA also accounts for our own credit risk in the fair value measurement of all derivative net liability positions and liabilities where AIG has elected the fair value option, when appropriate.
DAC Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs Deferred costs that are incremental and directly related to the successful acquisition of new business or renewal of existing business.
174 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
Glossary
DAC Related to Unrealized Appreciation (Depreciation) of Investments An adjustment to DAC and Reserves for investment-oriented products, equal to the change in DAC and unearned revenue amortization that would have been recorded if fixed maturity securities available for sale and also, prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value had been sold at their stated aggregate fair value and the proceeds reinvested at current yields. An adjustment to benefit reserves for investment-oriented products is also recognized to reflect the application of the benefit ratio to the accumulated assessments that would have been recorded if fixed maturity securities available for sale and also, prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value had been sold at their stated aggregate fair value and the proceeds reinvested at current yields (collectively referred to as shadow Investment-Oriented Adjustments).
For long-duration traditional products, significant unrealized appreciation of investments in a sustained low interest rate environment may cause additional future policy benefit liabilities to be recorded (shadow loss reserves).
Deferred Gain on Retroactive Reinsurance Retroactive reinsurance is a reinsurance contract in which an assuming entity agrees to reimburse a ceding entity for liabilities incurred as a result of past insurable events. If the amount of premium paid by the ceding reinsurer is less than the related ceded loss reserves, the resulting gain is deferred and amortized over the settlement period of the reserves. Any related development on the ceded loss reserves recoverable under the contract would increase the deferred gain if unfavorable, or decrease the deferred gain if favorable.
Expense ratio Sum of acquisition expenses and general operating expenses, divided by net premiums earned.
General operating expense ratio General operating expenses divided by net premiums earned. General operating expenses are those costs that are generally attributed to the support infrastructure of the organization and include but are not limited to personnel costs, projects and bad debt expenses. General operating expenses exclude losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred, acquisition expenses, and investment expenses.
GIC/GIA Guaranteed Investment Contract/Guaranteed Investment Agreement A contract whereby the seller provides a guaranteed repayment of principal and a fixed or floating interest rate for a predetermined period of time.
IBNR Incurred But Not Reported Estimates of claims that have been incurred but not reported to us.
ISDA Master Agreement An agreement between two counterparties, which may have multiple derivative transactions with each other governed by such agreement, that generally provides for the net settlement of all or a specified group of these derivative transactions, as well as pledged collateral, through a single payment, in a single currency, in the event of a default on, or affecting any, one derivative transaction or a termination event affecting all, or a specified group of, derivative transactions.
LAE Loss Adjustment Expenses The expenses directly attributed to settling and paying claims of insureds and include, but are not limited to, legal fees, adjuster’s fees and the portion of general expenses allocated to claim settlement costs.
Loan-to-Value Ratio Principal amount of loan amount divided by appraised value of collateral securing the loan.
Loss Ratio Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred divided by net premiums earned.
Loss reserve development The increase or decrease in incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses related to prior years as a result of the re-estimation of loss reserves at successive valuation dates for a given group of claims.
Loss reserves Liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The estimated ultimate cost of settling claims relating to insured events that have occurred on or before the balance sheet date, whether or not reported to the insurer at that date.
Master netting agreement An agreement between two counterparties who have multiple derivative contracts with each other that provides for the net settlement of all contracts covered by such agreement, as well as pledged collateral, through a single payment, in a single currency, in the event of default on or upon termination of any one such contract.
Natural catastrophe losses are generally weather or seismic events having a net impact on AIG in excess of $10 million each and man-made catastrophe losses, such as terrorism and civil disorders that exceed the $10 million threshold.
Net premiums written represent the sales of an insurer, adjusted for reinsurance premiums assumed and ceded, during a given period. Net premiums earned are the revenue of an insurer for covering risk during a given period. Net premiums written are a measure of performance for a sales period, while net premiums earned are a measure of performance for a coverage period.
Noncontrolling interests The portion of equity ownership in a consolidated subsidiary not attributable to the controlling parent company.
Policy fees An amount added to a policy premium, or deducted from a policy cash value or contract holder account, to reflect the cost of issuing a policy, establishing the required records, sending premium notices and other related expenses.
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 175
Glossary
Pool A reinsurance arrangement whereby all of the underwriting results of the pool members are combined and then shared by each member in accordance with its pool participation percentage.
Premiums and deposits - Life and Retirement includes direct and assumed amounts received and earned on traditional life insurance policies, group benefit policies and life-contingent payout annuities, as well as deposits received on universal life, investment-type annuity contracts, FHLB funding agreements and mutual funds.
Prior year development See Loss reserve development.
RBC Risk-Based Capital A formula designed to measure the adequacy of an insurer’s statutory surplus compared to the risks inherent in its business.
Reinstatement premiums Additional premiums payable to reinsurers or receivable from insurers to restore coverage limits that have been reduced or exhausted as a result of reinsured losses under certain excess of loss reinsurance contracts.
Reinsurance The practice whereby one insurer, the reinsurer, in consideration of a premium paid to that insurer, agrees to indemnify another insurer, the ceding company, for part or all of the liability of the ceding company under one or more policies or contracts of insurance which it has issued.
Retroactive Reinsurance See Deferred Gain on Retroactive Reinsurance.
Return on common equity - Adjusted after-tax income excluding AOCI adjusted for the cumulative unrealized gains and losses related to Fortitude Re’s Funds Withheld Assets and DTA (Adjusted return on common equity) is a non-GAAP measure and is used to show the rate of return on common shareholders’ equity. Adjusted return on common equity is derived by dividing actual or annualized adjusted after-tax income attributable to AIG common shareholders by average Adjusted Common Shareholders’ Equity.
Return premium represents amounts given back to the insured in the case of a cancellation, an adjustment to the rate or an overpayment of an advance premium.
SIA Sales Inducement Asset Represents enhanced crediting rates or bonus payments to contract holders on certain annuity and investment contract products that meet the criteria to be deferred and amortized over the life of the contract.
Solvency II Legislation in the European Union which reforms the insurance industry’s solvency framework, including minimum capital and solvency requirements, governance requirements, risk management and public reporting standards. The Solvency II Directive (2009/138/EEC) was adopted on November 25, 2009 and became effective on January 1, 2016.
Subrogation The amount of recovery for claims we have paid our policyholders, generally from a negligent third party or such party’s insurer.
Surrender charge A charge levied against an investor for the early withdrawal of funds from a life insurance or annuity contract, or for the cancellation of the agreement.
Surrender rate represents annualized surrenders and withdrawals as a percentage of average reserves and Group Retirement mutual fund assets under administration.
Unearned premium reserve Liabilities established by insurers and reinsurers to reflect unearned premiums, which are usually refundable to policyholders if an insurance or reinsurance contract is canceled prior to expiration of the contract term.
VOBA Value of Business Acquired Present value of projected future gross profits from in-force policies of acquired businesses.
176 AIG | 2020 Form 10-K
Acronyms
Acronyms
A&H Accident and Health Insurance
GMWB Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefits
ABS Asset-Backed Securities
ISDA International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc.
APTI Adjusted pre-tax income
Moody's Moody's Investors’ Service Inc.
AUM Assets Under Management
NAIC National Association of Insurance Commissioners
CDO Collateralized Debt Obligations
NM Not Meaningful
CDS Credit Default Swap
OTC Over-the-Counter
CMA Capital Maintenance Agreement
OTTI Other-Than-Temporary Impairment
CMBS Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities
RMBS Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities
EGPs Estimated gross profits
S&P Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC
FASB Financial Accounting Standards Board
SEC Securities and Exchange Commission
FRBNY Federal Reserve Bank of New York
URR Unearned revenue reserve
GAAP Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America
VIE Variable Interest Entity
GMDB Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefits
AIG | 2020 Form 10-K 177