Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
You should read this discussion together with the Financial Statements, related Notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
AIkido Pharma Inc. (the “Company”), was initially formed in 1967 and is currently a biotechnology company with a diverse portfolio of small-molecule anti-cancer therapeutics in development. The Company’s platform consists of patented technology from leading universities and researchers and we are currently in the process of developing an innovative therapeutic drug platform through strong partnerships with world-renowned educational institutions, including the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Maryland, Baltimore and Wake Forest University. Our diverse pipeline of therapeutics includes therapies for pancreatic cancer, acute myeloid leukemia (“AML”) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (“ALL”). The Company is also developing a broad-spectrum antiviral platform that may potentially inhibit replication of multiple viruses including Influenza virus, SARS-CoV (coronavirus), MERS-CoV, Ebolavirus and Marburg virus.
The Company previously focused its efforts on owning, developing, acquiring and monetizing intellectual property assets. Since May 2016, the Company has received limited funds from its intellectual property monetization. In addition to its patent monetization efforts, since the fourth quarter of 2017, the Company has been transitioning to focus its efforts as a technology and biotechnology development company. These efforts have focused on biotechnology research and blockchain technology research. The Company’s investment in biotechnology research development includes: (i) an investment in Hoth Therapeutics, Inc. (“Hoth”), a development stage biopharmaceutical company focused on unique targeted therapeutics for patients suffering from indications such as atopic dermatitis, also known as eczema, (ii) an investment in DatChat, Inc. (“DatChat”), a privately held personal privacy platform focused on encrypted communication, internet security and digital rights management, and (iii) the acquisition of assets of CBM BioPharma, Inc. (“CBM”), a pharmaceutical company focusing on the development of cancer treatments.
As a result of the Company’s biotechnology research development and associated investments and acquisitions, our business portfolio now focuses on the treatment of three different cancers, including pancreatic cancer, AML and ALL. Our AML and ALL compounds, developed at Wake Forest University, are targeted therapeutics designed to overcome multiple resistance mechanisms observed with the current standard of care. DHA-dFdC, our pancreatic drug candidate developed at the University of Texas at Austin (“UTA”), is a new compound that we hope will become the next generation of chemotherapy treatment for advanced pancreatic cancer. DHA-dFdC overcomes tumor cell resistance to current chemotherapeutic drugs and is well tolerated in preclinical toxicity tests. Preclinical studies have also indicated that DHA-dFdC inhibits pancreatic cancer cell growth (up to 100,000-fold more potent that gemcitabine, a current standard therapy), has documented efficacy against pancreatic tumors in a clinically relevant transgenic mouse model and has demonstrated activities against other cancers, including leukemia, lung and melanoma. DHA-dFdC is being developed by certain third parties for oral administration in a solid lipid nanoparticle carrier matrix, which has also been licensed from UTA, and is intended to be a second-line treatment for advanced pancreatic cancer. The Company has entered into agreements with a number of third parties to assist in optimizing the manufacturing process of the active ingredient, formulate the dosage form and do other tests, like drug stability, pre-clinical animal studies, and assistance with potential FDA clearance. The Company’s license with UTA (the “License”) is a royalty-bearing exclusive license that, unless terminated earlier, continues until the last date of expiration or termination of the patent rights granted under the License (the “Patent Rights”). With regard to DHA-dFdC, the Patent Rights include several filed U.S. patent applications (a “U.S. Patent Application”) and an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (“PCT”) that is currently being prosecuted to secure rights in foreign countries. From these applications, one patent, U.S. Patent No. 10,463,684 (the “684 Patent”), contains items covering the compound DHA-dFdC. Assuming all maintenance fees are timely paid, the 684 Patent is expected to expire on October 27, 2035. The Company’s license with UTA also covers a non-provisional U.S. Patent Application filed with respect to the lipid nanoparticle carrier matrix for the drug, which was filed on June 6, 2019. In June of 2020, at the request of the Company, UTA filed both a U.S. non-provisional utility patent application as well as a PCT application relating to the lipid nanoparticle carrier matrix. Patent prosecution on all pending patent applications is currently underway. The Company is currently engaged in Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (“CMC”) activities related to DHA-dFdC. Manufacturing activities thus far have confirmed the critical chemical steps required for the manufacturing and scalability of the process. In collaboration with our contract manufacturing organization, Parimer Scientific, we are currently optimizing the manufacturing procedure for DHA-dFdC. Our manufacturing activities were initially delayed several months due to COVID-19 because Parimer was recruited by the U.S. and South Carolina governments to manufacture hand sanitizer for use in hospitals. For that reason, our manufacturing activities did not begin in earnest until the beginning of the third quarter of 2020. Once manufacturing began, shipping delays due to the pandemic further slowed progress. Despite these delays, we have now successfully replicated the synthesis as reported in the literature with satisfactory yield and purity and are currently optimizing the procedure to ensure batch-to-batch consistency. In tandem, the Company is developing the solid lipid nanoparticle delivery system and is currently optimizing the manufacturing process for size and consistency of the particles. We plan to begin formulation development in the second quarter of 2021, which will require limited animal testing to determine proper dosage. We expect to have manufactured 20,000 mg of purified DHA-dFdC during the second quarter of 2021 to use for such purposes. We plan to engage a contract research organization for the purpose of such animal testing during the second quarter of 2021. Our goal is to have acceptable intravenous and oral formulations developed in the fourth quarter of 2021. The Company expects these activities, as well as the development of the final formulation to comprise most of the CMC activities through the end of the year. Optimization of the formulation will require in vitro studies as well as some preliminary animal studies. During the second half of 2021 and into 2022, optimization of the formulation and biological studies, including animal toxicology testing and pharmacology testing, are scheduled to occur. To the extent costs are incurred relating to governmental regulations, including under the FDA and environmental regulations, those costs will be borne by our Contract Manufacturing Organizations and Contract Research Organizations and will be passed on to the Company as part of their fees. FDA approval will eventually be required to begin administering DHA-dFdC to patients as part of any clinical trials. The animal studies performed next year will be a necessary prerequisite to filing an Investigational New Drug Application (“IND”) with the FDA. The Company’s development activities in the first half of 2021 will also include preparing the IND for submission to the FDA. The Company’s formulation is a new chemotherapy oral dosage form “repurposing” the chemotherapeutic agent gemcitabine, enabling it to be developed for use in patients following a special regulatory pathway codified in Section 505(b)(2) of the FDA rules. Section 505(b)(2) was enacted to enable sponsors to seek New Drug Application (“NDA”) approval for novel repurposed drugs without the need for such sponsors to undertake certain time consuming and expensive safety studies. Proceeding under this regulatory pathway, we hope to be able to rely upon all of the publicly available safety and toxicology data with respect to gemcitabine in our FDA submissions. We believe that this path will dramatically reduce the required clinical development efforts, costs and risks as compared to what would be required of us if we were required to conduct the entire scope of trials required for new chemical entities that are not eligible to be reviewed pursuant to the Section 505(b)(2) regulatory pathway. We estimate that by using the Section 505(b)(2) regulatory pathway, the clinical development process may be several years shorter than is required for a new chemical entity, and the FDA approval process may be six to nine months shorter than the typical eighteen-month period, which we believe may result in lower development costs and shorter development time. As of the date hereof, we have not submitted an IND or an NDA to the FDA. During the latter half of 2021, we hope to schedule and attend the first of a series of meetings with the FDA to review the requirements for submission and activation of an IND with respect to the DHA/dFdC formulated in SLNs for second-line treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer. At that meeting, we will present to the FDA our proposed clinical trial plan for the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer. As part the meeting, as is standard, the FDA will provide us with general guidance with respect to specific animal studies, dosing schedules and suggested human safety studies before we commence clinical trials in patients. In addition, we are constantly seeking to grow our pipeline to treat unmet medical needs in oncology.
In addition, the Company owns an exclusive world-wide license to patented technology from the University of Maryland Baltimore (“UMB”). Our license is for a broad-spectrum antiviral drug platform. The licensed technology is a broadly acting pan-viral inhibitory compound with efficacy against multiple viral pathogens. The technology works to inhibit replication of multiple viruses including Influenza virus, SARS-CoV (coronavirus), MERS-CoV, Ebolavirus and Marburg virus. The technology is covered by two patent applications already on file with the United States Patent and Trademark Office. The Company’s license covers two U.S. Nonprovisional Applications, which were consolidated and timely filed as a PCT application on June 5, 2020, commencing patent prosecution. Any patents issued from this application are expected to expire 20 years later, on June 5, 2040, unless the term is extended by the patent office. Publication of the results of the work to which the Company is licensed is expected later this year. Currently, the Company and UMB are collaborating to identify chemical structures that are as effective as, or more effective than, the lead compounds covered in the PCT application. The UMB inventors are Drs. Matthew Frieman, Alexander MacKerell and Stuart Watson. The Company has also executed a Sponsored Research Agreement with UMB to support the development of the technology.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies are disclosed in Note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting standards.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
The Company experienced very little or no revenue in the last two years and we don’t expect any revenue until a biotechnology product is fully developed which may not occur for many years.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a loss from operations of $6.5 million and $5.7 million, respectively. The increase in loss was primarily attributed to $1.0 million increase in other research and development expense, and $0.9 million increase in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by $1.0 million decrease in research and development expense incurred in connection with the license acquired.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, other (expense) income was approximately $(5.8) million and $1.5 million, respectively. The increase in other expense was primarily attributed to a $8.2 million decrease in change in fair value of investment in Hoth, due to the decrease in Hoth’s common stock price for the year ended December 31, 2020, and partially offset by $1.0 million increase in gains on marketable securities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We continue to incur ongoing administrative and other expenses, including public company expenses, in excess of corresponding (non-financing related) revenue. While we continue to implement our business strategy, we intend to finance our activities through:
● managing current cash on hand from our past debt and equity offerings;
● seeking additional funds raised through the sale of additional securities in the future;
● seeking additional liquidity through credit facilities or other debt arrangements; and
● increasing revenue from its patent portfolios, license fees and new business ventures.
During the first quarter of 2021, the Company consummated a public offering of 53,905,927 shares of common stock (including the underwriter overallotment). The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $86.2 million before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. Therefore, the Company has adequate cash to fund its operations for at least the next twelve months.
Management is currently evaluating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search for drug candidates, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities - For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash used in operations was $4.0 million and $3.0 million, respectively. The cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from a net loss of $12.3 million, and partially offset by reduction in fair value of investment of $6.8 million and $1.5 million research and development expense related with license acquired. The cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily resulted from a net loss of $4.2 million, reduced by $1.4 million change in fair value of our investment, $0.1 million unrealized loss on marketable securities and $0.2 million change in assets and liabilities, and partially offset by $2.5 million research and development expense related with license acquisition.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities - For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $25.0 million as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of approximately $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from our purchase of marketable securities of $98.8 million and research and development expense related with license acquired of $1.5 million, partially offset by our sale of marketable securities of $74.9 million since we invest excess cash into marketable securities until additional cash is needed. The cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $10.3 million primarily resulted from our sale of marketable securities, partially offset by our purchase of marketable securities of $8.5 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities - For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $31.6 million, which reflects the net proceeds of $6.6 million from investors in exchange of issuance of common stock, common warrants and prefunded warrants, net proceeds of $17.8 million from investors in exchange of issuance of common stock, and net proceeds of $7.2 million from the exercise of common warrants and prefunded warrants. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.8 million, which reflects the net proceeds of $0.8 million from investors in exchange of issuance of common stock and prefunded common stock warrants, and net proceeds of $1.0 million from the issuance of common stock as part of our ATM offering.
We have filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC. Whether we sell securities under the registration statement will depend on a number of factors, including the market conditions at that time, our cash position at that time and the availability and terms of alternative sources of capital.
Contractual obligations
None.