ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this report. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the Risk Factors, Forward-Looking Statements and Business sections in this report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
Overview
AITX was incorporated in Florida on March 25, 2010. AITX reincorporated into Nevada on February 17, 2015. AITX’ fiscal year end is February 28 (February 29 during leap year). AITX is located at 10800 Galaxie Ave ,Ferndale Michigan , 48220, and our telephone number is 877-767-6268.
Results of Operations
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020. The historical results presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period.
- 23 -
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended February 28, 2021 was $360,888, which represented an increase of $100,120 compared to total revenue of $260,768 for the year ended February 29, 2020. Although limited by resources the Company continues its efforts to grow its business. The Company deployed an additional 33 revenue earning devices during the year ended February 28, 2021.
Gross profit
Total gross profit for the year ended February 29, 2021 was $262,721, which represented an increase of $85,713 compared to total gross profit of $177,008 for the year ended February 29, 2020. The increase is a result of the increase in revenues above.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 comprised of the following:
Our operating expenses were comprised of general and administrative expenses, research and development, depreciation and amortization, and a loss on disposal of fixed assets. General and administrative expenses consisted primarily of professional services, automobile expenses, advertising, salaries and wages, travel expenses and rent. Our operating expenses during the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 were $3,257,590 and $1,959,814, respectively. The overall $1,297,776 increase in operating expenses was primarily attributable to the following increases in operating expenses of:
●
Research and development expenses increased by $45,716 which was due primarily by the increase in R&D Design costs for the ROAMEO prototypes as well as upgrades in the Wally and Rosa product lines.
●
General and administrative expenses increased by $1,211,926 primarily due to the following increases:
-
Professional fees increased by $98,626 due to higher reporting costs in 2021.
-
Stock based payments for fees paid to lenders and consultants was $362,084 for the year ended February 28, 2021, and nil for the prior year.
-
Wages, salaries and payroll levies increased by $146,170 as a result of settlements with back pay owed on some employees. Subcontractors increased by $404,300 as well due to the increase in revenues and expansion into new products.
-
Supplies increased by approximately $178,000 through their use in new prototypes and designs.
- 24 -
-
Rent and operating lease cost increased by approximately $9,000 due to the new operating lease.
-
Trade shows and travel decreased by $98,227 as a result of travel restrictions due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
-
In general, the Company experienced an increase in operating expenses as a result of the factors above as well as other small increase in advertising , and other general and administrative expenses.The Company expects significant increases in future periods as it ramps up its spending levels for advertising and promotion,
●
Depreciation and amortization increased by $18,605 due to the increase in revenue earning devices and the new vehicle in fixed assets.
●
Loss (gain) on disposal of fixed assets increased by $12,068 due to disposals in 2020 that generated small gains.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) consisted of the change of fair value of derivative instruments interest expense and gain on settlement of debt. Other income (expense) during the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, was ($2,904,042) and ($4,430,843), respectively.
The change in other income (expense) was due to the following:
●
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities increased by $1,891,144 due to the re-valuation of derivative liability on convertible notes based on the change in the market price of the Company’s common stock and the decrease in convertible notes payable through debt conversions to common stock and settlements.
●
Interest expense decreased by $85,265 due to the loan settlements in fiscal 2021offset by increased penalties in the current year
●
Loss on settlement of debt increased by $449,608 due to losses recorded in 2021 versus gains recorded in 2020.
The Company’s loss from operations for the year ended February 28, 2021 was $2,994,869, which represented an increase in loss of $1,212,063 compared to $1,782,806 for the year ended February 29, 2020. The higher revenues in 2021 were offset by significantly higher operating expenses for the reasons set out above. Note that the Company had a net loss of $5,898,911 for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to net loss of $6,213,649 for the year ended February 29, 2020. This change is mostly attributable to the changes in the derivative liability as well as the reasons set out above..
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result from the possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
For the year ended February 28, 2021, the Company had negative cash flow from operating activities of $3,073,325. As of February 28, 2021 the Company has an accumulated deficit of $31,521,754 and negative working capital of $3,203,677. Management does not anticipate having positive cash flow from operations in the near future. These factors raise a substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for the twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements.
The Company does not have the resources at this time to repay its credit and debt obligations, make any payments in the form of dividends to its shareholders or fully implement its business plan. Without additional capital, the Company will not be able to remain in business.
- 25 -
Management has plans to address the Company’s financial situation as follows:
In the near term, management plans to raise an additional $ 15 million to $ 50 million before the end of the fiscal year. Management is committed to raise either non-dilutive funds or minimally dilutive funds. There is no assurance that these funds will be able to be raised nor can we provide assurance that these possible raises may not have dilutive effects.
The Company currently projects that next fiscal year’s revenues will be between 5 and 15 times greater than this fiscal year’s revenues. This projection is based on the following factors: 1. an anticipated significant increase in the orders expected to be received after this fiscal year; 2. an expected significant improvement in the Company’s ability to make timely deliveries; and 3. an anticipated significant improvement in the Company’s ability to support many more devices than this it could support during this fiscal year. However, there can be no assurance that the revenues will increase to the extent projected or that the anticipated improvements will actually occur.
This expansion plan will require the Company to expend significant resources, including the hiring of additional staffing, which the Company expects to finish the next fiscal year with between 75 - 125 employees.
After the end of this fiscal year, the Company increased its sales team from one full-time salesperson to five full-time salespersons. The Company expects to finish the next fiscal year with between 8-12 full-time salespersons. In addition, the Company expects that some planned promotional moves will raise the Company’s stature in the market and industry in the next fiscal year. The Company is also increasing staffing in its subsidiaries and expects to considerably increase its technology over the next fiscal year. Over 60% of the Company’s current staff are engaged in research and development activities. The Company expects to increase its research and development activities by opening a second Canadian research and development office in British Columbia, Canada, in the next fiscal year.
The Company expects to announce at least one significant end-user device relationship in the next fiscal year. Similar to the EAGL relationship (RAD integration of their technology into our ecosystem), RAD will take another vendor’s solution and put it into the RAD ecosystem.
The Company has a number of technology projects in process at this time. The Company expects to file applications for several different types of patents throughout the next fiscal year. Moreover, the Company currently expects that RAD-G will introduce at least one solution to the market by the end of next fiscal year. Management of the Company hopes that some of its solutions, successes and promotional efforts will lead to national press coverage during the next fiscal year, similar to August 2020 when 15 major media markets syndicated KTLA’s RAD-face-mask-analytic story.
The Company currently expects that its new Michigan ‘REX’ (RAD Excellence Center) will provide manufacturing expansion to over 100 various devices per month; the Company is taking significant steps to increase sales volume to match. The Company also expects that REX will become the foremost testing center for the Company’s mobility devices, ground and air, in the next fiscal year.
The Company has embarked on its ‘RAD 3.0’ program in 2021. This program is called ’3.0’ as it will represent the next stage of development. The Company considers RAD 1.0 to be the early stage with the foreign robot and considers RAD 2.0 to be the current stage. The RAD 2.0 current stage is characterized by growing adoption of the Company’s stationary line, market adoption of its first mobility solution (ROAMEO), significant increases in all areas of Company performance (engineering, production, sales), and the Company’s reputation within the industry that RAD’s solutions perform as promised. RAD 3.0 will be characterized by enhanced internal any cyber controls with fully implemented SOC2 Type 2, implementation and adoption of an ERP, design overhaul, and conversion of some operating elements from the Windows OS platform to the Linux platform. The Company expects that completion of the RAD 3.0 elements, along with the Company’s anticipated financing efforts, will allow the Company to continue its status as a going concern.
The Company plans to improve the trading market for its shares by uplisting the shares to the OTCQB during the next fiscal year.
The Company plans to continue regular communication with shareholders and other interested parties through the CEO’s Twitter account (@SteveReinharz), regular press releases and on-time SEC filings.
- 26 -
Capital Resources
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital for the period indicated:
__________
(1)
As February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, current liabilities included approximately $0.4 million and $6.9 million, respectively, of derivative liabilities that are expected to be settled in shares of the Company in accordance with the various conversion terms.
As of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, we had a cash balance of $1,044,418 and $13,307, respectively.
Summary of Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended February 28, 2021 was $3,073,325, which included a net loss of $5,898,911, non-cash activity such as the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of ($764,025), loss on settlement of debt of $288,234, interest expense related to penalties from debt defaults of $939,705, amortization of debt discount of $201,567, stock based payments of $362,084, loss on disposal of fixed assets $553, loss on debt settlements of $294,744,bad debts expense $24,868, depreciation and amortization of $120,846 and change in operating assets and liabilities of $1,357.010.
Net cash used in investing activities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended February 28, 2021 was $40,623. This consisted primarily of the purchase of fixed assets of $37,764 and cash paid for security deposit of $ 3,859 offset by proceeds of disposal of fixed assets of $1,000.
Net cash provided by financing activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4,145,059 for the year ended February 28, 2021. This consisted of proceeds from convertible notes payable of $692,650, proceeds from loans payable $3,603,623 and proceeds from deferred variable payment obligation of $966,000 and offset by settlements of convertible notes of $250,000, net borrowings from loan payable - related party of $693,049 and repayments of loan payable $173,881.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any outstanding off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency forward contracts. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. We do not have any variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
- 27 -
Significant Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
In order to prepare financial statements in conformity with accounting principals generally accepted in the United States, management must make estimates , judgements and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and determine whether contingent assets and liabilities, if any , are disclosed in the financial statements. The ultimate resolution of issues requiring these estimates and assumptions could differ significantly from resolution currently anticipated by management and on which the financial statements are based. The most significant estimates included in these consolidated financial statements are those associated with the assumptions used to value derivative liabilities.
Revenue Earning Devices
Revenue earning devices are stated at cost. Depreciation is provided on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of 48 months. The Company continually evaluates revenue earning devices to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that may warrant revision of the estimated useful life or whether the devices should be evaluated for possible impairment. The Company uses a combination of the undiscounted cash flows and market approaches in assessing whether an asset has been impaired. The Company measures impairment losses based upon the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value.
Fixed Assets
Fixed assets are stated at cost. Depreciation is provided on the straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the respective assets which range from three to five years. Major repairs or improvements are capitalized. Minor replacements and maintenance and repairs which do not improve or extend asset lives are expensed currently.
The Company periodically evaluates the fair value of fixed assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Upon retirement or other disposition of fixed assets, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and the resulting gain or loss, if any, is recognized in income.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed in the period they are incurred in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development unless they meet specific criteria related to technical, market and financial feasibility, as determined by Management, including but not limited to the establishment of a clearly defined future market for the product, and the availability of adequate resources to complete the project. If all criteria are met, the costs are deferred and amortized over the expected useful life or written off if a product is abandoned. At February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, the Company had no deferred development costs.
Sales of Future Revenues
The Company has entered into transactions, as more fully described in footnote 11, in which it has received funding from investors in exchange for which it will make payments to those investors based on the level of sales of certain revenue categories, generally based on a percentage of sales for those certain revenues. The Company determines whether these agreements constitute sales of future revenues or are in substance debt based on the facts and circumstances of each agreement, with the following primary criteria determinative of whether the agreement constitutes a sale of future revenues or debt:
●
Does the agreement purport, in substance, to be a sale
●
Does the Company have continuing involvement in the generation of cash flows due the investor
●
Is the transaction cancellable by either party through payment of a lump sum or other transfer of assets
●
Is the investors rate of return implicitly limited by the terms of the agreement
●
Does the Company’s revenue for a reporting period underlying the agreement have only a minimal impact on the investor’s rate of return
●
Does the investor have recourse relating to payments due
- 28 -
In the event a transaction is determined to be a sale of future revenues, it is recorded as deferred revenue and amortized using the sum-of-the-revenue method. In the event a transaction is determined to be debt, it is recorded as debt and amortized using the effective interest method. As of the date of these financial statements, the Company has determined that all such agreements are debt.
Revenue Recognition
ASU 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)”, supersedes the revenue recognition requirements and industry specific guidance under Revenue Recognition (Topic 605). Topic 606 requires an entity to recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Topic 606 defines a five-step process that must be evaluated and, in doing so, it is possible more judgment and estimates may be required within the revenue recognition process than required under existing accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each separate performance obligation. The Company adopted Topic 606 on March 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective method. Under the modified retrospective method, prior period financial positions and results will not be adjusted. There was no cumulative effect adjustment recognized as a result of this adoption. While the Company does not expect fiscal year 2020 net earnings to be materially impacted by revenue recognition timing changes, Topic 606 requires certain changes to the presentation of revenues and related expenses beginning March 1, 2018. Refer to Note 3 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers for additional information.
Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity
The Company relies on the guidance provided by ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, to classify certain redeemable and/or convertible instruments. The Company first determines whether a financial instrument should be classified as a liability. The Company will determine the liability classification if the financial instrument is mandatorily redeemable, or if the financial instrument, other than outstanding shares, embodies a conditional obligation that the Company must or may settle by issuing a variable number of its equity shares.
Once the Company determines that a financial instrument should not be classified as a liability, the Company determines whether the financial instrument should be presented between the liability section and the equity section of the balance sheet (“temporary equity”). The Company will determine temporary equity classification if the redemption of the financial instrument is outside the control of the Company (i.e. at the option of the holder). Otherwise, the Company accounts for the financial instrument as permanent equity.
Initial Measurement
The Company records its financial instruments classified as liability, temporary equity or permanent equity at issuance at the fair value, or cash received.
Subsequent Measurement - Financial Instruments Classified as Liabilities
The Company records the fair value of its financial instruments classified as liabilities at each subsequent measurement date. The changes in fair value of its financial instruments classified as liabilities are recorded as other income (expenses).
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC Topic 820”) provides a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
ASC Topic 820 defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. ASC Topic 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that distinguishes between (1) market participant assumptions developed based on market data obtained from independent sources (observable inputs) and (2) an entity’s own assumptions about market participant assumptions developed based on the best information available in the circumstances (unobservable inputs).
- 29 -
The fair value hierarchy consists of three broad levels, which gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy under ASC Topic 820 are described as follows:
●
Level 1 - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that are accessible at the measurement date.
●
Level 2 - Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability; and inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
●
Level 3 - Inputs that are unobservable for the asset or liability.
Measured on a Recurring Basis
The following table presents information about our liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, aggregated by the level in the fair value hierarchy within which those measurements fell:
See Note 12 for specific inputs used in determining fair value.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and advances, accounts payable and accrued expenses, approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Earnings (Loss) per Share
Basic earnings (loss) per share (“EPS”) is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period. Diluted EPS give effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used to determine the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options and/or warrants. Diluted EPS excluded all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Basic loss per common share is computed based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period. Diluted loss per share is computed in a manner similar to the basic loss per share, except the weighted-average number of shares outstanding is increased to include all common shares, including those with the potential to be issued by virtue of convertible debt and other such convertible instruments. Diluted loss per share contemplates a complete conversion to common shares of all convertible instruments only if they are dilutive in nature with regards to earnings per share.
- 30 -
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See discussion of the adoption of ASU 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)”, above.
In May 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-09, Modification Accounting for Share-Based Payment Arrangements. The standard amends the scope of modification accounting for share-based payment arrangements and provides guidance on the types of changes to the terms or conditions of share-based payment awards to which an entity would be required to apply modification accounting under ASC 718. The new standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2017. There was no impact on the financial statements of adopting this new standard on March 1, 2018.
On March 1, 2019 the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which is effective for public entities for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018. Under ASU 2016-02, lessees will be required to recognize the following for all leases (with the exception of short-term leases) at the commencement date: 1) a lease liability, which is a lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from a lease, measured on a discounted basis, and 2) a right-of-use asset, which is an asset that represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the lease term. The Company adopted ASU 2016-02 but does not expect any material impact on the financial statements because the leases commencing March 1, 2019 are month to month.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In September 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses. ASU 2016-13 was issued to provide more decision-useful information about the expected credit losses on financial instruments and changes the loss impairment methodology. ASU 2016-13 is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019 using a modified retrospective adoption method. A prospective transition approach is required for debt securities for which an other-than-temporary impairment had been recognized before the effective date. The Company is currently assessing the impact this accounting standard will have on its financial statements and related disclosures. The Company adopted this March 1, 2020.