Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Report. It contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly under the headings “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
General
We report our results through four segments: Global Lifestyle, Global Housing, Global Preneed and Corporate and Other. In October 2020, we announced we are exploring strategic alternatives for the Global Preneed business, including the possible sale of the business, to focus on opportunities within the broader Global Lifestyle and Global Housing portfolio. We have since then made progress toward the possible sale of the business; however, there can be no assurance we will complete a sale. Corporate and Other includes activities of the holding company, financing and interest expenses, net realized gains (losses) on investments (which includes unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities and changes in fair value of direct investments in collateralized loan obligations), interest income earned from short-term investments held, income (expenses) primarily related to our frozen benefit plans, amounts related to businesses previously disposed of through reinsurance and the run-off of the Assurant Health business. Corporate and Other also includes goodwill impairments, the foreign currency gains (losses) from remeasurement of monetary assets and liabilities, changes in the fair value of derivative instruments and other expenses related to merger and acquisition activities, as well as other highly variable or unusual items other than reportable catastrophes (reportable catastrophe losses, net of reinsurance and client profit sharing adjustments, and including reinstatement and other premiums).
The following discussion covers the year ended December 31, 2020 (“Twelve Months 2020”) and year ended December 31, 2019 (“Twelve Months 2019”). Please see the discussion that follows, for each of these segments, for a more detailed comparative analysis. Our comparative analysis of Twelve Months 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2018 is included under the heading “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020.
Executive Summary
COVID-19
As a global organization, we actively monitor the developments of the continuously evolving situation resulting from COVID-19. Throughout this period of uncertainty, we have acted swiftly and deliberately to safeguard our employees, to maintain business operations and service levels for customers, and to support our local communities. See “Item 1 - Business” for additional information. While continuing to evolve, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant global economic and financial market disruption, resulting in increased financial market volatility, business and operational challenges such as the temporary closures of businesses, and overall diminished expectations for the economy and the financial markets. Overall, for Twelve Months 2020, we believe COVID-19 had a modest negative impact on our net income, mainly due to lower investment income from lower yields, lower REO volumes, foreign exchange rate fluctuations and higher mortality rates in our Global Preneed business. This was partially offset by lower expenses, more favorable international claims activity and more favorable non-catastrophe loss experience. Throughout this period, we believe our liquidity has remained strong. As of December 31, 2020, we had $407.2 million of holding company liquidity.
Our investment portfolio will continue to be impacted by COVID-19 and related financial market volatility. Though we generally believe our portfolio remains well diversified and high-quality, with the majority comprised of investment grade fixed maturity assets, interest rates are expected to remain relatively low for the foreseeable future. Refer to “-Investments” below and Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
We ran multiple scenarios based on the potential duration and severity of this crisis to better understand how our business might perform and stress-tested our capital, cash flows and liquidity. Our business performed on the high-end of the scenarios, demonstrating its overall resilience given our installed customer base across Connected Living, Global Automotive, Multifamily Housing and Global Preneed.
For a discussion of the material risks relating to COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition, refer to “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Macroeconomic, Political and Global Market Risks - The COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken in response thereto may adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
Overview
We have undertaken several acquisitions and dispositions, which are reflected in our results. On December 1, 2020, we acquired HYLA, a leading provider of smartphone software, trade-in and upgrade services, for total consideration of
$348.8 million, a portion of which was excess cash in the business that was distributed to the holding company shortly after closing. In May 2020, we completed our acquisition of AFAS, a provider of finance and insurance products and services including vehicle service contracts, guaranteed asset protection insurance and other ancillary products, for total consideration of $176.9 million, a portion of which was excess cash in the business that was distributed to the holding company shortly after closing.
In May 2020, we sold our minority interests in Iké, terminated our obligations to purchase the remaining shares of Iké, and settled a financial derivative that provided an economic hedge against declines in the Mexican Peso relative to the U.S. Dollar. These transactions resulted in net cash outflows of $85.3 million, which included financing of $34.0 million, the proceeds from the settlement of the derivative and transaction expenses. For additional information on this transaction, see “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below and Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
During the third quarter of 2020, we identified impairment indicators impacting the fair value of Global Preneed in connection with exploring strategic alternatives for the Global Preneed business, including the possible sale of the business, to focus on opportunities within the broader Global Lifestyle and Global Housing portfolio. The fair value calculated in third quarter 2020 was lower than the carrying value of the reporting unit, resulting in the impairment of the entire goodwill of $137.8 million related to the Global Preneed reporting unit. For additional information on the impairment test, refer to “- Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill” below and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Summary of Financial Results
Consolidated net income attributable to common stockholders increased $59.2 million, or 16%, to $423.1 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $363.9 million for Twelve Months 2019. The increase was primarily driven by $154.6 million of lower after-tax losses from the reduction in fair value of Iké, as well as an $84.4 million one-time tax benefit related to the enactment of the federal CARES Act, which allows the carryback of net operating losses to years taxed at higher rates. The increase was partially offset by the $137.8 million after-tax impairment on the Global Preneed goodwill, as well as a $68.2 million decrease in net realized gains on investments, mostly due to a decline in the fair value of certain collateralized loan obligations and lower net unrealized gains on equity securities.
Global Lifestyle segment net income increased $27.9 million, or 7%, to $437.2 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $409.3 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily driven by Connected Living from growth in mobile subscribers in North America and Asia Pacific, as well as improved extended service contract loss experience. The increase was also due to a $6.7 million after-tax benefit for a client recoverable in Connected Living and $9.2 million of client benefits in Global Automotive. Results were partially offset by lower investment income across all lines of business, unfavorable foreign exchange and declines in Global Financial Services and Other.
Global Lifestyle net earned premiums, fees and other income increased $243.4 million, or 3%, to $7.34 billion for the Twelve Months 2020 compared with $7.09 billion for Twelve Months 2019. Excluding the $117.0 million lower revenue impact resulting from the July 1, 2020 transition of one of our mobile trade-in and upgrade programs from our recognition of device sales revenue to a flat fee per device, revenue increased 5%, primarily due to continued growth in Global Automotive and Connected Living. The increase was partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange and declines within Global Financial Services and Other.
Global Housing segment net income decreased $24.9 million, or 10%, to $233.8 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $258.7 million for Twelve Months 2019. Segment net income for Twelve Months 2020 included $137.2 million of reportable catastrophes compared to $40.9 million of reportable catastrophes for Twelve Months 2019. Excluding reportable catastrophes, segment net income increased $71.4 million, primarily due to more favorable non-catastrophe loss experience across all lines of business, including underwriting improvements in sharing economy offerings. The increase was also driven by higher premium rates in Lender-placed Insurance, which were partially offset by a reduction in REO volumes due to foreclosure moratoriums enacted in connection with COVID-19 and fewer policies-in-force. Lower investment income also contributed to the offset.
Global Housing net earned premiums, fees and other income decreased $56.4 million, or 3%, to $1.98 billion for Twelve Months 2020 compared with $2.03 billion for Twelve Months 2019, primarily due to the expected run-off of our small commercial business and declines in Lender-placed Insurance policies-in-force from the previously disclosed financially insolvent client, as well as lower REO volumes. The decrease was partially offset by higher premium rates in Lender-placed Insurance and continued growth within Specialty and Other and Multifamily Housing.
Global Preneed segment net income decreased $4.2 million, or 8%, to $48.0 million for Twelve Months 2020 from $52.2 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily due to higher mortality from COVID-19 and lower investment income. This decrease was partially offset by the absence of a $9.9 million after-tax expense related to an out of period adjustment for over-capitalization of deferred acquisition costs occurring over a ten-year period recorded in Twelve Months 2019.
Global Preneed net earned premiums, fees and other income increased $8.5 million, or 4%, to $209.4 million for Twelve Months 2020 compared with $200.9 million for Twelve Months 2019, primarily due to growth in domestic pre-funded funeral policies and prior period sales of the Final Need product.
Critical Factors Affecting Results
Our results depend on, among other things, the appropriateness of our product pricing, underwriting, the accuracy of our reserving methodology for future policyholder benefits and claims, the frequency and severity of reportable and non-reportable catastrophes, returns on and values of invested assets, and our ability to manage our expenses and achieve expense savings. Our results will also depend on our ability to profitably grow all of our businesses, in particular our Connected Living, Multifamily Housing and Global Automotive businesses, and maintain our position in our Lender-placed Insurance business. Factors affecting these items, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken in response thereto, conditions in financial markets, the global economy and the markets in which we operate, fluctuations in exchange rates, interest rates and inflation, may have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. For more information on these and other factors that could affect our results, see “Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
Our results may also be impacted by our ability to continue to grow in the markets in which we operate, including in our Connected Living, Multifamily Housing and Global Automotive businesses. Our mobile business is subject to volatility in mobile device trade-in volumes based on the actual and anticipated timing of the release of new devices and carrier promotional programs, as well as to changes in consumer preferences. Our Lender-placed Insurance revenues will also be impacted by changes in the housing market. In addition, across many of our businesses, we must respond to the threat of disruption. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Business, Strategic and Operational Risks - Significant competitive pressures, changes in customer preferences and disruption could adversely affect our results of operations.”
Management believes that we will have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our needs over the next twelve months, including the ability to pay interest on our debt and dividends on our common and preferred stock.
For Twelve Months 2020, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $1.34 billion; net cash used in investing activities totaled $735.2 million; and net cash used in financing activities totaled $264.8 million. We had $2.23 billion in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020. Please see “ - Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further details.
Revenues
We generate revenues primarily from the sale of our insurance policies, service contracts and related products and services and from income earned on our investments. Sales of insurance policies are recognized in revenue as earned premiums while sales of administrative services are recognized as fee income.
Under the universal life insurance guidance, income earned on preneed life insurance policies sold after January 1, 2009 are presented within fee income net of policyholder benefits. Under the limited pay insurance guidance, the consideration received on preneed policies sold prior to January 1, 2009 is presented separately as net earned premiums, with policyholder benefits expense shown separately.
Our premium and fee income is supplemented by income earned from our investment portfolio. We recognize revenue from interest payments, dividends, change in market value of equity securities and sales of investments. Currently, our investment portfolio is primarily invested in fixed maturity securities. Both investment income and realized capital gains on these investments can be significantly affected by changes in interest rates.
Interest rate volatility can increase or reduce unrealized gains or losses in our investment portfolios. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors, including governmental monetary policies, domestic and international economic and political conditions and other factors beyond our control, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Fluctuations in interest rates affect our returns on, and the market value of, fixed maturity and short-term investments.
The fair market value of the fixed maturity securities in our investment portfolio and the investment income from these securities fluctuate depending on general economic and market conditions. The fair market value generally increases or decreases in an inverse relationship with fluctuations in interest rates, while net investment income realized by us from future investments in fixed maturity securities will generally increase or decrease with interest rates. We also have investments that are subject to pre-payment risk, such as mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities. Interest rate fluctuations may cause actual net investment income and/or cash flows from such investments to differ from estimates made at the time of investment. In periods of declining interest rates, mortgage prepayments generally increase and mortgage-backed securities, commercial mortgage obligations and bonds are more likely to be prepaid or redeemed as borrowers seek to borrow at lower interest rates. Therefore, in these circumstances we may be required to reinvest those funds in lower interest-earning investments.
Expenses
Our expenses are primarily policyholder benefits, underwriting, general and administrative expenses and interest expense.
Policyholder benefits are affected by our claims management programs, reinsurance coverage, contractual terms and conditions, regulatory requirements, economic conditions, and numerous other factors. Benefits paid or reserves required for future benefits could substantially exceed our expectations, causing a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Underwriting, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of commissions, premium taxes, licenses, fees, amortization of deferred costs, general operating expenses and income taxes. We continue to undertake various expense savings initiatives while also making investments in information technology, among other things, which will impact our expenses.
We also incur interest expense related to our debt.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain items in our Consolidated Financial Statements are based on estimates and judgment. Differences between actual results and these estimates could in some cases have material impacts on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following critical accounting policies require significant estimates. The actual amounts realized in these areas could ultimately be materially different from the amounts currently provided for in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Reserves
Reserves are established using generally accepted actuarial methods and reflect judgments about expected future claim payments. Factors used in their calculation include experience derived from historical claim payments and actuarial assumptions. Calculations incorporate assumptions about the incidence of incurred claims, the extent to which all claims have been reported, reporting lags, expenses, inflation rates, future investment earnings, internal claims processing costs and other relevant factors. While the methods of making such estimates and establishing the related liabilities are periodically reviewed and updated, the estimation of reserves includes an element of uncertainty given that management is using historical information and methods to project future events and reserve outcomes.
The recorded reserves represent our best estimate at a point in time of the ultimate costs of settlement and administration of a claim or group of claims, based upon actuarial assumptions and projections using facts and circumstances known at the time of calculation. The adequacy of reserves may be impacted by future trends in claims severity, frequency, judicial theories of liability and other factors. These variables are affected by both external and internal events, including, but not limited to: changes in the economic cycle, inflation, changes in repair costs, natural or human-made catastrophes, judicial trends, legislative changes and claims handling procedures.
Many of these items are not directly quantifiable and not all future events can be anticipated when reserves are established. Reserve estimates are refined as experience develops. Adjustments to reserves, both positive and negative, are reflected in the consolidated statement of operations in the period in which such estimates are updated.
Because establishment of reserves is an inherently complex process involving significant judgment and estimates, there can be no certainty that future settlement amounts for claims incurred through the financial reporting date will not vary from reported claims reserves. Future loss development could require reserves to be increased or decreased, which could have a material effect on our earnings in the periods in which such increases or decreases are made. However, based on information currently available, we believe our reserve estimates are adequate. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks - Our actual claims losses may exceed our reserves for claims, requiring us to establish additional reserves or to incur additional expense for settling unreserved liabilities, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, profitability and capital” for more detail on this risk.
For additional information regarding our reserves, see Notes 2 and 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Short Duration Contracts
Claims and benefits payable reserves for short duration contracts include (1) case reserves for known claims which are unpaid as of the balance sheet date; (2) IBNR reserves for claims where the insured event has occurred but has not been reported to us as of the balance sheet date; and (3) loss adjustment expense reserves for the expected handling costs of settling the claims. Periodically, we review emerging experience and make adjustments to our reserves and assumptions where necessary. Below are further discussions on the reserving process for our major short duration products.
Global Lifestyle and Global Housing
Ultimate loss and loss adjustment expenses are estimated utilizing generally accepted actuarial loss reserving methods. Both paid claims development as well as case incurred development are typically analyzed at the product or product grouping level, considering product size and data credibility. The reserving methods widely employed by us include the Chain Ladder, Munich Chain Ladder and Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods. For Global Housing, reportable catastrophes are analyzed and reserved for separately using a frequency and severity approach.
The methods all involve aggregating paid and case-incurred loss data by accident quarter (or accident year) and accident age for each product grouping. As the data ages, development factors are calculated that measure emerging claim development patterns between reporting periods. By selecting loss development factors indicative of remaining development, known losses are projected to an ultimate incurred basis for each accident period. The underlying premise of the Chain Ladder method is that future claims development is best estimated using past claims development, whereas the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method employs a combination of past claims development and prior estimates of ultimate losses based on an expected loss ratio. The Munich Chain Ladder method incorporates the correlations between paid and incurred development in projecting future development factors, and is typically more applicable to products experiencing variability in incurred to paid ratios.
Each of these methods applied to the data groupings produces an estimate of the loss reserves for the product grouping. The best estimate is generally selected from a blend of the different methods. The IBNR associated with the best estimate is then allocated to accident year based on a weighting of the underlying actuarial methods. The determination of the best estimate is based on many factors, including but not limited to:
•the nature and extent of the underlying assumptions;
•the quality and applicability of historical data - whether internal or industry data;
•current and expected future economic and market conditions;
•regulatory, legislative, and judicial considerations;
•the extent of data segmentation - data should be homogeneous yet credible enough for loss development methods to apply;
•trends in loss frequencies and severities for various causes of loss;
•consideration of the distribution of loss reserves, management’s selection of the best estimate that may exceed an estimate based on median values, suggesting that favorable development may be more likely than unfavorable development; and
•hindsight testing of prior loss estimates - the loss estimates on some product lines will vary from actual loss experience more than others.
When employing the reserving methods, consideration is given to contractual requirements, historical utilization trends and payment patterns, coverage changes, seasonality, product mix, the legislative and regulatory environment, economic factors, natural catastrophes and other relevant factors. We consistently apply reserving principles and methodologies from year to year, while also giving due consideration to the potential variability of these factors.
While management has used judgment in establishing its best estimate of required reserves, different assumptions and variables could lead to significantly different reserve estimates. Two key measures of loss activity are loss frequency, which is a measure of the number of claims per unit of insured exposure, and loss severity, which is a measure of the average size of claims. Factors affecting loss frequency include the effectiveness of loss controls, changes in economic activity and weather patterns. Factors affecting loss severity include changes in policy limits, retentions, rate of inflation and judicial interpretations.
If the actual level of loss frequency and severity are higher or lower than expected, the ultimate reserves required will be different than management’s estimate. The effect of higher and lower levels of loss frequency and severity on our ultimate costs for claims occurring in 2020 would be as follows:
(1)Represents the sum of the case reserves and incurred but not reported reserves as of December 31, 2020 for Global Lifestyle and Global Housing.
Disposed and Runoff Short Duration Lines
We have exposure to asbestos, environmental and other general liability claims arising from our participation in various reinsurance pools from 1971 through 1985. This exposure arose from a contract that we discontinued writing many years ago. We carried case reserves for these liabilities, as recommended by the various pool managers, and IBNR reserves totaling $22.1 million (before reinsurance) and $19.1 million (net of reinsurance) at December 31, 2020. Estimation of these liabilities is subject to greater than normal variation and uncertainty due to the general lack of sufficiently detailed data, reporting delays and absence of a generally accepted actuarial methodology for determining the exposures. There are significant unresolved industry legal issues, including such items as whether coverage exists and what constitutes an occurrence. In addition, the determination of ultimate damages and the final allocation of losses to financially responsible parties are highly uncertain. Based on information currently available, and after consideration of the reserves reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements, we do not believe or expect that changes in reserve estimates for these claims are likely to be material.
Long Duration Contracts
Reserves for future policy benefits represent the present value of future benefits to policyholders and related expenses less the present value of future net premiums. Reserve assumptions reflect best estimates for expected investment yield, inflation, mortality, morbidity, expenses and withdrawal rates. These assumptions are based on our experience to the extent it is credible, modified where appropriate to reflect current trends, industry experience and provisions for possible unfavorable deviation. We also record an unearned revenue reserve which represents premiums received which have not yet been recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Historically, premium deficiency testing on continuing lines of business has not resulted in material adjustments to deferred acquisition costs or reserves. Such adjustments could occur, however, if economic or mortality conditions significantly deteriorated.
Global Preneed
Global Preneed includes pre-funded funeral (“preneed”) life insurance and annuity contracts and legacy traditional life insurance (no longer offered). The reserve assumptions for future policy benefits and expenses are determined based upon pricing, which approximates actual experience.
For preneed life insurance issued after 2008 with discretionary death benefit growth, the universal life-type accounting model is applied whereby reserve assumptions are made without provision for adverse deviation. Interest and discount rates are based upon investment returns of the assets acquired to support the business. Expected mortality rates, lapse rates, and future death benefit increases are based upon pricing assumptions.
For preneed life insurance issued after 2008 with either no death benefit growth or death benefit growth linked to an inflation index, the long-duration accounting model is applied whereby reserve assumptions are made with provision for adverse deviation. Interest and discount rates are based upon investment returns of the assets acquired to support the business. Expected mortality rates and lapse rates are based upon pricing assumptions. For contracts with minimum benefit increases associated with an inflation index, the reserves assume expected benefit increases equal to a selected discount rate less a spread.
For preneed life insurance issued prior to 2009, the long-duration accounting model is applied whereby reserve assumptions are made with provision for adverse deviation. Interest and discount rates are based upon investment returns of the assets acquired to support the business. Expected mortality rates, lapse rates and future death benefit increases are based upon pricing assumptions.
Annuity contracts have reserve assumptions made without provision for adverse deviation. Assumed discount rates and interest rates credited on deferred annuities vary by year of issue. Withdrawal charge assumptions are based upon contract provisions. Nearly all of the deferred annuity contracts have a minimum guaranteed interest rate.
For life insurance and annuity contracts acquired in 2000 and prior, interest and discount rates as well as mortality assumptions are based on statutory valuation requirements, which approximate the GAAP valuation requirements, with no explicit provision for lapses.
Disposed and Runoff Long Duration Lines
Risks related to the reserves recorded for certain discontinued individual life, annuity and long-term care insurance policies have been fully ceded via reinsurance. While we have not been released from our contractual obligation to the policyholders, changes in and deviations from economic, mortality, morbidity, and withdrawal assumptions used in the calculation of these reserves will not directly affect our results of operations unless there is a default by the assuming reinsurer.
Deferred Acquisition Costs (“DAC”) and Value of Business Acquired (“VOBA”)
Only direct incremental costs associated with the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts are deferred to the extent that such costs are deemed recoverable from future premiums or gross profits. Acquisition costs primarily consist of commissions and premium taxes. Certain direct response advertising expenses are deferred when the primary purpose of the advertising is to elicit sales to customers who can be shown to have specifically responded to the advertising and the direct response advertising results in probable future benefits.
Premium deficiency testing is performed annually and generally reviewed quarterly. Such testing involves the use of best estimate assumptions including the anticipation of investment income to determine if anticipated future policy premiums are adequate to recover all DAC and related claims, benefits and expenses. To the extent a premium deficiency exists, it is recognized immediately by a charge to the consolidated statement of operations and a corresponding reduction in DAC. If the premium deficiency is greater than unamortized DAC, a loss (and related liability) is recorded for the excess deficiency.
Long Duration Contracts
Acquisition costs for pre-funded funeral life insurance policies issued prior to 2009 and certain life insurance policies no longer offered are deferred and amortized in proportion to anticipated premiums over the premium-paying period. These acquisition costs consist primarily of first year commissions paid to agents.
For preneed investment-type annuities, preneed life insurance policies with discretionary death benefit growth issued after January 1, 2009, universal life insurance policies and investment-type annuities no longer offered, DAC is amortized in proportion to the present value of estimated gross profits from investment, mortality, expense margins and surrender charges over the estimated life of the policy or contract. Estimated gross profits include the impact of unrealized gains or losses on investments as if these gains or losses had been realized, with corresponding credits or charges included in AOCI. The assumptions used for the estimates are consistent with those used in computing the policy or contract liabilities.
Short Duration Contracts
Acquisition costs relating to extended service contracts, vehicle service contracts, mobile device protection, credit insurance, lender-placed homeowners insurance and flood, multifamily housing and manufactured housing are amortized over the term of the contracts in relation to premiums earned. These acquisition costs consist primarily of advance commissions paid to agents.
Acquisition costs relating to disposed lines of business (group term life, group disability, group dental and group vision) consist primarily of compensation to sales representatives. Such costs are deferred and amortized over the estimated terms of the underlying contracts.
VOBA
As part of the acquisition of businesses that sell long-term extended service contracts, such as warranty contracts sold by TWG, and long-duration insurance contracts, such as life products, we establish an intangible asset related to VOBA, which represents the fair value of the expected future profits in unearned premium for insurance contracts acquired. For vehicle service contracts and extended service contracts such as those purchased in connection with the TWG acquisition, the amount is determined using estimates, for premium earnings patterns, paid loss development patterns, expense loads, and discount rates applied to cash flows that include a provision for credit risk. For vehicle service contracts and extended service contracts, VOBA is amortized consistent with the premium earning patterns of the underlying in-force contracts. For limited payment policies, preneed life insurance policies, universal life policies and annuities, the valuation of VOBA at the time of acquisition is derived from similar assumptions to those used to establish the associated claim or benefit reserves and is amortized over the expected life of the policies.
Investments
For available for sale fixed maturity securities in an unrealized loss position for which we do not intend to sell or for which it is more likely than not that we would not be required to sell before an anticipated recovery in value, we evaluate whether the decline in fair value has resulted from credit losses or other factors. In making this assessment, we consider the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost basis, changes to the credit rating of the security by a nationally recognized statistical ratings organization and any adverse conditions specifically related to the security, industry or geographic area, among other factors. If this assessment indicates a potential credit loss may exist, the present value of cash flows expected to be collected are compared to the security’s amortized cost basis. If the present value of cash flows expected to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit-related impairment exists, and a charge to income and an associated allowance for credit losses is recorded for the credit-related impairment. Any impairment not related to credit losses is recorded through other comprehensive income. The amount of the allowance for credit losses is limited to the amount by which fair value is less than the amortized cost basis. Upon recognizing a credit-related impairment, the cost basis of the security is not adjusted.
Subsequent changes in the allowance for credit losses are recorded as a provision for, or reversal of, credit loss expense. For fixed maturities where we record a credit loss, a determination is made as to the cause of the impairment and whether we expect a recovery in the value. Write-offs are charged against the allowance when management concludes the financial asset is uncollectible. For fixed maturities where we expect a recovery in value, the effective yield method is utilized, and the investment is amortized to par. We recorded a $1.5 million allowance for credit losses on fixed maturity securities available for sale for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For available for sale fixed maturity securities that we intend to sell, or for which it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell before recovery of our amortized cost basis, the entire impairment loss, or difference between the fair value and amortized cost basis of the security, is recognized in net realized gains (losses). The new cost basis of the security is the previous amortized cost basis less the impairment recognized and is not adjusted for any subsequent recoveries in fair value.
See also Notes 2, 5 and 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report, “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks - Our investment portfolio is subject to market risk, including changes in interest rates that may adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition” and “ - Investments” contained in this Item 7.
Reinsurance
Reinsurance recoverables were $9.84 billion and $9.59 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which include amounts we are owed by reinsurers for claims paid as well as those included in reserve estimates that are subject to the reinsurance. Reinsurance premiums paid are amortized as reductions to premium over the terms of the underlying reinsured policies. Amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with claim and claim adjustment expense reserves or future policy benefits reserves. We use a probability of default and loss given default methodology in estimating the allowance, whereby the credit ratings of reinsurers are used in determining the probability of default. The allowance is established for reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid future policy benefits and claims and benefits. Prior to applying default factors, the net exposure to credit risk is reduced for any collateral for which the right of offset exists, such as funds withheld, assets held in trust and letters of credit, which are part of the reinsurance arrangements, with adjustments to include consideration of credit exposure on the collateral. Our methodology incorporates historical default factors for each reinsurer based on their credit rating using comparably rated bonds as published by a major ratings service. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing and other relevant factors.
We have used reinsurance to exit certain businesses, including Assurant Employee Benefits and blocks of individual life, annuity and long-term care business. The reinsurance recoverables relating to these dispositions amounted to $4.42 billion and $4.46 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in both the assumption and cession of reinsurance with non-affiliated companies. The following table provides details of the reinsurance recoverables balance as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
We utilize reinsurance for loss protection and capital management, business dispositions and, in Global Lifestyle and Global Housing, client risk and profit sharing. See also Notes 2, 5 and 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report, “Item 1A - Risk Factors - Financial Risks - Reinsurance may not be adequate or available to protect us against losses, and we are subject to the credit risk of reinsurers” and “