Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also refer to the section under the heading “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Business Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company with the purpose of bettering the life of each person impacted by kidney disease. Since our initial public offering in 2014, we have built a business focused on developing and commercializing innovative renal therapeutics that we believe serves as a foundation for future growth. As a leader in the kidney community, we remain committed to helping patients and others where we believe our current and future products have the ability to deliver value. Our portfolio includes a late-stage product candidate and a commercial product:
•Vadadustat is an investigational oral hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor, or HIF-PHI, designed to mimic the physiologic effect of altitude on oxygen availability. At higher altitudes, the body responds to lower oxygen availability with stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor, or HIF, which stimulates erythropoietin, or EPO, production and leads to red blood cell, or RBC, production and improved oxygen delivery to tissues. The significance of the HIF pathway was recognized by the 2019 Nobel Prize and the 2016 Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research Award, which honored the three physician-scientists who discovered the HIF pathway and elucidated this primary oxygen sensing mechanism that is essential for survival. We believe that, based on the HIF-PHI mechanism of action and clinical data to date, vadadustat has the potential to set a new oral standard of care for the treatment of anemia due to chronic kidney disease, or CKD.
We recently completed the global Phase 3 clinical development program for vadadustat, which included two separate programs, INNO2VATE and PRO2TECT. INNO2VATE evaluated vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in adult patients on dialysis, or DD-CKD, and PRO2TECT evaluated vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in adult patients not on dialysis, or NDD-CKD.
In May of 2020, we announced positive top-line results from our Phase 3 INNO2VATE program that showed vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa, an injectable erythropoiesis-stimulating agent, or ESA, with respect to hematological efficacy (change in hemoglobin concentration) and cardiovascular safety (assessed in a time to the first occurrence of a major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE) analysis, which is the composite of all-cause mortality, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or a nonfatal stroke) in treating anemia due to CKD in DD-CKD adult patients. In addition to meeting the primary endpoints of the INNO2VATE program, vadadustat met the key secondary hematological efficacy endpoint in each of the two studies in the program and also met the program's key secondary safety endpoints. The results of the INNO2VATE program were presented at American Society of Nephrology, or ASN, in October of 2020.
In September of 2020, we announced top-line results from our Phase 3 PRO2TECT program that showed vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa with respect to hematological efficacy in treating anemia due to CKD in NDD-CKD adult patients. While the PRO2TECT data showed that vadadustat achieved both the primary and key secondary hematological efficacy endpoints, it did not meet the program's primary cardiovascular safety (MACE) endpoint. These cardiovascular outcomes contrast with those reported within the INNO2VATE program, which evaluated vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in DD-CKD adult patients. The results of the PRO2TECT program were presented at ASN in October of 2020. Simultaneous with the PRO2TECT ASN presentation, we presented additional analyses, conducted by Akebia, of data from the PRO2TECT program that revealed that the greater number of MACE events observed among vadadustat patients as compared to the active comparator was primarily related to an excess of non-cardiovascular death and death-of-unknown-cause in regions outside of the United States where significant differences in treatment patterns for NDD-CKD patients were observed.
We plan to proceed with the submission of a New Drug Application, or NDA, for vadadustat by the middle of the second quarter of 2021 for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in both DD-CKD and NDD-CKD adult patients. We are also working in close collaboration with our collaboration partner, Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Co. Ltd., to prepare a Marketing Authorization Application, or MAA, for vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in both DD-CKD and NDD-CKD adult patients for submission to the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, expected in 2021. However, as vadadustat did not meet the PRO2TECT program's primary safety endpoint, we are remaining cautious in our outlook for potential approval of vadadustat in NDD-CKD adult patients in the United States and Europe.
In June of 2020, we announced the first regulatory approval of vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in DD-CKD and NDD-CKD adult patients in Japan. Our collaboration partner in Japan, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, or MTPC, commenced commercial sales of vadadustat in Japan under the trade name, VafseoTM, in August 2020.
In addition to anemia due to CKD, we believe that vadadustat has the potential to treat other serious or life-threatening conditions, including preventing and lessening the severity of acute respiratory distress syndrome, or ARDS, a complication of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), or COVID-19, infection. More specifically, in July of 2020, we announced an investigator-sponsored clinical study by The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, or UTHealth, in Houston, Texas, evaluating the use of vadadustat as a potential therapy to prevent and lessen the severity of ARDS in up to 400 adult patients who have been hospitalized due to COVID-19. Within this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, patients will be dosed with vadadustat or a placebo starting within 24 hours of hospital admission and continuing for up to 14 days. This study is being conducted under a U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, Investigational New Drug application, or IND, with UTHealth as the study sponsor and is currently enrolling patients. In January of 2021, UTHealth announced that it had been awarded $5.1 million in funding from the U.S. Department of Defense, or DOD, to expand this clinical trial at its facilities.
•Auryxia® (ferric citrate) is approved and marketed in the United States for two indications: (1) the control of serum phosphorus levels in adult patients with DD-CKD, or the Hyperphosphatemia Indication, and (2) the treatment of iron deficiency anemia, or IDA, in adult patients with NDD-CKD, or the IDA Indication. Ferric citrate is also approved and marketed in Japan as an oral treatment for the improvement of hyperphosphatemia in patients with CKD, including DD-CKD and NDD-CKD, under the trade name Riona (ferric citrate hydrate).
Vadadustat
Top-line Results from Global Phase 3 INNO2VATE Program within DD-CKD Adult Patients
The two INNO2VATE studies (Correction/Conversion and Conversion), which collectively enrolled 3,923 patients, evaluated the efficacy and safety of vadadustat versus darbepoetin alfa for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in DD-CKD adult patients.
Vadadustat achieved the primary and key secondary efficacy endpoint in each of the two INNO2VATE studies, demonstrating non-inferiority to darbepoetin alfa as measured by a mean change in hemoglobin, or Hb, between baseline and the primary evaluation period (weeks 24 to 36) and secondary evaluation period (weeks 40 to 52). Vadadustat also achieved the primary safety endpoint of the INNO2VATE program, defined as non-inferiority of vadadustat versus darbepoetin alfa in time to first occurrence of MACE across both INNO2VATE studies.
Primary and Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoint Results
Vadadustat achieved each of the INNO2VATE studies’ primary efficacy endpoints of mean change in Hb between baseline and the primary evaluation period compared to darbepoetin alfa, in DD-CKD adult patients, demonstrating non-inferiority to darbepoetin alfa based on using a non-inferiority margin of -0.75 g/dL.
In INNO2VATE’s Correction/Conversion study of incident dialysis patients (n=369):
•Primary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa. The least square mean difference in Hb was -0.31 g/dL (95% CI: -0.53, -0.10), achieving the pre-specified non-inferiority criterion of -0.75 g/dL. The mean (SD) Hb level at week 24 to week 36 was 10.36 (1.13) g/dL for vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.61 (0.94) g/dL for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
•Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat sustained the target Hb efficacy response at weeks 40 to 52 achieving non-inferiority compared to darbepoetin alfa. The least square mean difference in Hb was -0.07 g/dL (95%
CI: -0.34, 0.19). The mean (SD) Hb level at week 40 to week 52 was 10.51 (1.19) g/dL for vadadustat treated-patients compared to 10.55 (1.14) g/dL for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
In INNO2VATE’s Conversion study of dialysis patients (n=3,554):
•Primary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa. The least square mean difference in Hb was -0.17 g/dL (95% CI: -0.23, -0.10), achieving the pre-specified non-inferiority criterion of -0.75 g/dL. The mean (SD) Hb level at week 24 to week 36 was 10.36 (1.01) g/dL for vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.53 (0.96) g/dL for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
•Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat sustained efficacy in the Conversion study demonstrating non-inferiority to darbepoetin with a least square mean difference in Hb of -0.18 g/dL (95% CI: -0.25, -0.12). The mean (SD) Hb level at week 40 to week 52 was 10.40 (1.04) g/dL in the vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.58 (0.98) g/dL for darbepoetin treated patients.
Primary Safety Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events (MACE) Endpoint Result
Vadadustat achieved the INNO2VATE program’s primary safety endpoint of non-inferiority for MACE. In the primary analysis of time to first MACE event, vadadustat demonstrated non-inferiority to darbepoetin alfa using a non-inferiority margin of 1.25 prospectively agreed to by FDA and a non-inferiority margin of 1.3 prospectively agreed to by EMA.
The INNO2VATE program (Correction/Conversion and Conversion studies) of dialysis patients (n=3,902):
•Vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa. The upper bound of the 95% confidence interval (CI) of the Hazard Ratio (HR) was below the pre-specified non-inferiority margin of 1.25 for primary MACE analysis (HR 0.96, 95% CI: 0.83, 1.11.).
The incidence of treatment emergent adverse events during the Correction/Conversion study in vadadustat treated patients was 83.8% and 85.5 % in darbepoetin alfa treated patients. During the study, the most common treatment emergent adverse events reported in vadadustat/darbepoetin alfa treated patients were hypertension (16.2%/ 12.9%) and diarrhea (10.1%/ 9.7%). Serious treatment emergent adverse events were lower in vadadustat treated patients at 49.7% compared to 56.5% for darbepoetin alfa treated patients. The incidence of treatment emergent adverse events during the Conversion study in the vadadustat treated patients was 88.3%, and 89.3% in darbepoetin alfa treated patients. During the study, the most common treatment emergent adverse events reported in vadadustat/darbepoetin alfa treated patients were diarrhea (13.0%/ 10.1%), pneumonia (11.0%/ 9.7%), hypertension (10.6%/ 13.8%), and hyperkalemia (9.0%/ 10.8%). Serious treatment emergent adverse events were slightly lower for vadadustat treated patients at 55.0% and 58.3% for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
INNO2VATE results on key secondary safety endpoints showed that vadadustat also demonstrated non-inferiority to darbepoetin alfa in analyses of expanded MACE, cardiovascular MACE, cardiovascular mortality, and all-cause mortality.
Top-line Results from Global Phase 3 PRO2TECT Program within NDD-CKD Adult Patients
The two PRO2TECT studies (Correction and Conversion), which collectively enrolled 3,476 patients, evaluated the efficacy and safety of vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in NDD-CKD adult patients.
Vadadustat achieved the primary and key secondary efficacy endpoint in each of the two PRO2TECT studies, demonstrating non-inferiority to darbepoetin alfa as measured by a mean change in Hb between baseline and the primary evaluation period (weeks 24 to 36) and secondary evaluation period (weeks 40 to 52). Vadadustat did not meet the primary safety endpoint of the PRO2TECT program, defined as non-inferiority of vadadustat versus darbepoetin alfa in time to first occurrence of MACE across both PRO2TECT studies.
Primary and Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoint Results
Vadadustat achieved each of the PRO2TECT studies' primary efficacy endpoints of mean change in Hb between baseline and the primary evaluation period compared to darbepoetin alfa, in adult patients on dialysis, demonstrating non-inferiority to darbepoetin alfa using an NI margin of -0.75 g/dL.
In PRO2TECT's Correction study (n=1,751):
•Primary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa. The least square mean difference in Hb was 0.05 g/dL (95% CI: -0.04, 0.15), achieving the pre-specified NI criterion of -0.75 g/dL. The mean (SD) Hb level at week 24 to week 36 was 10.39 (0.99) g/dL for vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.35 (1.03) g/dL for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
•Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat sustained the target Hb efficacy response at weeks 40 to 52 achieving non-inferiority compared to darbepoetin alfa. The least square mean difference in Hb was 0.04 g/dL (95% CI: -0.06, 0.14). The mean (SD) Hb level at week 40 to week 52 was 10.48 (1.05) g/dL for vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.45 (1.01) g/dL for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
In PRO2TECT's Conversion study (n=1,725):
•Primary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat was non-inferior to darbepoetin alfa. The least square mean difference in Hb was -0.01 g/dL (95% CI: -0.09, 0.07), achieving the pre-specified NI criterion of -0.75 g/dL. The mean (SD) Hb level at week 24 to week 36 was 10.77 (0.98) g/dL for vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.77 (0.99) g/dL for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
•Key Secondary Efficacy Endpoint Result: Vadadustat sustained efficacy in the Conversion study demonstrating non-inferiority to darbepoetin with a least square mean difference in Hb of 0.00 g/dL (95% CI: -0.10, 0.09). The mean (SD) Hb level at week 40 to week 52 was 10.80 (1.04) g/dL in the vadadustat-treated patients compared to 10.79 (1.05) g/dL for darbepoetin alpha-treated patients.
Primary Safety Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events (MACE) Endpoint Result
The PRO2TECT program (Correction and Conversion studies) (n=3,471):
•Primary Safety MACE Endpoint Result: Vadadustat did not meet the PRO2TECT program's primary safety endpoint of non-inferiority for MACE. The upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of the Hazard Ratio (HR) was above the pre-specified NI margin of 1.25 for primary MACE analysis (HR 1.17, 95% CI: 1.01, 1.36).
Analysis of MACE events conducted by Akebia in the PRO2TECT program revealed that the greater number of MACE events observed among vadadustat patients as compared to the active comparator was primarily related to an excess of non-cardiovascular death and death-of-unknown-cause in regions outside of the United States where significant differences in treatment patterns for NDD-CKD patients were observed.
The PRO2TECT analysis plan was prospectively designed to analyze the effect of regional differences, most notably, well-known differences in Hb treatment targets. Within PRO2TECT, U.S. patients were treated to a target Hb range of 10 to 11 g/dL and non-U.S. patients were treated to a target Hb range of 10 to 12 g/dL. In October of 2020, we presented a pre-specified regional analysis using age as a dichotomous variable, that showed vadadustat was not associated with a clinically meaningful increase in cardiovascular risk compared to darbepoetin alfa in U.S. patients treated to a target Hb range of 10 to 11 g/dL, in an analysis of MACE (HR 1.06, 95% CI: 0.87, 1.29).
In October 2020, we announced that based on these analyses and the totality of the data from our Phase 3 program, we plan to pursue regulatory approval in the United States for vadadustat for the treatment of anemia in adult NDD-CKD patients. However, as vadadustat did not meet the PRO2TECT program's primary safety endpoint, we are remaining cautious in our outlook for potential approval of vadadustat in adult NDD-CKD patients and we look forward to working with the FDA in their review of these data.
The incidence of treatment emergent adverse events during the Correction study in the vadadustat-treated patients was 90.9%, and 91.6% in darbepoetin alfa-treated patients. During the study, the most common treatment emergent adverse events reported in vadadustat/darbepoetin alfa-treated patients were end-stage renal disease (34.7%/ 35.2%), hypertension (17.7%/ 22.1.%), hyperkalemia (12.3.%/ 15.6%), urinary tract infection (12.9%/ 12.0%), diarrhea (13.9%/ 10.0%), peripheral oedema (12.5%/ 10.5%), fall (9.6%/ 10%) and nausea (10%/ 8.2%). Serious treatment emergent adverse events were 65.3% for vadadustat-treated patients and 64.5% for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients. The incidence of treatment emergent adverse events during the Conversion study in vadadustat treated patients was 89.1% and 87.7% in darbepoetin alfa-treated patients. During the study, the most common treatment emergent adverse events reported in vadadustat/darbepoetin alfa-treated patients were end-stage renal disease (27.5%/ 28.4%), hypertension (14.4%/ 14.8%), urinary tract infection (12.2%/ 14.5%), diarrhea (13.8.%/ 8.8.%), peripheral oedema (9.9%/ 10.1%) and pneumonia (10.0%/ 9.7%). Serious treatment emergent adverse events were 58.5% for vadadustat-treated patients and 56.6% for darbepoetin alfa-treated patients.
Regulatory and Commercialization Strategy
Based on the strength of the INNO2VATE data, the additional analyses of data from PRO2TECT conducted by Akebia and the totality of the data from our Phase 3 program, following our October 2020 pre-NDA meeting with the FDA, we plan to proceed with the submission of an NDA for vadadustat by the middle of the second quarter of 2021 for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in both DD-CKD and NDD-CKD adult patients. We are also working in close collaboration with Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., to prepare a Marketing Authorization Application, or MAA, for vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in both DD-CKD and NDD-CKD adult patients for submission to the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, expected in 2021. However, as vadadustat did not meet the PRO2TECT program's primary safety endpoint, we are remaining cautious in our outlook for potential approval of vadadustat in NDD-CKD adult patients in the United States and Europe.
We are in the process of supporting MTPC's commercial launch of vadadustat in Japan, preparing for a potential commercial launch of vadadustat in the United States and supporting potential commercial launches of vadadustat in certain other markets. Our ability to launch vadadustat in the United States is dependent on the successful filing and defense of an NDA, and approval by the FDA.
We plan to commercialize vadadustat, subject to FDA approval, in the United States with our well-established, nephrology-focused commercial organization, while leveraging our collaboration with Otsuka and its U.S. nephrology commercial organization. We granted Otsuka exclusive rights to commercialize vadadustat in Europe, China and certain other markets, subject to marketing approvals. We granted MTPC exclusive rights to commercialize vadadustat in Japan, where MTPC commenced commercial sales of vadadustat under the trade name, VafseoTM, in August 2020, and in certain other countries in Asia, subject to marketing approvals. In addition, we granted Vifor (International) Ltd., or Vifor Pharma, an exclusive license to sell vadadustat to FKC and Third Party Dialysis Organizations, which combined manage up to approximately 60% of the dialysis patients in the United States, which would be effective upon FDA approval of vadadustat, the earlier of vadadustat’s reimbursement under a bundled reimbursement model or using the TDAPA, and a milestone payment by Vifor Pharma. During the term of the license agreement, Vifor Pharma is not permitted to sell any HIF product that competes with vadadustat in the United States to FKC or its affiliates or to any Third Party Dialysis Organization, and we may not directly supply vadadustat to FKC or any other affiliate of Fresenius Medical Care North America, or FMCNA, or any Third Party Dialysis Organization. For more information about our license, collaboration and strategic agreements relating to vadadustat, see Part I, Item 1. Business - License, Collaboration and Other Strategic Agreements - Vadadustat.
We entered into a letter agreement on February 14, 2020, or the Letter Agreement, with Vifor Pharma, relating to Vifor Pharma’s agreement with a third party to purchase a Priority Review Voucher, or the PRV, issued by the FDA subject to satisfaction of customary closing conditions, or the PRV Purchase. A PRV entitles the holder to priority review of an NDA, or a Biologics License Application, or BLA, for a new drug, which reduces the target FDA review time to six months after official acceptance of the submission, and could lead to expedited approval. Pursuant to the Letter Agreement, we paid Vifor Pharma $10.0 million in connection with the closing of the PRV Purchase. Vifor Pharma is obligated to retain all rights to, and maintain the validity of, the PRV until we and Vifor Pharma (a) enter into a definitive agreement setting forth the financial and other terms by which Vifor Pharma will assign the PRV to us for use with our planned NDA for vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in both DD-CKD and NDD-CKD adult patients, or (b) make a mutual decision to sell the PRV and share the proceeds based on certain terms.
Japan Approval and Launch
In June 2020, we announced the first regulatory approval of vadadustat for the treatment of anemia due to CKD in DD-CKD and NDD-CKD patients in Japan. Our collaboration partner, MTPC, commenced commercial sales of vadadustat in Japan under the trade name, VafseoTM, in August 2020. The regulatory approval triggered a $15.0 million regulatory milestone payment from MTPC to Akebia.
Study in COVID-19-Related Indication
In July 2020, we announced the initiation of an investigator-sponsored clinical study by The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, or UTHealth, in Houston, Texas, evaluating the use of vadadustat as a potential therapy to prevent and lessen the severity of acute respiratory distress syndrome, or ARDS, a complication of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), or COVID-19, infection. The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study is intended to evaluate the safety and efficacy of vadadustat in up to 400 adult patients who have been hospitalized due to COVID-19. Patients will be dosed with vadadustat or a placebo starting within 24 hours of hospital admission and continuing for up to 14 days. This study is being conducted under an FDA Investigational New Drug application with UTHealth as the study sponsor and is currently enrolling patients. In January of 2021, UTHealth announced that it had been awarded $5.1 million in funding from the U.S. Department of Defense, or DOD, to expand this clinical trial at its facilities.
Auryxia
We market Auryxia in the United States with our well-established, nephrology-focused commercial organization. Our Japanese sublicensee, Japan Tobacco, Inc., or JT, and its subsidiary, Torii Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., or Torii, commercialize Riona in Japan.
Auryxia is our only product approved for sale in the United States and it generated approximately $128.9 million in revenue from U.S. product sales during the year ended December 31, 2020. We have funded our operations primarily through equity offerings, strategic collaborations, product revenues and debt.
Operating Overview
We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $383.5 million, $279.7 million and $143.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with the continued commercialization of Auryxia and development efforts relating to vadadustat, including preparing for and conducting clinical studies of vadadustat, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. The amount of our future net losses will depend, in part, on the rate of our future expenditures, and our financial position will depend, in part, on product revenue, collaboration revenue, and our ability to obtain additional funding. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses if and as we:
•conduct any post-marketing approval studies, Phase 4 studies or any other clinical trials for Auryxia, vadadustat or any other product or product candidate, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired;
•continue our commercialization activities for Auryxia and plan for the commercialization of vadadustat, if approved, and any other product or product candidate, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired;
•adapt to any regulatory changes, including changes relating to reimbursement;
•adapt to any changes in reimbursement practices by third party payors;
•continue our integration activities as a result of our merger, or the Merger, with Keryx Biopharmaceuticals, Inc., or Keryx;
•enroll patients in our clinical trials;
•seek marketing approvals for vadadustat and any other product candidate, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired, and maintain marketing approvals for Auryxia and any other product, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired;
•have Auryxia, vadadustat and any other product or product candidate, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired, manufactured for clinical trials and for commercial sale;
•seek to discover and develop additional product candidates or platforms that may lead to the discovery of additional product candidates;
•engage in transactions, including strategic, merger, collaboration, acquisition and licensing transactions, pursuant to which we would market and develop commercial products, or develop and commercialize other product candidates and technologies;
•make royalty, milestone or other payments under our license agreements and any future license agreements;
•maintain, protect and expand our intellectual property portfolio;
•attract, hire and retain qualified personnel;
•continue to create additional infrastructure and expend additional resources to support our operations as a fully integrated, publicly traded biopharmaceutical company; and
•experience any delays or encounter issues with any of the above.
We have not generated, and may not generate, enough product revenue to realize net profits from product sales. We have no manufacturing facilities, and all of our manufacturing activities are contracted out to third parties. Additionally, we currently utilize contract research organizations, or CROs, to carry out our clinical development activities. If we obtain marketing approval for vadadustat, and as we continue to commercialize Auryxia, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We expect to finance future cash needs through product revenue, public or private equity or debt transactions, payments from our collaborators, royalty transactions, strategic transactions, or a combination of these approaches. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts when needed or on attractive terms, we may not be able to pursue development and commercial activities related to Auryxia and
vadadustat, if approved, or any additional products and product candidates, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
From inception through December 31, 2020, we raised approximately $704.3 million of net proceeds from the sale of equity, including $519.8 million from various underwritten public offerings, $134.5 million from at-the-market offerings, or ATM offerings, pursuant to sales agreements with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., and $50.0 million from the sale of 3,571,429 shares of common stock to Vifor Pharma. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our common stock with aggregate net proceeds of $142.4 million and we raised $67.3 million of net proceeds from ATM offerings. In addition, on November 11, 2019, we entered into a loan agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with funds managed by Pharmakon Advisors LP, or Pharmakon, pursuant to which term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million were made available to us in two tranches, subject to certain terms and conditions, or the Term Loans. On November 25, 2019, we drew down the first tranche of $80.0 million from the Term Loans and received net proceeds of $77.3 million. On December 10, 2020, we drew down the second tranche of $20.0 million from the Term Loans and received net proceeds of $20.0 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and through the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company raised $15.9 million in net proceeds from ATM offerings. At the inception of our collaboration agreements with Otsuka and MTPC, our collaborators committed to an aggregate of approximately $573.0 million or more in cost-share funding, which we generally continue to receive on a quarterly prepaid basis, and license payments. Of these commitments, we received approximately $272.0 million at the onset of the collaboration agreements.
Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), or COVID-19, pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and continues to affect our employees, patients, healthcare providers with whom we interact, customers, collaboration partners, CROs, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, vendors, communities and business operations. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition continues to depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the COVID-19 pandemic, any resurgences or mutations of COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets where the healthcare providers with whom we interact, our partners, our CROs, our CMOs, and our other vendors operate.
While we did not experience a significant impact from COVID-19 on our revenues during the first nine months of 2020, we believe our revenue growth was negatively impacted during the fourth quarter of 2020 primarily as the kidney patient populations that we serve continue to experience both higher hospitalization and mortality rates due to COVID-19. While we are unable to quantify the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future revenues and revenue growth, COVID-19 continues to adversely and disproportionately impact our patient population; therefore, we expect COVID-19 to continue to have a negative impact on our revenue growth for the foreseeable future.
The majority of our office-based employees have been working from home since March 13, 2020. In addition, healthcare facilities have continued, or begun again, to restrict access for non-patients, including the members of our sales force. For example, DaVita, Inc., or DaVita, and Fresenius Medical Care, or Fresenius, which account for a vast majority of the dialysis population in the United States, have restricted access to their clinics. As a result, we continue to primarily engage with healthcare providers and other customers virtually, where possible. Given this uncertain environment and the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on CKD patients, we are actively monitoring the demand for Auryxia, including the potential for further declines or changes in prescription trends and customer orders.
At this time, our third party contract manufacturing partners continue to operate at or near normal levels. However, it is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic and response efforts may have an impact in the future on our contract manufacturing partners' ability to manufacture and deliver Auryxia and vadadustat (which is currently marketed under the trade name VafseoTM by MTPC in Japan), which may result in delays in or disruptions to manufacturing and supply of our products.
COVID-19 pandemic precautions have caused moderate delays in enrolling new clinical trials and may cause delays in enrolling other new clinical trials. We are using remote monitoring and central monitoring, where possible.
This uncertain COVID-19 pandemic environment has presented new risks to our business. While we are working aggressively to mitigate the impacts on our business, we are mindful that many of these risks and the impact to the larger healthcare market are outside of our control.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please refer to Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Financial Overview
Revenue
To date, our revenues have been derived from collaboration revenues, which include license and milestone payments, royalty and cost-sharing revenue generated through collaboration and license agreements with partners for the development and commercialization of vadadustat and, following the Merger, commercial sales of Auryxia and royalty revenue from sales of Riona in Japan. Cost-sharing revenue represents amounts reimbursed by our collaboration partners for expenses incurred by us for research and development activities and, potentially, co-promotion activities, under our collaboration agreements.
We expect our revenue to continue to be generated primarily from our collaborations with Otsuka and MTPC and any other collaborations into which we may enter, as well as commercial sales of Auryxia in the United States, and royalty revenue from JT and Torii, based on net sales of Riona in Japan.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes direct costs to manufacture commercial drug substance and drug product for Auryxia, as well as indirect costs, including costs for packaging, shipping, insurance and quality assurance, idle capacity charges, write-offs for inventory that fails to meet specifications or is otherwise no longer suitable for commercial sale, and royalties due to the licensor of Auryxia related to the U.S. product sales recognized during the period.
As a result of the Merger and the application of purchase accounting, costs of goods sold also includes both amortization expense and, if applicable, impairment charges associated with the fair value of the developed product rights for Auryxia as well as expense associated with the fair value inventory step-up. The fair value of the developed product rights for Auryxia is being amortized over its estimated useful life, which as of December 31, 2020 is estimated to be six years. The fair value inventory step-up is expected to be incurred over approximately three years from the date of the Merger.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of vadadustat, which include:
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, recruiting fees, travel and stock-based compensation expense of our research and development personnel;
•expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and investigative sites that conduct our clinical studies;
•the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical study materials through CMOs;
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies; and
•costs associated with preclinical, clinical and regulatory activities.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and our clinical sites.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of current or future clinical studies of Auryxia and vadadustat or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of vadadustat, if approved. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for vadadustat.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical studies and development of Auryxia and vadadustat will depend on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, those described in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of Auryxia and vadadustat could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with that development. For example, if the FDA, the EMA, or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical studies in addition to or different from those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience delays in any of our clinical studies, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have incurred $1.3 billion in research and development expenses. We expect to have significant research and development expenditures for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of Auryxia and vadadustat.
Our direct research and development expenses consist principally of external costs, such as fees paid to clinical trial sites, consultants, central laboratories and CROs in connection with our clinical studies, and drug substance and drug product manufacturing for clinical studies.
We recently completed our global Phase 3 clinical program for vadadustat to which the majority of our research and development costs are attributable. A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external costs, which we track on a program-by-program basis. These external costs include fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and contract research organizations in connection with our clinical trials, and costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials. Our internal research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs, depreciation and other indirect costs. We do not track our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they are deployed across multiple projects under development.
Prior to 2019, we did not track or record our external research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis. The following table summarizes our external research and development expenses by program, as well as expenses not allocated to programs, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses for our commercial personnel, including our field sales force and other commercial support personnel, as well as personnel in executive and other administrative or non-research and development functions. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs, fees for directors, accounting and legal services fees, recruiting fees and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Product Revenue, Net. Net product revenue is derived from sales of our only commercial product in the United States, Auryxia. We distribute our product principally through a limited number of wholesale distributors as well as certain specialty pharmacy providers. Net product revenue was $128.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net product revenue of $111.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in units sold. While we did not experience a significant impact from COVID-19 on our revenues during the first nine months of 2020, we believe our revenue growth was negatively impacted during the fourth quarter of 2020 primarily as the kidney patient populations that we serve continue to experience both higher hospitalization and mortality rates due to COVID-19. While we are unable to quantify the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future revenues and revenue growth, COVID-19 continues to adversely and disproportionately impact our patient population; therefore, we expect COVID-19 to continue to have a negative impact on our revenue growth for the foreseeable future. For additional information regarding the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on our company and revenue, please refer to Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
In September 2018, CMS decided that Auryxia would no longer be covered by Medicare for the IDA Indication. While this decision does not impact CMS coverage of the Hyperphosphatemia Indication, it requires all Auryxia prescriptions for Medicare patients to undergo a prior authorization to ensure their use in the Hyperphosphatemia Indication. On October 15, 2019, we filed a complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts against CMS and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services challenging CMS’s decision that Auryxia would no longer be covered by Medicare for the IDA Indication and imposing a prior authorization requirement for Auryxia in the Hyperphosphatemia Indication, or the CMS Decision. See Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings for further information. While we believe that the vast majority of the Medicare prescriptions written for Auryxia today are for the Hyperphosphatemia Indication and therefore will continue to be covered by Medicare with prior authorization, the CMS Decision has had and will continue to have an adverse impact on the sales and future growth of Auryxia for the Hyperphosphatemia Indication and the IDA Indication.
License, collaboration and other revenue. License, collaboration and other revenue was $166.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $223.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We recognized $154.3 million in collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 from our cost sharing arrangement under the Otsuka collaboration agreement for the United States, or the Otsuka U.S. Agreement, and the Otsuka collaboration agreement for certain territories outside the United States, or the Otsuka International Agreement, and recognition of a milestone and royalty revenue earned under our collaboration agreement with MTPC, or the MTPC Agreement. We recognized $216.9 million in collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 from our cost sharing arrangement under the Otsuka U.S. Agreement and the Otsuka International Agreement and recognition of a milestone under the MTPC Agreement. The decrease in revenue between
the two periods was primarily attributable to a decrease of $68.0 million of revenue recognized under both the Otsuka U.S. Agreement and Otsuka International Agreement. This decrease was partially offset by an additional $5.4 million of revenue recognized under the MTPC Agreement due to timing of milestone recognition and royalty revenue, with $15.4 million recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $10.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect our Otsuka collaboration revenue to continue to decrease in the near term as we recently completed our global Phase 3 clinical development program for vadadustat and are currently engaged in close-out activities with respect to the program.
Cost of Goods Sold - Product. Cost of goods sold of $148.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consists of costs associated with the manufacturing of Auryxia, $68.2 million in non-cash charges related to the fair-value inventory step-up from the application of purchase accounting, $25.1 million in non-cash charges related to an increase in the liability for excess purchase commitments as a result of reductions in the short-term and long-term Auryxia revenue sales forecast during the year ended December 31, 2020, and $20.1 million primarily related to the write-down of inventory associated with specific lots of Auryxia because it was determined that these lots were not manufactured in conformance with the FDA's GMP guidance relating to validation.
Cost of goods sold of $108.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of costs associated with the manufacturing of Auryxia and $70.4 million in non-cash charges related to the fair-value inventory step-up from the application of purchase accounting.
Cost of Goods Sold - Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles relates to the acquired developed product rights for Auryxia. This intangible asset was being amortized using a straight-line method over its estimated useful life of approximately nine years during the six months ended June 30, 2020 and approximately seven years during the six months ended December 31, 2020. Amortization of intangibles during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $31.5 million and $36.4 million, respectively. The combined effect of the lower carrying value of the Auryxia intangible asset following impairment in the second quarter of 2020, as further described below, and the corresponding adjustment to the estimated useful life of the developed product rights for Auryxia, resulted in a decrease in 2020 amortization expense compared to 2019.The Company expects the future amortization charges to increase from 2020 due to the prospective adjustment of the estimated useful life of the developed product rights for Auryxia from seven years to six years as of December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold - Impairment of Intangible Asset. In the second quarter of 2020, in connection with a routine business review, we reduced our short-term and long-term Auryxia revenue forecast. This reduction was primarily driven by the compounding impact of the CMS Decision that rescinded Medicare Part D coverage of Auryxia for the IDA Indication, and imposed a prior authorization requirement for Auryxia for the Hyperphosphatemia Indication. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $115.5 million to the Auryxia intangible asset during the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no such impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were $218.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $323.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net decrease of $104.5 million was due to the following:
The decrease in the costs related to the development of vadadustat is primarily attributable to a decrease in external costs related to our global Phase 3 program (INNO2VATE and PRO2TECT), for which we reported top-line data in the second and third quarters of 2020, respectively. Although we expect our research and development expenses to continue to decrease in the near term as we recently completed our global Phase 3 clinical development program for vadadustat, we will continue to incur significant research and development expenses in future periods in support of our overall development program for vadadustat and ongoing or planned studies with respect to Auryxia, vadadustat and development of other potential product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $153.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $149.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4.5 million was primarily due to increases in headcount and consulting costs. In 2021, we expect our selling, general and administrative
expenses for our ongoing commercialization of Auryxia and for support of our ongoing research and development and potential commercialization of vadadustat and other product candidates to increase modestly from 2020.
License Expenses. License expense related to royalties due to Panion relating to sales of Riona in Japan were $3.4 million and $3.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Other Expense, Net. Other expense, net, was $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to interest expense associated with our Term Loans. Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to interest expense associated with our former line of credit with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, in the first quarter of 2019, which line of credit was terminated in November 2019, and interest expense associated with our Term Loans in the fourth quarter of 2019, offset by interest income from investment balances during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Benefit from Income Taxes. There was no benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020. Benefit from income taxes was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decrease in our deferred tax liabilities, or DTLs. During the year ended December 31, 2019, there was an increase in deferred tax assets associated with the state net operating loss generated during the period. This increase in deferred tax assets reduced our net DTLs which created a benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Product Revenue, Net. Net product revenue is derived from sales of our only commercial product in the United States, Auryxia. We distribute our product principally through a limited number of wholesale distributors as well as certain specialty pharmacy providers. We began recording product revenue on sales of Auryxia in the United States on December 12, 2018 following the consummation of the Merger. Net product revenue was $111.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $6.8 million for the period from December 12, 2018 through December 31, 2018. This increase as compared to the period from December 12, 2018 through December 31, 2018 was due to net product revenue associated with Auryxia, as there was no comparable net product revenue in the period from January 1, 2018 through December 11, 2018 prior to the Merger.
License, collaboration and other revenue. License, collaboration and other revenue was $223.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $200.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. We recognized $216.9 million in
collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 from our cost sharing arrangement under the Otsuka U.S. Agreement and the Otsuka International Agreement and recognition of a milestone earned under the MTPC Agreement. We recognized $200.5 million in collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 from our cost sharing arrangement under the Otsuka U.S. Agreement, the Otsuka International Agreement, as well as revenue recognized in connection with the MTPC Agreement. The increase in revenue between the two periods was primarily attributable to an additional $15.7 million of revenue recognized under both the Otsuka U.S. Agreement and Otsuka International Agreement and an additional $0.7 million of revenue recognized in connection with the MTPC Agreement. The remaining variance was primarily due to an increase in license revenue relating to our sublicense agreement with JT and Torii and includes license fees and royalties on net product sales of Riona in Japan.
Cost of Goods Sold - Product. Cost of goods sold of $108.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of costs associated with the manufacturing of Auryxia and a $70.4 million charge related to the fair-value inventory step-up from the application of purchase accounting. Cost of goods sold of $6.3 million for the period from December 12, 2018 through December 31, 2018 consisted primarily of costs associated with the manufacturing of Auryxia and a $4.8 million charge related to the fair-value inventory step-up from the application of purchase accounting. This increase as compared to the period from December 12, 2018 through December 31, 2018 was due to costs associated with Auryxia, as there were no comparable costs in the period from January 1, 2018 through December 11, 2018 prior to the Merger.
Cost of Goods Sold - Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles relates to the acquired developed product rights for Auryxia. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, this intangible asset was being amortized over its estimated useful life of approximately nine years using a straight-line method. Amortization of intangibles for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $36.4 million and $1.5 million, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were $323.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $291.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The net increase of $32.0 million was due to the following:
The decrease in the costs related to the development of vadadustat was primarily attributable to a decrease in external costs related to other supporting clinical and preclinical activities, as well as regulatory activities, and a decrease in costs for the Japan Phase 2 studies, which were completed in 2018. There was also a decrease in external costs for the PRO2TECT and INNO2VATE Phase 3 program and a decrease in costs related to the manufacture of drug substance and drug product. The overall increase in research and development expenses was primarily impacted by increases in headcount and consulting costs to support our research and development programs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $149.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $87.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $62.4 million was primarily due to commercialization costs associated with Auryxia as there were no comparable commercialization costs during the first eleven months of 2018, and an increase in costs to support our research and development programs.
License Expenses. License expense related to royalties due to Panion relating to sales of Riona in Japan were $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $67,000 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $3.4 million was primarily due to no license expense in the period from January 1, 2018 through December 11, 2018 prior to the Merger.
Other Expense, Net. The decrease in other income, net of $6.2 million was primarily due to interest expense associated with our former line of credit with SVB, in the first quarter of 2019 and interest expense associated with our Term Loans in the fourth quarter of 2019 offset by interest income from investment balances during the year ended December 31, 2018. We did not have similar income during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Benefit for Income Taxes. Benefit for income taxes was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decrease in our net DTLs. During the year ended December 31, 2019, there was an increase in deferred tax assets associated with the state net operating loss generated during the period. This increase in deferred tax assets reduced our net DTLs which created a benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations since our inception in February 2007, and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.2 billion. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We expect to continue to incur additional research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses for our ongoing research and development and potential commercialization of vadadustat and our ongoing development and commercialization of Auryxia. Consistent with our expectation of an NDA submission by the middle of the second quarter of 2021, we expect our cash resources to fund our current operating plan beyond the expected U.S. launch of our product candidate, vadadustat, assuming timely regulatory approval and the receipt of associated regulatory milestones. Although we believe we have the cash resources to fund our operating plan beyond the expected U.S. launch of vadadustat, as noted above, we expect to continue to incur significant costs and we anticipate that we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our operating plan beyond that period. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Furthermore, our regulatory milestones may not be achieved, we may not receive the anticipated funding from our collaboration partners, and we may not secure other sources of financing. The period over which our cash runway extends is also dependent on the execution of our commercial plan, which is dependent on the overall market, the competitive environment, and the execution of our reimbursement strategies.
We have funded our operations principally through sales of our common stock, payments received from our collaboration partners, and following the Merger, product sales, debt and a royalty transaction. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and available for sale securities of approximately $268.7 million. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation. Accordingly, available for sale securities, consisting principally of corporate and government debt securities stated at fair value, are also available as a source of liquidity.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities in all periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in the components of working capital. Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $110.4 million was largely driven by timing of payments on our Phase 3 development program for vadadustat, rebate payments and payments for inventory. These payments were partially offset by adjustments for non-cash items, including the intangible asset impairment charge of $115.5 million, fair value step-up of inventory sold or written off of $68.2 million, amortization of intangibles of $31.5 million, an increase to the liability for excess purchase commitments of $25.1 million, stock-based compensation expense of $24.5 million, and write-downs of inventory of $20.1 million primarily associated with specific lots of Auryxia because it was determined that these lots were not manufactured in conformance with the FDA's GMP guidance relating to validation. Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $257.4 million was largely driven by timing of payments on our Phase 3 development program for vadadustat, payments for inventory and merger-related liabilities. These payments were partially offset by adjustments for non-cash items, including the fair value write-up of inventory sold or written off of $70.4 million, amortization of intangibles of $36.4 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $11.9 million. Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 of $97.5 million was largely driven by our Phase 3 development program for vadadustat, partially offset by receipt of cash from collaboration agreements.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $40.0 million was comprised primarily of purchase of available for sale securities of $99.9 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturities of available for sale securities of $60.2 million. Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $211.2 million was comprised primarily of proceeds from the maturities of available for sale securities of
$153.1 million and proceeds from the sales of available for sale securities of $64.7 million, partially offset by purchases of equipment of $6.7 million. Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 of $36.6 million was comprised primarily from the sale and maturities of available for sale securities, partially offset by purchases of available for sale securities, purchases of equipment and acquisition of the business, net of cash acquired.
Financing Activities. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 our net cash provided by financing activities was $231.7 million, $89.0 million and $96.6 million, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 consisted primarily of net proceeds from the issuance of debt, net proceeds from the public issuance of common stock, proceeds from the exercise of stock options and proceeds from the sale of stock under our employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by payments on loans payable.
Operating Capital Requirements
We have one product, Auryxia, approved for commercial sale in the United States, but have not generated, and may not generate, enough product revenue from the sale of Auryxia to realize net profits from product sales. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek marketing approvals for vadadustat and any other potential product candidates. We are subject to all risks incident to the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company and we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and available for sale securities of approximately $268.7 million. At the inception of our collaboration agreements with Otsuka and MTPC, our collaborators committed to an aggregate of approximately $573.0 million or more in cost-share funding, of which we received approximately $272.0 million at the onset of the collaborations, and the remainder of which we generally continue to receive on a quarterly prepaid basis, and through license payments.
We expect to finance future cash needs through product revenue, public or private equity or debt transactions, payments from our collaboration partners, royalty transactions, strategic transactions, or a combination of these approaches. Additionally, we will require additional capital to pursue development and commercial activities related to Auryxia and vadadustat, if approved, or any additional products and product candidates, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired. However, additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts when needed or on attractive terms, we may not be able to pursue development and commercial activities related to Auryxia and vadadustat, if approved, or any additional products or product candidates, including those that may be in-licensed or acquired. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders or increased fixed payment obligations, and any such securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may be substantially different than actual results, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future funding requirements, both near- and long-term, will depend on many factors including, but not limited to, those described under Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
At December 31, 2020, our future contractual obligations are as follows:
Leases
We lease approximately 65,167 square feet of office and lab space in Cambridge, Massachusetts under a lease which was most recently amended in November 2020, collectively the Cambridge Lease. Under the Third Amendment to the Cambridge Lease, or the Third Amendment, executed in July 2016, total monthly lease payments under the initial base rent were approximately $242,000 and are subject to annual rent escalations. In addition to such annual rent escalations, base rent payments for a portion of said premises commenced on January 1, 2017 in the monthly amount of approximately $22,000. The Fourth Amendment to the Cambridge Lease, executed in May 2017, provided additional storage space to us and did not impact rent payments. In April 2018, we entered into a Fifth Amendment to the Cambridge Lease, or the Fifth Amendment, for an additional 19,805 square feet of office space on the 12th floor. Monthly lease payments for the existing 45,362 square feet of office and lab space, under the Third Amendment, remain unchanged. The new space leased by us was delivered in September 2018 and additional monthly lease payments of approximately $135,000 commenced in February 2019 and are subject to annual rent escalations, which commenced in September 2019. In November 2020, we entered into a Sixth Amendment to the Cambridge Lease, or the Sixth Amendment, to extend the term of the Cambridge Lease with respect to the lab space from November 30, 2021 to January 31, 2025. The Sixth Amendment includes two months of free rent starting in December 2020 and additional monthly lease payments of approximately $48,000 commencing in December 2021, and is subject to annual rent escalations, which commence in December 2022.
Additionally, as a result of the Merger, we have a lease for 27,300 square feet of office space in Boston, Massachusetts, or the Boston Lease, which expires on February 28, 2023. The total monthly lease payments under the base rent are approximately $136,000 and are subject to annual rent escalations.
In September 2019, Keryx entered into an agreement to sublease the Boston office space to Foundation Medicine, Inc., or Foundation. The sublease is subject and subordinate to the Boston Lease between Keryx and the landlord. The term of the sublease commenced on October 16, 2019, upon receipt of the required consent from the landlord for the sublease agreement, and expires on February 27, 2023. Foundation is obligated to pay Keryx rent that approximates the rent due from us to Keryx’s landlord with respect to the Boston Lease. Keryx continues to be obligated for all payment terms pursuant to the Boston Lease, and we will guaranty Keryx’s obligations under the sublease.
Term Loans
On November 11, 2019, Akebia, with Keryx as guarantor, entered into a loan agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with BioPharma Credit PLC as collateral agent and a lender, or the Collateral Agent, and BioPharma Credit Investments V (Master) LP as a lender, pursuant to which term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million were made available to us in two tranches, subject to certain terms and conditions, or the Term Loans. BioPharma Credit PLC subsequently transferred its interest in the Term Loans, solely in its capacity as a lender, to its affiliate, BPCR Limited Partnership. The Collateral Agent and the lenders are collectively referred to as Pharmakon. The first tranche of $80.0 million, or Tranche A, was drawn on November 25, 2019, or the Tranche A Funding Date, and the second tranche of $20.0 million, or Tranche B was drawn on December 10, 2020, or the Tranche B Funding Date. Each of the Tranche A Funding Date and the Tranche B Funding Date, a Funding Date.
Proceeds from the Term Loans may be used for general corporate purposes. We and Keryx entered into a Guaranty and Security Agreement with the Collateral Agent, or the Guaranty and Security Agreement, on the Tranche A Funding Date. Pursuant to the Guaranty and Security Agreement, our obligations under the Term Loans are unconditionally guaranteed by Keryx, or the Guarantee. Additionally, our and Keryx’s obligations under the Term Loans and the Guarantee are secured by a first priority lien on certain assets of ours and Keryx’s, including Auryxia and certain related assets, cash, and certain equity interests held by us and Keryx, collectively the Collateral.
The Term Loans bear interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the three-month LIBOR rate plus 7.50%, subject to a 2.00% LIBOR floor and a 3.35% LIBOR cap, payable quarterly in arrears. The Term Loans will mature on the fifth anniversary of the Tranche A Funding Date, or the Maturity Date. We will repay the principal under the Term Loans in equal quarterly payments starting on the 33rd-month anniversary of the applicable Funding Date or, if certain conditions are met, it will have the option to repay the principal in equal quarterly payments starting on the 48th-month anniversary of the applicable Funding Date, or collectively the Amortization Schedule. Under certain circumstances, unless certain liquidity conditions are met, the Maturity Date may decrease by up to one year, and the Amortization Schedule may correspondingly commence up to one year earlier.
On the Tranche A Funding Date, we paid to Pharmakon a facility fee equal to 2.00% of the aggregate principal amount of the Term Loans, or $2.0 million, in addition to other expenses incurred by Pharmakon and reimbursed by us, or Lender Expenses. The Tranche A draw was $77.3 million, net of facility fee, Lender Expenses and issuance costs. The Tranche B draw was $20.0 million, net of immaterial Lender Expenses and issuance costs. The Loan Agreement permits voluntary prepayment at any time in whole or in part, subject to a prepayment premium. The prepayment premium would be 2.00% of the principal amount being prepaid prior to the third anniversary of the applicable Funding Date, 1.00% on or after the third anniversary, but prior to the fourth anniversary, of the applicable Funding Date, and 0.50% on or after the fourth anniversary of the applicable Funding Date but prior to the Maturity Date, and a make-whole premium on or prior to the second anniversary of the applicable Funding Date in an amount equal to foregone interest through the second anniversary of the applicable Funding Date. A change of control triggers a mandatory prepayment of the Term Loans.
The Loan Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, events of default and covenants of ours and our subsidiaries, including maintaining, on an annual basis, a minimum liquidity threshold starting in 2021, and on a quarterly basis, a minimum net sales threshold for Auryxia which started in the fourth quarter of 2020. If an event of default occurs and is continuing under the Loan Agreement, the Collateral Agent is entitled to take enforcement action, including acceleration of amounts due under the Loan Agreement. Under certain circumstances, a default interest rate will apply on all outstanding obligations during the occurrence and continuance of an event of default. As of December 31, 2020, we determined that no events of default had occurred.
We assessed the terms and features of the Loan Agreement in order to identify any potential embedded features that would require bifurcation or any beneficial conversion feature. As part of this analysis, we assessed the economic characteristics and risks of the Loan Agreement, including put and call features. The terms and features assessed include a potential extension to the interest-only period dependent on both no event of default having occurred and continuing and on our achieving certain regulatory and revenue conditions. We also assessed the acceleration of the obligations under the Loan Agreement under an event of default. In addition, under certain circumstances, a default interest rate will apply on all outstanding obligations during the occurrence and continuance of an event of default. In accordance with ASC 815, we concluded that these features are not clearly and closely related to the host instrument, and represent a single compound derivative that is required to be re-measured at fair value on a quarterly basis.
Manufacturing Agreements
As a result of the Merger, our contractual obligations include Keryx’s commercial supply agreements with BioVectra Inc., or BioVectra, and Siegfried Evionnaz SA, or Siegfried, to supply commercial drug substance for Auryxia.
Pursuant to the Manufacture and Supply Agreement with BioVectra and the Product Manufacture and Supply and Facility Construction Agreement with BioVectra, collectively the BioVectra Agreement, we agreed to purchase minimum quantities of Auryxia drug substance annually at predetermined prices. On September 4, 2020, we and BioVectra entered into an Amended and Restated Product Manufacture and Supply and Facility Construction Agreement, which provided for reduced minimum quantity commitments and revised the predetermined prices. The price per kilogram decreases with an increase in quantity above the predetermined purchase quantity tiers. In addition, the Manufacture and Supply Agreement with BioVectra and the Amended and Restated Product Manufacture and Supply and Facility Construction Agreement with BioVectra, collectively the Amended BioVectra Agreement, requires us to reimburse BioVectra for certain costs in connection with construction of a new facility for the manufacture and supply of Auryxia drug substance. These construction costs are recorded in other assets and amortized into drug substance as inventory is released to us from BioVectra. The term of the Manufacture and Supply Agreement with BioVectra expires on December 31, 2022. The term of the Amended and Restated Product Manufacture and Supply and Facility Construction Agreement expires on December 31, 2026, after which, it automatically renews for successive one-year terms unless either party gives notice of its intention to terminate within a specified time prior to the end of the then-current term. In addition, we and BioVectra each have the ability to terminate these agreements upon the occurrence of certain conditions. As of December 31, 2020, we are required to reimburse BioVectra for certain costs in connection with the construction of the new facility and to purchase minimum quantities of Auryxia drug substance annually for a total cost of approximately $95.7 million through the end of the contract term.
Pursuant to the Siegfried Master Manufacturing Services and Supply Agreement, or the Siegfried Agreement, we have agreed to purchase a minimum quantity of drug substance of Auryxia at predetermined prices. The price per kilogram will decrease with an increase in quantity above the minimum purchase quantity. The term of the Siegfried Agreement expires on December 31, 2021, after which, it automatically renews for one-year terms until terminated. The Siegfried Agreement provides us with certain termination rights prior to December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we are required to purchase a minimum quantity of drug substance for Auryxia annually at a total cost of approximately $47.9 million through the year ending December 31, 2021.
As part of purchase accounting, we identified executory contracts in the commercial supply agreements between Keryx and its contract manufacturers for Auryxia, which include future firm purchase commitments. These executory contracts were deemed to have an off-market element related to the amount of purchase commitments that exceed the current forecast. The liability related to the amount of purchase commitments that exceed the current forecast was $55.8 million and $30.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $25.6 million increase in liability, which was largely driven by reductions in the short-term and long-term Auryxia revenue sales forecast during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily recorded to cost of goods sold.
On February 11, 2021, Keryx and Siegfried entered into an amendment to the Siegfried Agreement, or the Siegfried Amendment. The Siegfried Agreement, as amended, includes the terms and conditions under which Siegfried will manufacture and supply finished Auryxia drug substance for commercial purposes. Siegfried currently manufactures Auryxia drug substance at two approved sites. Pursuant to the Siegfried Amendment, the term of the Siegfried Agreement was extended for one site such that the Siegfried Agreement will expire on December 31, 2022, subject to Keryx’s option to extend the term for such site through December 31, 2023 by providing 12 months’ prior written notice to Siegfried. The Siegfried Amendment provides for minimum annual quantity commitments and predetermined prices for the remainder of the term as well as certain other changes. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the amount of Auryxia drug substance we have committed to purchase from Siegfried is $45.4 million through December 31, 2022.
On April 9, 2019, we entered into a Supply Agreement with Esteve Química, S.A., or Esteve, or the Esteve Agreement. The Esteve Agreement includes the terms and conditions under which Esteve will manufacture vadadustat drug substance for commercial use. Pursuant to the Esteve Agreement, we provide rolling forecasts to Esteve on a quarterly basis, or the Esteve Forecast. The Esteve Forecast reflects our needs for vadadustat drug substance produced by Esteve over a certain number of months, represented as a quantity of vadadustat drug substance per calendar quarter. The parties have agreed to a volume-based pricing structure under the Esteve Agreement. The Esteve Agreement has an initial term of four years, beginning April 9, 2019 and ending April 9, 2023. Pursuant to the Esteve Agreement, we have agreed to purchase a certain percentage of the global demand for vadadustat drug substance from Esteve. As of December 31, 2020, we have committed to purchase $26.0 million of vadadustat drug substance from Esteve through the second quarter of 2022. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the amount of vadadustat drug substance we have committed to purchase from Esteve increased to $47.6 million through the fourth quarter of 2022.
On March 11, 2020, we entered into a Supply Agreement with Patheon Inc., or Patheon, or the Patheon Agreement. The Patheon Agreement includes the terms and conditions under which Patheon will manufacture vadadustat drug product for commercial use. Pursuant to the Patheon Agreement, we provide Patheon a long-term forecast on an annual basis, as well as short-term forecasts on a quarterly basis, or the Patheon Forecast. The Patheon Forecast reflects our needs for commercial supply of vadadustat drug product produced by Patheon, represented as a quantity of drug product per calendar quarter. The parties have agreed to a volume-based pricing structure under the Patheon Agreement. The Patheon Agreement has an initial term beginning March 11, 2020 and ending June 30, 2023. Pursuant to the Patheon Agreement, we have agreed to purchase a certain percentage of the global demand for vadadustat drug product from Patheon. As of December 31, 2020, we had a minimum commitment with Patheon for $1.3 million through the third quarter of 2021.
On April 2, 2020, we entered into a Supply Agreement with STA Pharmaceutical Hong Kong Limited, a subsidiary of WuXi AppTec, or WuXi STA, or the WuXi STA DS Agreement. The WuXi STA DS Agreement includes the terms and conditions under which WuXi STA will manufacture vadadustat drug substance for commercial use. Pursuant to the WuXi STA DS Agreement, we provide rolling forecasts to WuXi STA on a quarterly basis, or the WuXi STA DS Forecast. The WuXi STA DS Forecast reflects our needs for vadadustat drug substance produced by WuXi STA over a certain number of quarters. The parties have agreed to a volume-based pricing structure under the WuXi STA DS Agreement. The WuXi STA DS Agreement has an initial term of four years, beginning April 2, 2020 and ending April 2, 2024. Pursuant to the WuXi STA DS Agreement, we have agreed to purchase a certain percentage of the global demand for vadadustat drug substance from WuXi STA. As of December 31, 2020, we have committed to purchase $44.7 million of vadadustat drug substance from WuXi STA through the first quarter of 2022.
On February 10, 2021, we entered into a Supply Agreement with WuXi STA, or the WuXi STA DP Agreement. The WuXi STA DP Agreement includes the terms and conditions under which WuXi STA will manufacture and supply vadadustat drug product for commercial purposes. Pursuant to the WuXi STA DP Agreement, we will provide rolling forecasts to WuXi STA on a quarterly basis, or the WuXi STA DP Forecast. Each WuXi STA DP Forecast will reflect the quantities of vadadustat drug product that we expect to order from WuXi STA over a certain number of months, represented as a quantity of vadadustat drug product per calendar quarter. Pursuant to the WuXi STA DP Agreement, we have agreed to purchase a certain percentage of global demand for vadadustat drug product from WuXi STA. The parties have agreed to a volume-based pricing structure under the WuXi STA DP Agreement. The vadadustat drug product price will remain fixed for the first 12 months and thereafter shall be annually reviewed by us and WuXi STA. We will also reimburse WuXi STA for certain reasonable expenses. The WuXi STA DP Agreement has an initial term of four years, beginning February 10, 2021 and ending February 10, 2025. The WuXi STA DP Agreement may be renewed or extended by mutual agreement of us and WuXi STA with at least 18 months’ prior written notice. The WuXi STA DP Agreement allows us to terminate the relationship on 180 calendar days’ prior written notice to WuXi STA for any reason. In addition, each party has the ability to terminate the WuXi STA DP Agreement upon the occurrence of certain conditions.
Other Third Party Contracts
Under our agreement with IQVIA to provide contract research organization services for the PRO2TECT and INNO2VATE programs, the total remaining contract costs as of December 31, 2020 were approximately $14.7 million, of which Otsuka reimburses a significant portion back to us. Substantive performance for the committed work with IQVIA was completed in 2020 and close out activities will be performed through the first quarter of 2021. We also contract with various other organizations to conduct research and development activities with remaining contract costs to us of approximately $155.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The scope of the services under these research and development contracts can be modified and the contracts cancelled by us upon written notice, and therefore not included in the table of contractual obligations and commitments. In some instances, the contracts may be cancelled by the third party upon written notice.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue, prepaid and accrued research and development expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. In making estimates and judgments, management employs critical accounting policies.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We account for warrants and other derivative financial instruments as either equity or liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or ASC 815, based upon the characteristics and provisions of each instrument. Warrants classified as equity are recorded at fair value as of the date of issuance on our consolidated balance sheets and no further adjustments to their valuation are made. Warrants classified as derivative liabilities and other derivative financial instruments that require separate accounting as liabilities are recorded on our consolidated balance sheets at their fair value on the date of issuance and will be revalued on each subsequent balance sheet date until such instruments are exercised or expire, with any changes in the fair value between reporting periods recorded as other income or expense. The warrant issued by us in connection with the Janssen Pharmaceutica NV Research and License Agreement, the Janssen Agreement, is classified as equity in our consolidated balance sheet. (See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements in Part 2, Item 8. Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data). The derivative liability recorded in connection with the Loan Agreement with Pharmakon is classified as a liability in our consolidated balance sheet. (See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements in Part 2, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data).
Inventory
We value our inventories at the lower-of-cost or net realizable value. We determine the cost of our inventories, which includes amounts related to materials and manufacturing overhead, on a first-in, first-out basis. We classify inventory costs as long-term, in other assets in our consolidated balance sheets, when we expect to utilize the inventory beyond our normal operating cycle.
Prior to the regulatory approval of our product candidates, we incur expenses for the manufacture of material that could potentially be available to support the commercial launch of our products. Until the first reporting period when regulatory approval has been received or is otherwise considered probable and the future economic benefit is expected to be realized, we record all such costs as research and development expense. Inventory used in clinical trials is also expensed as research and development expense, when selected for such use. Inventory that can be used in either the production of clinical or commercial products is expensed as research and development costs when identified for use in a clinical manufacturing campaign.
We perform an assessment of the recoverability of capitalized inventory during each reporting period, and write down any excess and obsolete inventory to our net realizable value in the period in which the impairment is first identified. Such impairment charges, should they occur, are recorded as a component of cost of product sales in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The determination of whether inventory costs will be realizable requires the use of estimates by management. If actual market conditions are less favorable than projected by management, additional write-downs of inventory may be required. Additionally, our product is subject to strict quality control and monitoring that we perform throughout the manufacturing process. In the event that certain batches or units of product do not meet quality specifications, we will record a charge to cost of product sales, to write-down any unmarketable inventory to its estimated net realizable value. In all cases, product inventory is carried at the lower of cost or its estimated net realizable value.
Debt
We perform an assessment of all embedded features of a debt instrument to determine if (1) such features should be bifurcated and separately accounted for, and (2) if bifurcation requirements are met, whether such features should be classified and accounted for as equity or liability instruments. If the embedded feature meets the requirements to be bifurcated and accounted for as a liability, the fair value of the embedded feature is measured initially, included as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet, and re-measured to fair value at each reporting period. Any changes in fair value are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations. We monitor, on an ongoing basis, whether events or circumstances could give rise to a change in the classification of embedded features.
Excess Purchase Commitment Liability
We identified executory contracts in the commercial supply agreements between Keryx and its contract manufacturers for Auryxia, which include future firm purchase commitments. These executory contracts were deemed to have an off-market element related to the amount of purchase commitments that exceed the current forecast and as such, we recorded a liability in purchase accounting. We re-evaluate the excess purchase commitments each reporting period to assess whether any adjustments to the excess purchase commitment liability are necessary. This evaluation includes reviewing the contractual minimums, expiration and utilization assumptions, and sales forecasts.
Revenue
We generate revenues primarily from sales of Auryxia, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, and from our collaborations with MTPC and Otsuka, see Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, which applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)determine the transaction price;
(iv)allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We do not include a financing component in our estimated transaction price at contract inception unless we estimate that certain performance obligations will not be satisfied within one year. Additionally, we recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less.
Product Revenue, Net
We sell Auryxia in the United States, primarily to wholesale distributors as well as certain specialty pharmacy providers, collectively, Customers. These Customers resell our product to health care providers and patients. In addition to distribution agreements with Customers, we enter into arrangements with health care providers and payors that provide for government-mandated and/or privately-negotiated rebates, chargebacks, and discounts with respect to the purchase of our product.
We recognize revenue on product sales when the Customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon delivery to the Customer. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that we would have recognized is one year or less.
Reserves for Variable Consideration
Revenue from product sales is recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and which result from discounts, returns, chargebacks, rebates, co-pay assistance and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our Customers, health care providers, payors and other indirect customers relating to our sales of our products. These reserves are based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount will be credited to the Customer) or as a current liability (if the amount is payable to a Customer or a party other than a Customer). When appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted in accordance with the expected value method in ASC 606 for relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the respective underlying contracts.
The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained, and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Trade Discounts and Allowances: We generally provide Customers with discounts that include incentive fees that are explicitly stated in our contracts and are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. In addition, we compensate (through trade discounts and allowances) our Customers for sales order management, data, and distribution services. However, we have determined such services received to date are not distinct from our sale of products to the Customer and, therefore, these payments have been recorded as a reduction of revenue within the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss through December 31, 2020. We record a corresponding reduction to accounts receivable (if the trade discount and/or allowance will be credited to the Customer) or an increase to accrued expense (if the trade discount and/or allowance is payable to a Customer) on the consolidated balance sheets.
Product Returns: Consistent with industry practice, we generally offer Customers a limited right of return which allows for the product to be returned when the product expiry is within an allowable window, when the quantity delivered is different than quantity ordered, the product is damaged in transit prior to receipt by the customer, or is subject to a recall. This right of return generally lapses once the product is provided to a patient. We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned for credit by our Customers and record this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is
recognized. We currently estimate product return reserve using available industry data and our own historical sales information, including our visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Provider Chargebacks and Discounts: Chargebacks for fees and discounts to providers represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell products to qualified healthcare providers at prices lower than the list prices charged to Customers who directly purchase the product from us. Customers charge us for the difference between what they pay for the product and the ultimate selling price to the qualified healthcare providers. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and accounts receivable. Chargeback amounts are generally determined at the time of resale to the qualified healthcare provider by Customers, and we generally issue credits for such amounts within a few weeks of the Customer’s resale of the product. Reserves for chargebacks consist of credits that we expect to issue for units that remain in the distribution channel at each reporting period end that we expect will be sold to qualified healthcare providers, and chargebacks that Customers have claimed but for which we have not yet issued a credit.
Commercial and Medicare Part D Rebates: We contract with various commercial payor organizations, primarily health insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers, for the payment of rebates with respect to utilization of our products. We estimate the rebates for commercial and Medicare Part D payors based upon (i) our contracts with the payors and (ii) information obtained from our Customers and other third parties regarding the payor mix for Auryxia. We estimate these rebates and record such estimates in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability.
Other Government Rebates: We are subject to discount obligations under state Medicaid programs and other government programs. We estimate Medicaid and other government programs rebates based upon a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payor mix. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability which is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. For Medicare, we also estimate the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom we will owe an additional liability under the Medicare Part D program. Our liability for these rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that have not been paid or for which an invoice has not yet been received, estimates of claims for the current quarter, and estimated future claims that will be made for product that has been recognized as revenue, but which remains in the distribution channel at the end of each reporting period.
Other Incentives: Other incentives that we offer include voluntary patient assistance programs such as our co-pay assistance program, which are intended to provide financial assistance to qualified commercially insured patients with prescription drug co-payments required by payors. The calculation of the accrual for co-pay assistance is based on actual claims processed during a given period, as well as historical utilization data to estimate the amount we expect to receive associated with product that has been recognized as revenue, but remains in in the distribution channel at the end of each reporting period.
Collaboration Revenues
We enter into out-license and collaboration agreements which are within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license certain rights to our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; development, regulatory, and commercial milestone payments; payments for manufacturing supply services we provide through our contract manufacturers; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Each of these payments may result in license, collaboration and other revenue, except for revenues from royalties on net sales of licensed products, which are classified as royalty revenues.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, we implement the five-step model noted above. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine whether the individual promises should be accounted for as separate performance obligations or as a combined performance obligation, and to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. A deliverable represents a separate performance obligation if both of the following criteria are met: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on our own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer, and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. With regard to the MTPC and Otsuka collaboration agreements, we recognize revenue related to amounts allocated to the identified performance obligation on a proportional performance basis as the underlying services are performed.
Licenses of Intellectual Property
If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in an out-license and collaboration arrangement, we recognize revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to assess the milestone as probable of being achieved. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether a milestone is probable of being reached at each specific reporting period. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the customer, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenues as, or when, the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we will re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaboration revenue in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing Supply Services
Arrangements that include a promise for future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the licensee’s discretion are generally considered as options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations. If we are entitled to additional payments when the licensee exercises these options, any additional payments are recorded in license, collaboration and other revenues when the licensee obtains control of the goods, which is upon delivery.
Royalties
We will recognize sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). We receive royalty payments from JT and Torii, based on net sales of Riona in Japan.
Collaborative Arrangements
We record the elements of our collaboration agreements that represent joint operating activities in accordance with ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (ASC 808). Accordingly, the elements of the collaboration agreements that represent activities in which both parties are active participants and to which both parties are exposed to the significant risks and rewards that are dependent on the commercial success of the activities are recorded as collaborative arrangements. We consider the guidance in ASC 606-10-15, Revenue from Contracts with Customers - Scope and Scope Exceptions, in determining the appropriate treatment for the transactions between us and our collaborative partner and the transactions between us and third parties. Generally, the classification of transactions under the collaborative arrangements is determined based on the nature and contractual terms of the arrangement along with the nature of the operations of the participants. Therefore, we recognize our allocation of the shared costs incurred with respect to the jointly conducted medical affairs and commercialization and non-promotional activities under the Otsuka U.S. Agreement, as defined below in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, as a component of the related expense in the period incurred. To the extent product revenue is generated from the collaboration, we recognize our share of the net sales on a gross basis if it is deemed to be the principal in the transactions with customers, or on a net basis if it is instead deemed to be the agent in the transactions with customers, consistent with the guidance in ASC 606.
Intangible Assets
We maintain a definite-lived intangible asset related to developed product rights for Auryxia, which was acquired on December 12, 2018 as part of the Merger.
Intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and stated net of accumulated amortization and impairments. We amortize our intangible assets that have finite lives using either the straight-line method, or if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefit of the asset is expected to be utilized. Amortization for our intangible asset is recorded over its remaining estimated useful life, which as of December 31, 2020 is estimated to be six years.
We review intangible assets subject to amortization to determine if any adverse conditions exist or a change in circumstances has occurred that would indicate impairment or a change in the remaining useful life. If an impairment indicator exists, we perform a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows of the intangible asset group to its carrying value on the consolidated balance sheet. If the carrying value of the intangible asset group exceeds the undiscounted cash flows used in the recoverability test, we will write the carrying value of the intangible asset group down to the fair value in the period identified. We calculate the fair value of the intangible asset group as the present value of estimated future cash flows expected to be generated from the intangible asset group using a risk-adjusted discount rate. In determining estimated future cash flows associated with the intangible asset group, we use market participant assumptions pursuant to ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (ASC 820). During the second quarter of 2020, we identified indicators of impairment related to the developed product rights for Auryxia and recorded an impairment charge of $115.5 million (see Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional information).
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with FASB Topic 740, Income Taxes, or ASC 740, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. All deferred taxes as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are classified as noncurrent within the income tax provision (see Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements in Part 2, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data).
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position, as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we do not have any significant uncertain tax positions. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, or RSUs, performance-based restricted stock units, or PSUs, and modifications to existing stock awards, to be recognized in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their fair values. Our stock-based awards are comprised of stock options and RSUs. We estimate the fair value of options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We use a blend of our stock price and the quoted market price of comparable public companies to determine the fair value of restricted stock awards and common stock awards.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of certain subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected stock price volatility, (b) the calculation of expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate and (d) expected dividends. Due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data for trading our stock in the public market, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption. The computation of expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of a representative group of companies with similar characteristics to us, including stage of product development and life science industry focus. During 2017, we began to estimate our volatility by using a blend of our stock price history for the length of time we have market data for our stock and the historical volatility of similar public companies for the expected term of each grant. We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company and the representative group of companies has certain similar characteristics to us. We believe the group selected has sufficient similar
economic and industry characteristics and includes companies that are most representative of us. We use the simplified method as prescribed by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, to calculate the expected term for options granted to employees as it does not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. The expected term is applied to the stock option grant group as a whole, as we do not expect substantially different exercise or post-vesting termination behavior among our employee population. For options granted to non-employees, we utilize the contractual term of the arrangement as the basis for the expected term assumption. The risk-free interest rate is based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected life of the stock options. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock, which is similar to our peer group.
Our stock-based awards are subject to either service- or performance-based vesting conditions. Compensation expense related to awards to employees and non-employees with service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the associated service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term, and is adjusted for pre-vesting forfeitures in the period in which the forfeitures occur. Compensation expense related to awards to employees and non-employees with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized based on the grant date fair value over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution method to the extent achievement of the performance condition is probable.
For awards with performance conditions in which the award does not vest unless the performance condition is met, we recognize expense if, and to the extent that, we estimate that achievement of the performance condition is probable. If we conclude that vesting is probable, we recognize expense from the date we reach this conclusion through the estimated vesting date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For additional discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, please refer to New Accounting Pronouncements - Recently Adopted and New Accounting Pronouncements - Not Yet Adopted included within Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in Part 2, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.