ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis was prepared to supplement information contained in the accompanying financial statements and is intended to explain certain items regarding the Company’s financial condition as of December 31, 2020, and its results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this annual report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains certain forward-looking information. See “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” above for certain information concerning those forward-looking statements. Our financial statements are prepared in U.S. dollars and in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles.
Overview
We are a full-service development stage provider of IFEC solutions. With advanced technologies and a unique business model, we, as a service provider of IFEC solutions, intend to provide airline passengers with a broadband in-flight experience that encompasses a wide range of service options. Such options include Wi-Fi, cellular, movies, gaming, live TV, and music. We plan to offer these core services, which we are currently still developing, through both built-in in-flight entertainment systems, such as in seat-back displays, as well as on passengers’ personal devices. We also expect to provide content management services and e-commerce solutions related to our IFEC solutions.
We plan to partner with airlines and offer airline passengers free IFEC services. We expect to generate revenue through advertising and in-flight transactions. We believe that this is an innovative approach that differentiates us from existing market players.
To complement and facilitate our planned IFEC service offerings, we intend to build satellite ground stations and related data centers within the geographic regions where we expect to be providing IFEC airline services. We have purchased a 6.36 acre parcel of land in Taiwan where we expect to build our first ground station. We are currently waiting for the title to this Taiwan land parcel to be transferred to us and once that process is completed, we intend to mortgage the property to finance the cost of the first ground station construction.
Our total sales were $0 and $1,599,864 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our total sales of $1,599,864 for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a non-recurring sale of compact adaptors for smartphones that allows a user to turn their smartphone into a satellite smartphone to provide reliable connectivity beyond the coverage of traditional networks.
The COVID-19 Pandemic Expected Impact on Aerkomm’s Business
Although we cannot predict with any degree of certainty the long-term impact on our business of the COVID-19 pandemic, we do not expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material adverse effect on our business in 2020, in view of the fact that Aerkomm is a development stage company. Consequently, we do not have any contractual agreements with airlines that would result in a decrease or complete halt in revenue generation due to the grounding of aircraft and reduction in aircraft fleets and new aircraft purchases. Additionally, because we do not currently have any operational IFEC systems, we are not generating any recurrent operational expenses with satellite companies that provide bandwidth connectivity for operational IFEC systems. We expect that we will acquire certification of our Aerkomm K++ System by the third quarter of 2021, and we are currently targeting the commencement of the initial installations of our Aerkomm K++ System by the end of the fourth quarter of 2021, although these target dates could get pushed back due to various factors, including the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. While according to the current IATA data, the recovery in 2021 is expected to be slow, this could work to our advantage as it will provide the opportunity to have more aircraft on the ground available for the retrofit installation of our Aerkomm K++ System equipment. That is, we will not have to wait for a prospective airline customer to cycle through its scheduled grounding of aircraft for major maintenance checks to be able to install our K++ System retrofit solution. Of course, there can be no assurance that a grounded airline fleet would make it more probable that an airline company would contract for our Aerkomm K++ System installation.
Because under our innovative business model we will be providing the AERKOMM K++ System free of charge to commercial airlines, we believe that the COVID-19 economic environment may provide us with a competitive advantage in relation to airlines that need to upgrade IFEC solutions to better serve their passengers, but because of drastically reduced revenues, will not be able to afford to purchase IFEC equipment in the foreseeable future. Additionally, as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic begins to become more manageable and air travel begins to increase once again, airlines will need to attract passengers. Our revenue sharing model may incentivize airlines to install our AERKOMM K++ System in expectation that they may be able to generate additional revenues from passengers who will not be required to pay for connectivity.
With respect to our AirCinema Cube (discussed in more detail below), which we are developing exclusively for installation on Hong Kong Airlines aircraft and which is expected to be ready for installation by the third quarter of 2021, we believe we will still be able to begin installations on schedule. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, even if we can install the AirCinema Cube on schedule, revenue from the AirCinema Cube will, most likely, be delayed until the fleet of Hong Kong Airlines re-commences its full schedule which, we expect, will be late in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Because of the unpredictability of the future developments of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot be sure that any of our development, certification, installation or revenue generation expectations, with respect to timing or otherwise, will be met.
Principal Factors Affecting Financial Performance
We believe that our operating and business performance will be driven by various factors that affect the commercial airline industry, including trends affecting the travel industry and trends affecting the customer bases that we target, as well as factors that affect wireless Internet service providers and general macroeconomic factors. Key factors that may affect our future performance include:
● our ability to enter into and maintain long-term business arrangements with airline partners, which depends on numerous factors including the real or perceived availability, quality and price of our services and product offerings as compared to those offered by our competitors;
● the extent of the adoption of our products and services by airline partners and customers;
● costs associated with implementing, and our ability to implement on a timely basis, our technology, upgrades and installation technologies;
● costs associated with and our ability to execute our expansion, including modification to our network to accommodate satellite technology, development and implementation of new satellite-based technologies, the availability of satellite capacity, costs of satellite capacity to which we may have to commit well in advance, and compliance with regulations;
● costs associated with managing a rapidly growing company;
● the impact and effects of the global outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, and other potential pandemics or contagious diseases or fear of such outbreaks, on the global airline and tourist industries, especially in the Asia Pacific region;
● the number of aircraft in service in our markets, including consolidation of the airline industry or changes in fleet size by one or more of our commercial airline partners;
● the economic environment and other trends that affect both business and leisure travel;
● continued demand for connectivity and proliferation of Wi-Fi enabled devices, including smartphones, tablets and laptops;
● our ability to obtain required telecommunications, aviation and other licenses and approvals necessary for our operations; and
● changes in laws, regulations and interpretations affecting telecommunications services and aviation, including, in particular, changes that impact the design of our equipment and our ability to obtain required certifications for our equipment.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act, and therefore we intend to take advantage of certain exemptions from various public company reporting requirements, including not being required to have our internal controls over financial reporting audited by our independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an “emerging growth company.” In addition, the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under the JOBS Act. This election allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earlier of (1) the last day of the fiscal year: (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering; (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion; or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeded $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period. References herein to “emerging growth company” have the meaning associated with that term in the JOBS Act.
Results of Operations
On March 18, 2018, we changed our fiscal year from December 31 to March 31, to be able to comply with the Nasdaq Stock Market so called “seasoning rules” which required that we have audited financial statements for a full year following the date of the closing of our reverse acquisition before we could file a listing application with Nasdaq. Since we were able to meet that seasoning requirement by changing our fiscal year to March 31 thus enabling us to generate audited financial statements for the full year beginning on April 1, 2017 and ending on March 31, 2018, our board of directors determined that for practical business reasons, it would be in the Company’s best interest to revert to a December 31 fiscal year end. Our board of directors voted to change our fiscal year back to December 31 on February 12, 2019. Now that our common stock is listed for trading on the Professional Segment of the regulated market of Euronext Paris, we have determined to suspend our Nasdaq listing application.
The discussion below relates to our two fiscal years ended on December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue. Our sales were $0 the years ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the $1,599,864 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0 as we are still developing our core business in in-flight entertainment and connectivity and there was no non-recurring sale. Our total revenue of $1,599,864 for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a non-recurring sale of compact adaptors for smartphones that allows a user to turn their smartphone into a satellite smartphone to provide reliable connectivity beyond the coverage of traditional networks.
Cost of sales. Our cost of sales includes the direct costs of our raw materials and component parts, as well as the cost of labor and overhead. Our cost of sales was $0 and $1,587,222 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0 as we did not have any sales during the periods, while the cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 represents the cost of non-recurring sales of satellite-based mobile communication units.
Operating expenses. Our operating expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits, professional advisor fees, cost of promotion, business development, business travel, transportation costs, and other expenses incurred in connection with general operations. Our operating expenses decreased by $233,633, or 2.7%, to $8,335,598 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $8,569,231 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Such decrease was mainly due to the decrease in stock-based compensation expense, research and development cost, legal expense and amortization expense in the amount of $645,099, $416,230, $212,748 and $52,066, respectively, which was offset by the increase in consulting expense, outside service expense, insurance expense and payroll and related expenses in the amount of $433,888, $254,796, $226,632 and $164,522, respectively.
Net non-operating income (expense). We had $773,262 in net non-operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $580,281 in net non-operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net non-operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of net interest expense of $39,494, other loss of $1,155,623 due to a loss from allowance for other receivable (as explained under the Legal Proceedings section below), unrealized loss from investments of $868,064 and gain on foreign exchange of $1,088,672, Covid-19 government subsidy of $38,763 received by Aircom Japan and $15,085 received by Aircom HK and forgiveness of PPP Loan of $163,200 received by Aircom . Net non-operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of interest expense of $4,207 and gain on foreign exchange of $586,040.
Loss before income taxes. Our loss before income taxes is $9,108,860 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $7,976,308, an increase of $1,132,552, or 14.2%, as a result of the factors described above.
Income tax expense (benefit). Income tax expense decreased by $35 to $3,286 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from an income tax expense of $3,251 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The income tax expenses were mainly due to California franchise tax and foreign subsidiary’s income tax expenses.
Total comprehensive loss. As a result of the cumulative effect of the factors described above, our total comprehensive loss increased by $1,801,573, or 21.0%, to $10,383,735 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $8,582,162 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $584,591 and restricted cash of $3,210,000. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash proceeds from financing activities, including from our 2018/2019 and 2020 public offering, issuance of convertible bonds, short-term borrowings and equity contributions by our stockholders.
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flow:
Cash Flow
Operating Activities
Net cash used for operating activities was $1,912,091 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $8,729,319 for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition to the net loss of $9,112,146, the increase in net cash used for operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly due to the increase in inventory of $2,172,863, offset by the decrease in accounts receivable, decrease in prepaid expenses, increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses, other payable - related parties and other payable - others of $451,130, $1,345,956, $961,610, $886,319, $420,215 and $1,311,246, respectively. In addition to the net loss of $7,979,559, the increase in net cash used for operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to increase in inventory and prepaid expenses, decrease in accounts payable and other payable - others of $2,143,550, $1,435,164, $1,120,245 and $779,849, respectively, offset by the decrease in accounts receivable and temporary deposit - related parties of $1,293,870 and $100,067, respectively.
Investing Activities
Net cash used for investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5,376,667 as compared to $692,063 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net cash used for investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly due to the prepayment on long-term investment of $5,027,600, purchase of trading securities of $233,174, prepayment for equipment of $86,617 and purchase of property and equipment of $29,276. The net cash used for investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the $624,462 final payment toward the purchase of a parcel of land to build our first satellite ground station and data center (the “Land”). We also used $67,601 for the purchase of property and equipment.
Our $5,027,600 prepayment on long-term investment was made to purchase 6,000,000 restricted shares of Yuanjiu, one of our business partners and a related party. This purchase was made for business purposes in Taiwan relating to local operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $11,378,109 and $10,912,505, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly attributable to the net proceeds from issuance of common stock of $1,667,080, net proceeds from issuance of convertible bonds of $9,218,094 and proceeds from short-term loan - related party of $527,066. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly attributable to net proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our public offering and the borrowing under a long-term loan in the amounts of $10,810,688 and $45,469, respectively.
On December 16, 2019, we terminated a public offering (SEC File No. 333-222208) of our common stock begun in May 2018, which we refer to as the 2018/2019 public offering, underwritten by Boustead Securities LLC on a “best efforts” basis. In the 2018/2019 public offering, we held 13 closings in which we issued and sold an aggregate of 1,294,627 shares of our common stock, at $42.50 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $55.02 million, or net proceeds of approximately $50.83 million after underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
On May 9, 2019, two of our current shareholders, whom we refer to as the Lenders, each committed to provide us with a $10 million bridge loan, or together, the Loans, for an aggregate principal amount of $20 million, to bridge our cash flow needs prior to our obtaining a mortgage loan to be secured by a parcel of our Taiwan land parcel which we have recently purchased. The Taiwan land parcel consists of approximately 6.36 acres of undeveloped land located at the Taishui Grottoes in the Xinyi District of Keelung City, Taiwan. Aerkomm Taiwan contracted to purchase the Taiwan land parcel for NT$1,056,297,507, or US$34,474,462, and as of July 3, 2019 we completed payment of the purchase price for the Taiwan land parcel in full. We are now waiting for title to the Taiwan land parcel to be transferred to us pending the completion of a local governmental land office re-titling process. The Loans will be secured by the Taiwan land parcel with the initial closing date of the Loans to be a date, designated by us, within 30 days following the date that the title for the Taiwan land parcel is fully transferred to and vested in our subsidiary, Aerkomm Taiwan. The Loans will bear interest, non-compounding, at the Bank of America Prime Rate plus 1%, annually, calculated on the actual number of days the Loans are outstanding and based on a 365-day year and will be due and payable upon the earlier of (1) the date of our obtaining a mortgage loan secured by the Taiwan land parcel with a principal amount of not less than $20 million and (2) one year following the initial closing date of the Loans. The Lenders also agreed to an earlier closing of up to 25% of the principal amounts of the Loans upon our request prior to the time that title to the Taiwan land parcel is transferred to our subsidiary, Aerkomm Taiwan, provided that we provide adequate evidence to the Lenders that the proceeds of such an earlier closing would be applied to pay our vendors. We, of course, cannot provide any assurances that we will be able to obtain a mortgage on the Taiwan land parcel once the acquisition is completed. As of the date of this annual report, we have not drawn down any portion of the Loans.
On July 10, 2018, in conjunction with our agreement to acquire the Taiwan land parcel, we entered into a binding letter of commitment with Metro Investment Group Limited, or MIGL, pursuant to which we agreed to pay MIGL an agent commission of four percent (4%) of the full purchase price of the Taiwan land parcel, equivalent to approximately US$1,387,127, for MIGL’s services provided with respect to the acquisition. Under the terms of the initial with MIGL, we agreed to pay this commission no later than 90 days following payment in full of the Taiwan land parcel purchase price. On May 9, 2019, we amended the binding letter of commitment with MIGL to extend the payment to be paid after the full payment of the Land acquisition price until no later than December 31, 2020. If there is a delay in payment, we shall be responsible for punitive liquidated damages at the rate of one tenth of one percent (0.1%) of the commission per day of delay with a maximum cap to these damages of five percent (5%). Under applicable Taiwanese law, the commission was due and payable upon signing of the letter of commitment even if the contract is cancelled for any reason and the acquisition is not completed. We have recorded the estimated commission to the cost of land and will be paying the amount no later than December 31, 2021.
On December 3, 2020, the Company closed a private placement offering (the “Bond Offering”) consisting of US$10,000,000 in aggregate principal amount of its Credit Enhanced Zero Coupon Convertible Bond due 2025 (the “Credit Enhanced Bonds”) and US$200,000 in aggregate principal amount of its 7.5% convertible bonds due 2025 (the “Coupon Bonds,” and together with the Credited Enhanced Bonds, the “Bonds”).
Payments of principal, premium, interest and any payments thereof in respect of the Credit Enhanced Bonds will have the benefit of a bank guarantee denominated in U.S. dollars and issued by Bank of Panhsin Co., Ltd., based in Taiwan. Unless previously redeemed, converted or repurchased and canceled, the Credit Enhanced Bonds will be redeemed on December 2, 2025 at 105.11% of their principal amount and the Coupon Bonds will be redeemed on December 2, 2025 at 100% of their principal amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest. The Coupon Bonds will bear interest from and including December 2, 2020 at the rate of 7.5% per annum. Interest on the Coupon Bonds is payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 each year, commencing on June 1, 2021. Unless previously redeemed, converted or repurchased and cancelled, the Bonds may be converted at any time on or after December 3, 2020 up to November 20, 2025 into shares of Common Stock of the Company with a par value US$0.001 each (such shares of Common Stock, the “Conversion Shares”). The initial conversion price for the Bonds is US$13.30 per Conversion Share and is subject to adjustment in specified circumstances. Please refer to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with SEC on December 4, 2020.
On December 31, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement-Invest Securities”) with Invest Securities SA (“Invest-Securities”) in connection with the public offering (“2020/2021 Offering”), issuance and sale of up to 1,951,219 shares of the Company’s common stock on a best-efforts basis at the public offering price of €20.50 (approximately $25.07) per share, less underwriting discounts, for up to a maximum of €40 million (approximately $48.9 million). As of December 31, 2020, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement-Invest Securities, we had completed our first closing and issued an aggregate of 96,160 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of €1.97 million (approximately $2.41 million), or net proceeds of €1.4 million (approximately $1.7 million).
The Company has not generated significant revenues, excluding non-recurring revenues in 2019 and 2020, and will incur additional expenses as a result of being a public reporting company. Currently, we have taken measures that management believes will improve our financial position by financing activities, including having successfully completed our 2018/2019 public offering and Bond Offering, ongoing 2020/2021 Offering, short-term borrowings and other private loan commitments, including the Loans from our investors, discussed above. With our current available cash, the $20 million in loan commitments from the Lenders and our expectations for our ability to raise funds in the near term, we believe our working capital will be adequate to sustain our operations for the next twelve months.
However, even if we successfully raise sufficient capital to satisfy our needs over the next twelve months, following that period we will require additional cash resources for the implementation of our strategy to expand our business or for other investments or acquisitions we may decide to pursue. If our internal financial resources are insufficient to satisfy our capital requirements, we will need seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain additional credit facilities, although there can be no assurances that we will be successful in these efforts. The sale of additional equity securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could require us to agree to operating and financial covenants that would restrict our operations. Financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Any failure by us to raise additional funds on terms favorable to us, or at all, could limit our ability to expand our business operations and could harm our overall business prospects.
Capital Expenditures
Our operations continue to require significant capital expenditures primarily for technology development, equipment and capacity expansion. Capital expenditures are associated with the supply of airborne equipment to our prospective airline partners, which correlates directly to the roll out and/or upgrade of service to our prospective airline partners’ fleets. Capital spending is also associated with the expansion of our network, ground stations and data centers and includes design, permitting, construction, network equipment and installation costs.
Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $349,067, and $635,293, respectively.
We anticipate an increase in capital spending in fiscal year 2021 and estimate that capital expenditures will range from $10 million to $40 million as we will begin airborne equipment installations and continue to execute our expansion strategy.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. However, our management will closely monitor price changes in our industry and continually maintain effective cost control in operations.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Seasonality
Our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to significant seasonal variations. This pattern may change, however, as a result of new market opportunities or new product introductions.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject to significant concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash in banks. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the total balance of cash in bank exceeding the amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) for the Company was approximately $0 and $233,000, respectively. The balance of cash deposited in foreign financial institutions exceeding the amount insured by local insurance is approximately $3,514,000 and $37,000 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
We perform ongoing credit evaluation of its customers and requires no collateral. An allowance for doubtful accounts is provided based on a review of the collectability of accounts receivable. We determine the amount of allowance for doubtful accounts by examining its historical collection experience and current trends in the credit quality of its customers as well as its internal credit policies. Actual credit losses may differ from our estimates.
Inventories
Inventories are recorded at the lower of weighted-average cost or net realizable value. We assess the impact of changing technology on its inventory on hand and writes off inventories that are considered obsolete. Estimated losses on scrap and slow-moving items are recognized in the allowance for losses.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. When value impairment is determined, the related assets are stated at the lower of fair value or book value. Significant additions, renewals and betterments are capitalized. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred.
Depreciation is computed by using the straight-line and double declining methods over the following estimated service lives: ground station equipment - 5 years, computer equipment - 3 to 5 years, furniture and fixtures - 5 years, satellite equipment - 5 years, vehicles - 5 years and lease improvement - 5 years.
Upon sale or disposal of property and equipment, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the corresponding accounts, with any gain or loss credited or charged to income in the period of sale or disposal.
We review the carrying amount of property and equipment for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. It determined that there was no impairment loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Right-of-Use Asset and Lease Liability
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases” (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which modifies lease accounting for both lessees and lessors to increase transparency and comparability by recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases and finance leases under previous accounting standards and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements.
A lessee should recognize the lease liability to make lease payments and the right-of-use asset representing its right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. For operating leases and finance leases, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability are initially measured at the present value of the lease payments by discount rates. The Company’s lease discount rates are generally based on its incremental borrowing rate, as the discount rates implicit in the Company’s leases is readily determinable. Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use assets and lease liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. Finance leases are included in property and equipment and lease liability in our consolidated balance sheets. Lease expense for operating expense payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Interest and amortization expenses are recognized for finance leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
For the leases with a term of twelve months or less, a lessee is permitted to make an accounting policy election by class of underlying asset not to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities. If a lessee makes this election, it should recognize lease expense for such leases generally on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We adopted ASU 2016-02 effective January 1, 2019.
Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets
Our goodwill represents the amount by which the total purchase price paid exceeded the estimated fair value of net assets acquired from acquisition of subsidiaries. We tests goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that there may be impairment.
Purchased intangible assets with finite life are amortized on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of respective assets. Purchased intangible assets with indefinite life are evaluated for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Purchased intangible asset consists of satellite system software and is amortized over 10 years.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We utilize the three-level valuation hierarchy for the recognition and disclosure of fair value measurements. The categorization of assets and liabilities within this hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the measurement of fair value. The three levels of the hierarchy consist of the following:
Level 1 - Inputs to the valuation methodology are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Company has the ability to access at the measurement date.
Level 2 - Inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices in markets that are not active or inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the instrument.
Level 3 - Inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable inputs based upon management’s best estimate of inputs market participants could use in pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date, including assumptions.
The carrying amounts of our cash and restricted cash, accounts receivable, other receivable, accounts payable, short-term loan and other payable approximated their fair value due to the short-term nature of these financial instruments. Our long-term bonds payable, long-term loan and lease payable approximated the carrying amount as its interest rate is considered as approximate to the current rate for comparable loans and leases, respectively. There were no outstanding derivative financial instruments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue Recognition
During 2019, we adopted the provisions of ASU 2014-09 Revenue from Contract with Customers (Topic 606) and the principal versus agent guidance within the new revenue standard. As such, we identify a contract with a customer, identifies the performance obligations in the contract, determines the transaction price, allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract and recognizes revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation. Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was the sales of compact adaptor for smartphone that allows users to turn their smartphone into a satellite smartphone to provide reliable connectivity beyond the coverage of traditional networks.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are charged to operating expenses as incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred $0 and $416,231 of research and development costs, respectively.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Income tax expense is the tax payable or refundable for the period plus or minus the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities. Adjustments to prior period’s income tax liabilities are added to or deducted from the current period’s tax provision.
We follow FASB guidance on uncertain tax positions and has analyzed its filing positions in all the federal, state and foreign jurisdictions where it is required to file income tax returns, as well as all open tax years in those jurisdictions. We file income tax returns in the US federal, state and foreign jurisdictions where it conducts business. It is not subject to income tax examinations by US federal, state and local tax authorities for years before 2016. We believe that its income tax filing positions and deductions will be sustained on audit and does not anticipate any adjustments that will result in a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Therefore, no reserves for uncertain tax positions have been recorded. We do not expect unrecognized tax benefits to change significantly over the next twelve months.
Our policy for recording interest and penalties associated with any uncertain tax positions is to record such items as a component of income before taxes. Penalties and interest paid or received, if any, are recorded as part of other operating expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
Foreign Currency Transactions
Foreign currency transactions are recorded in U.S. dollars at the exchange rates in effect when the transactions occur. Exchange gains or losses derived from foreign currency transactions or monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognized in current income. At the end of each period, assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are revalued at the prevailing exchange rates with the resulting gains or losses recognized in income for the period.
Translation Adjustments
If a foreign subsidiary’s functional currency is the local currency, translation adjustments will result from the process of translating the subsidiary’s financial statements into the reporting currency of the Company. Such adjustments are accumulated and reported under other comprehensive income (loss) as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common outstanding during the period increased to include the number of additional shares of common stock that would have been outstanding if the potentially dilutive securities had been issued. Potentially dilutive securities include stock warrants and outstanding stock options, shares to be purchased by employees under our employee stock purchase plan.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Simplifying the Accounting for Debt with Conversion and Other Options.
In June 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06 to simplify the accounting in ASC 470, Debt with Conversion and Other Options and ASC 815, Contracts in Equity’s Own Entity. The guidance simplifies the current guidance for convertible instruments and the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity. Additionally, the amendments affect the diluted EPS calculation for instruments that may be settled in cash or shares and for convertible instruments. This ASU will be effective beginning in the first quarter of the Company’s fiscal year 2022. Early adoption is permitted. The amendments in this update must be applied on either full retrospective basis or modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings/(deficit) in the period of adoption. We are currently evaluating the impact of ASU 2020-06 on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures, as well as the timing of adoption.
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 to simplify the accounting in ASC 740, Income Taxes. This guidance removes certain exceptions related to the approach for intra-period tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also clarifies and simplifies other areas of ASC 740. This ASU will be effective beginning in the first quarter of the Company’s fiscal year 2021. Early adoption is permitted. Certain amendments in this update must be applied on a prospective basis, certain amendments must be applied on a retrospective basis, and certain amendments must be applied on a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings/(deficit) in the period of adoption. We are currently evaluating the impact this ASU will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures, as well as the timing of adoption.
Financial Instruments
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” (“ASU 2016-13”), which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses of certain financial instruments. In February 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-02 and delayed the effective date of Topic 326 until fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact of adopting ASU 2016-13 on our consolidated financial statements.
Intangibles
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other” (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, under which goodwill shall be tested at least annually for impairment at a level of reporting referred to as a reporting unit. ASU 2017-04 will be effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 does not have significant impact on our consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.