Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying footnotes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Because of many factors, including those factors set forth in Part 1, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Overview
We are a cardio-metabolic nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH, company dedicated to developing pioneering medicines designed to restore metabolic balance and improve overall health. NASH is a severe form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or NAFLD, characterized by inflammation and fibrosis in the liver that can progress to cirrhosis, liver failure, cancer and death. Our lead product candidate, efruxifermin, or EFX, formerly known as AKR-001, is an analog of fibroblast growth factor 21, or FGF21, which is an endogenously expressed hormone that protects against cellular stress and regulates metabolism of lipids, carbohydrates and proteins throughout the body. We conducted a Phase 2a clinical trial, the BALANCED study, to evaluate EFX in the treatment of biopsy-confirmed NASH patients. The main portion of this study in NASH patients with-F3 fibrosis showed EFX’s potential to reduce liver fat, improve liver health, reverse fibrosis, improve glycemic control and reduce risks of cardiovascular disease. In February 2021 we began screening for a Phase 2b clinical trial, the HARMONY study, to evaluate EFX in the treatment of NASH patients with/F3 fibrosis. Preliminary results of the HARMONY study, expected in the second half of 2022, will inform dose selection for a registrational Phase 3 clinical trial. An expansion cohort of the BALANCED study in cirrhotic NASH patients, Cohort C, is currently undergoing data analysis and we expect to report top-line results in the first half of 2021, which will include the results of paired biopsies from a subset of patients (18/30) who consented to post-treatment biopsies after a protocol amendment. Results from Cohort C will inform next steps in our development plans for EFX in cirrhotic NASH patients. Based on clinical data to date, we believe EFX has the potential to be a foundational NASH monotherapy.
EFX has been administered to a total of 162 patients with either NASH (n=79) or T2D (n=83) in three randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials for up to 16 weeks. In all three trials, patients treated with EFX achieved highly significant improvements in lipoprotein profile, including reduction in triglycerides of up to 45 percent, a key attribute given that cardiovascular disease remains the number one cause of mortality in NASH patients. In the BALANCED study EFX patients experienced improvements in glycemic control, including reductions in HbA1c of up to 0.9% among diabetic NASH patients. EFX patients also achieved highly significant relative reductions in liver fat of 63 to 71 percent across dose groups, compared to 0 percent for placebo. Significant reductions in ALT (up to 51%), were also observed. Most importantly, EFX patients experienced substantial improvements in liver histology based on analysis of paired biopsies. Of the 40 EFX patients who had end-of-treatment biopsies, we observed that 48% achieved at least a one-stage improvement in fibrosis without worsening of NASH and 48% achieved NASH resolution with no worsening of fibrosis. Among patients who had/F3 fibrosis at baseline, 68% had at least a 1-stage improvement in fibrosis, while 50% had a 2-stage fibrosis improvement.
We believe EFX holds the potential to be a promising monotherapy for the treatment of NASH, if approved. NASH is a complex disease, and its treatment ideally would include intervening at all of the various stages of its pathogenesis. Based on the results of the BALANCED study to date, we believe EFX could potentially address all of the various stages of NASH pathogenesis in a single treatment: reducing steatohepatitis, resolving fibrosis and helping restore healthy metabolism to the whole body.
We were incorporated in January 2017 and have devoted substantially all of our efforts to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing rights to EFX, research and development activities for EFX, building our intellectual property portfolio and providing general and administrative support for these
operations. To date, we have principally raised capital through the issuance of convertible preferred stock and the initial public offering of our common stock in June 2019 and an underwritten public offering of our common stock in July 2020.
We have incurred significant operating losses since inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of EFX and any future product candidates. Our net losses were $79.2 million and $43.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $209.5 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for at least the next several years as we advance EFX through later-stage clinical development, develop additional product candidates and seek regulatory approval of any product candidates that complete clinical development. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution. We may also incur expenses in connection with the in-licensing or acquisition of additional product candidates.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings, or other capital sources, which may include collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, reduce or eliminate the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities of $268.4 million.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
As of March 2021, a novel strain of coronavirus, or COVID-19, has spread globally. Efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have intensified and the United States, Europe and Asia have implemented severe travel restrictions, social distancing requirements, and stay-at-home orders, among other restrictions, which have led to delays in the commencement of non-COVID-19-related clinical trials. As a result, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruptions to the U.S., regional and global economies and has contributed to significant volatility and negative pressure in financial markets.
We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business and have taken important steps to help ensure the safety of employees and their families and to reduce the spread of COVID-19. We have established, and maintained without interruption, a work-from-home policy for all employees. We have also maintained efficient communication with our manufacturing and supply partners as the COVID-19 situation has progressed. We have taken these precautionary steps while maintaining business continuity so that we can continue to progress our programs. Our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were not significantly impacted by COVID-19, and the COVID-19 pandemic did not materially impact data collection for the main portion of the BALANCED study, which has been completed. In addition, enrollment in our recently initiated Phase 2b HARMONY trial has not been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Commercial-scale manufacture of GMP drug substance, or API, was completed in April 2020 without any impact from COVID-19. Manufacture of GMP drug product for our Phase 2b clinical trial was completed in September 2020, also without any impact from COVID-19.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our industry, the healthcare system and our current and future operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic, the impact of new strains of the virus, the effectiveness and availability of vaccines, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future, if at all. If our development efforts for EFX or additional product candidates that we may develop in the future are successful and result in marketing approval or if we enter into collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from such collaboration or license agreements.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of EFX, as well as unrelated discovery program expenses. We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
● expenses incurred under agreements with CROs that are primarily engaged in the oversight and conduct of our clinical trials; CMOs that are primarily engaged to provide drug substance and product for our clinical trials, research and development programs, as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials, nonclinical studies and other scientific development services;
● the cost of acquiring and manufacturing nonclinical and clinical trial materials, including manufacturing registration and validation batches;
● costs related to compliance with quality and regulatory requirements; and
● payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
Advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. Such amounts are recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed, or until it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered or the services rendered.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development, such as EFX, generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned clinical development activities in the near term and in the future. We expect our research and development expenses to vary from period to period, driven primarily by spending required to conduct clinical trials and manufacturing expenses for EFX. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the clinical development of EFX and any future product candidates.
Our clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
● per patient trial costs;
● the number of sites included in the trials;
● the countries in which the trials are conducted;
● the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
● the number of patients that participate in the trials;
● the number of doses that patients receive;
● the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients enrolled in clinical trials;
● potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
● the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
● any setbacks or delays to the initiation or completion of preclinical or non-clinical studies, product development or clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates, including on account of any disruption or delays to the supply of our product candidates due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the phase of development of our product candidates; and
● the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates.
The successful development and commercialization of product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, including the following:
● the timing and progress of nonclinical and clinical development activities;
● the number and scope of nonclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● the ability to raise necessary additional funds;
● the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we may enter into collaboration arrangements;
● our ability to maintain our current development program and to establish new ones;
● our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements;
● the successful initiation and completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority;
● the receipt and related terms of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● the availability of drug substance and drug product for use in production of our product candidate;
● establishing and maintaining agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing, if our product candidate is approved;
● our ability to obtain and maintain patents, trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity, both in the United States and internationally;
● our ability to protect our rights in our intellectual property portfolio;
● the commercialization of our product candidate, if and when approved;
● obtaining and maintaining third-party insurance coverage and adequate reimbursement;
● the acceptance of our product candidate, if approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
● competition with other products;
● the impacts of a pandemic, epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease, including COVID-19, on our supply of product candidate and ability to successfully initiate and complete preclinical and non-clinical studies and clinical trials, to receive regulatory approval for our product candidate and to commercialize our product candidate, if approved; and
● a continued acceptable safety profile of our therapy following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, finance, corporate and business development, and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and administrative consulting services; insurance costs; administrative travel expenses; marketing expenses and other operating costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support development of EFX and our continued research activities. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, tax, regulatory, compliance, and director and officer insurance costs, as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements.
Other income
Other income
Other income consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
Income taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each period or for our earned research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $127.4 million and $47.2 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities and expire at various dates beginning in 2037. The federal net operating loss carryforwards include $125.0 million, which may be carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2020, we also had U.S. federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $2.4 million and $0.4 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future tax liabilities which expire at various dates beginning in 2032. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses were $64.9 million and $37.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $27.9 million. Direct costs for our EFX program increased $25.9 million, attributed primarily to a $30.1 million increase in third-party contract manufacturing expenses for EFX partially offset by a decrease of $1.6 million for pre-clinical toxicology studies and a decrease of $2.5 million for a clinical milestone paid to Amgen in July 2019 that was not repeated in the 2020 period. Personnel and related costs increased $2.0 million, due to a $1.1 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $0.9 million increase in wages. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned manufacturing and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $15.2 million and $8.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $6.6 million. Personnel and related costs increased $3.5 million, due primarily to a $3.1 million increase in stock-based compensation. Legal, accounting and other professional service fees increased $1.9 million and insurance expenses increased by $1.2 million, which are related to our growth after becoming a public company in 2019.
Other income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 is comprised primarily of $0.9 million of interest income from our cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities compared to $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is related to lower market interest rates available on our investment funds.
Liquidity and capital resources
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of products for several years, if at all. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the sale of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, the initial public offering of our common stock in June 2019 and a follow-on public offering of our common stock in July 2020. Through December 31, 2020, we had received gross proceeds totaling $412.7 million from sales of our redeemable convertible preferred stock in 2017 and 2018, the initial public offering of our common stock in June 2019 and the follow-on public offering of our common stock in July 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities of $268.4 million. We have invested our cash resources primarily in liquid money market accounts, commercial paper and corporate debt securities.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $70.8 million, consisting of a net loss of $79.2 million, which was partially offset by non-cash charges of $6.0 million for stock-based compensation expense and net cash provided by the net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.1 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $2.5 million in increase in accounts payable.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $35.6 million, consisting of a net loss of $43.8 million, which was partially offset by non-cash charges of $1.8 million for stock-based compensation expense and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a reduction in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $7.4 million, of which $6.1 million was due to the timing of payments to our CROs and CMOs, and $1.3 million that was related to employee compensation. These amounts were partially offset by a $0.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $0.4 million decrease in accounts payable, both related to the timing of prepayments and payments to our CROs, CMOs and insurance vendors.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.8 million, consisting of $105.4 million from the sales and maturities of short-term marketable securities offset by $115.0 million in purchases of short-term marketable securities.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $71.5 million, consisting of purchases of short-term marketable securities.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $203.1 million, consisting of $202.6 million of follow-on public offering proceeds, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs, and $0.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of employee stock purchase plan shares.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $96.0 million, consisting of $98.4 million of IPO proceeds, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, partially offset by $2.9 million of related offering costs and $0.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of employee stock purchase shares.
Funding requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, research and development services, compensation and related expenses and general overhead costs. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. In addition, since the closing of our IPO, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We anticipate that our expenses will
increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of nonclinical studies and clinical trials for EFX or any future product candidates we may develop;
● timing delays, if any, with respect to preclinical and clinical development of EFX or any future product candidates we may develop as a result of a pandemic, epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease, including COVID-19;
● our ability to maintain our license to EFX from Amgen;
● the outcome, timing and cost of seeking and obtaining regulatory approvals from the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities, including the potential for such authorities to require that we perform more nonclinical studies or clinical trials than those that we currently expect or change their requirements on studies or trials that had previously been agreed to;
● the cost to establish, maintain, expand, enforce and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with licensing, preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patents or other intellectual property rights;
● the effect of competing technological and market developments;
● market acceptance of any approved product candidates, including product pricing, as well as product coverage and the adequacy of reimbursement by third-party payors;
● the cost of acquiring, licensing or investing in additional businesses, products, product candidates and technologies;
● the cost and timing of selecting, auditing and potentially validating a manufacturing site for commercial scale manufacturing;
● the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval and that we determine to commercialize; and
● our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems.
We expect that we will require additional funding to complete the clinical development of EFX, commercialize EFX, if we receive regulatory approval, and pursue in-licenses or acquisitions of other product candidates. If we receive regulatory approval for EFX or other product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, sales, marketing and distribution, depending on where we choose to commercialize EFX ourselves.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, ownership interest may be materially diluted, and the terms of such securities could include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specified actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or eliminate our product development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual obligations and other commitments
We have entered into agreements with CROs and CMOs to provide services in connection with our nonclinical studies and clinical trials and to manufacture clinical development materials. Apart from the contracts with non-cancelable purchase commitments, we have entered into other contracts in the normal course of business with certain
CROs, CMOs, and other third parties for nonclinical research studies and testing, clinical trials and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided and expenses incurred, including non-cancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation.
The following table represents our non-cancelable contractual obligations aggregated by type (in thousands):
1 See Note 12. Commitments and contingencies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
2 Purchase obligations represent management’s estimate of the future liability that would occur if agreements with CROs and CMOs were prematurely cancelled. We do not intend to prematurely cancel any agreements that we are currently party to.
Under the Amgen Agreement, we are obligated to pay Amgen $7.5 million in connection with dosing the first patient in a Phase 3 clinical trial, up to $30.0 million in connection with marketing approvals, and aggregate milestone payments of up to $75.0 million upon the achievement of specified commercial milestones for all products licensed under the agreement. Commencing on the first commercial sale of licensed products, we are obligated to pay tiered royalties on escalating tiers of annual net sales of licensed products ranging from low to high single-digit percentages. The amount and timing of any contingent payment obligations to Amgen are not currently known. The first clinical milestone, in the amount of $2.5 million, was paid to Amgen in July 2019.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies reflect the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Cash and cash equivalents
We consider all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less at the time of purchase to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents, which consist primarily of amounts invested in money market accounts, are stated at fair value.
Short-term marketable securities
We invest in short-term marketable securities, primarily money market funds, commercial paper, U.S. treasury securities and corporate debt securities. We classify our short-term marketable securities as available-for-sale securities and report them at fair value in cash equivalents or short-term marketable securities on the consolidated balance sheets with related unrealized losses included within accumulated other comprehensive loss on the consolidated balance sheets.
The amortized cost of debt securities is adjusted for amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts to maturity, which is included in other income on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Realized gains and losses and declines in value judged to be other-than-temporary, if any, on available-for-sale securities are included in other income. The cost of securities sold is based on the specific identification method. Interest and dividends on securities classified as available-for-sale are included in other income.
We regularly review all of our investments for other-than-temporary declines in estimated fair value. Our review includes the consideration of the cause of the impairment, including the creditworthiness of the security issuers, the number of securities in an unrealized loss position, the severity and duration of the unrealized losses, whether we have the intent to sell the securities and whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. When we determine that the decline in estimated fair value of an investment is below the amortized cost basis and the decline is other-than-temporary, we reduce the carrying value of the security and record a loss for the amount of such decline.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
• vendors in connection with nonclinical development activities;
• CROs and investigative sites in connection with nonclinical studies and clinical trials; and
• CMOs in connection with the production of nonclinical and clinical trial materials.
We base the expense recorded related to external research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and CROs that supply, conduct and manage nonclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-based compensation
We measure all stock-based awards granted to employees and nonemployees based on the fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award, on a straight-line basis. We account for forfeitures as they occur. We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Prior to our initial public offering, the exercise price for all stock options granted was at the estimated fair value of the underlying common stock as determined on the date of grant by our board of directors.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires inputs based on certain subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of the option, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of the option, and our expected dividend yield. We completed our IPO in June 2019 and accordingly, we lack sufficient company-specific historical and implied volatility information for our shares traded in the public markets. Therefore, we estimate our expected share price volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies and expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our own traded share price. The expected term of our stock options has been determined utilizing the "simplified" method for awards that qualify as "plain-vanilla" options. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends on our common stock and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. The fair value of each restricted common stock award is estimated on the date of grant based on the fair value of our common stock on that same date.
Compensation expense for purchases under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan is recognized based on the fair value of the common stock estimated based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of offering, less the purchase discount percentage provided for in the plan.
Stock-based compensation expense was $6.0 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $23.2 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation costs, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 2.5 years.
We have not recognized, and we do not expect to recognize in the near future, any tax benefit related to stock-based compensation expense as a result of the full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets including deferred tax assets related to our net operating loss carryforwards.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or in our tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the consolidated financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established through a charge to income tax expense. Potential for recovery of deferred tax assets is evaluated by estimating the future taxable profits expected and considering prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the consolidated financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination by the taxing authorities. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the consolidated financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, or unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Utilization of our NOL carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership changes that may have occurred or that could occur in the future, as required by Section 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, and similar state provisions. These ownership change limitations may limit the amount of NOL carryforwards and other tax attributes that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income or tax liabilities. In general, an “ownership change” as defined by Section 382 of the Code results from a transaction or series of transactions over a three-year period resulting in an
ownership change of more than 50 percentage points (by value) of the outstanding stock of a company by certain stockholders. As of December 31, 2020, the Company determined that ownership changes occurred on March 24, 2017, June 7, 2018 and July 8, 2020. As a result of the ownership changes, approximately $2.1 million and $3.6 million of the NOLs will expire unutilized for federal and state purposes, respectively. The ability of the Company to use its remaining NOL carryforwards may be further limited if the Company experiences a Section 382 ownership change as a result of future changes in its stock ownership.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part I, Item 8, “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (JOBS Act), and are eligible to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933 for complying with new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period at any time, which election is irrevocable. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
As an emerging growth company, we intend to rely upon other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act, including without limitation (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (a) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more; (b) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of our initial public offering; (c) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (d) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.