ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and the related notes thereto contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information” on page ii of this Report.
The following discussion highlights the results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition, as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described, and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on the audited financial statements contained in this Report, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. You should read the discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Overview and Plan of Operation
Akoustis® is an emerging commercial product company focused on developing, designing, and manufacturing innovative RF filter solutions for the wireless industry, including for products such as smartphones and tablets, network infrastructure equipment, WiFi Customer Premise Equipment (“CPE”) and defense applications. Filters are critical in selecting and rejecting signals, and their performance enables differentiation in the modules defining the RF front-end (“RFFE”). Located between the device’s antenna and its digital backend, the “RFFE” is the circuitry that performs the analog signal processing and contains components such as amplifiers, filters and switches. We have developed a proprietary microelectromechanical system (“MEMS”) based bulk acoustic wave (“BAW”) technology and a unique manufacturing process flow, called “XBAW”, for our filters produced for use in RFFE modules. Our XBAWTM filters incorporate optimized high purity piezoelectric materials for high power, high frequency and wide bandwidth operation. We own and/or have filed applications for patents on the core resonator device technology, manufacturing facility and intellectual property (“IP”) necessary to produce our RF filter designs and operate as a “pure-play” RF filter supplier, aligning with the front-end module manufacturers that seek to acquire high performance filters to expand their module businesses.
Our initial RF filter designs target ultra-high band, sub 7 GHz 5G, WiFi and defense bands and we expect our filter solutions will address problems (such as loss, bandwidth, power handling, and isolation) created by this growing number of frequency bands in the RFFE of mobile devices, infrastructure and premise equipment. We have prototyped, sampled and begun commercial shipments of our single-band low-loss BAW filter designs for 5G frequency bands and 5GHz and 6 GHz WiFi bands, which are suited to competitive BAW solutions and historically cannot be addressed with low-band, lower power handling surface acoustic wave (“SAW”) technology.
We plan to pursue RF filter design and R&D development agreements and potentially joint ventures with target customers and other strategic partners, although we cannot guarantee we will be successful in these efforts. These types of arrangements may subsidize technology development costs and qualification, filter design costs, and offer complementary technology and market intelligence and other avenues to revenue. However, we intend to retain ownership of our core technology, intellectual property, designs, and related improvements. We expect to pursue development of catalog designs for multiple customers and to offer such catalog products in multiple sales channels.
Please see Item 1. Business for more information.
Critical Accounting Policies
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate.
Derivative Liability
The Company evaluates its options, warrants, convertible notes, and other contracts, if any, to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with paragraph 815-10-05-4 and Section 815-40-25 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market each balance sheet date and recorded as either an asset or a liability. The change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statement of operations as other income or expense. Upon conversion, exercise or cancellation of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the date of conversion, exercise, or cancellation and then the related fair value is reclassified to equity.
In circumstances where the embedded conversion option in a convertible instrument is required to be bifurcated and there are also other embedded derivative instruments in the convertible instrument that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Equity instruments that are initially classified as equity that become subject to reclassification are reclassified to liability at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative instrument liabilities will be classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is expected within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
The Company adopted Section 815-40-15 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“Section 815-40-15”) to determine whether an instrument (or an embedded feature) is indexed to the Company’s own stock. Section 815-40-15 provides that an entity should use a two-step approach to evaluate whether an equity-linked financial instrument (or embedded feature) is indexed to its own stock, including evaluating the instrument’s contingent exercise and settlement provisions.
The Company utilizes a Monte Carlo simulation to compute the fair value of the derivative liability and to mark to market the fair value of the derivative at each balance sheet date. The Company records the change in the fair value of the derivative as other income or expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Company utilizes the with-and-without method, a form of the income approach model to compute the fair value of its embedded derivatives associated with its convertible notes. The fair value of the embedded derivatives represents the difference in the present value of anticipated cash flows assuming the feature is present as compared to a security without the same feature. The Company records the change in the fair value of the derivative as other income or expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents and accounts payable approximate fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
The Company measures the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on the guidance of ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
ASC 820 defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
Fair value measurements are categorized using a valuation hierarchy for disclosure of the inputs used to measure fair value, which prioritize the inputs into three broad levels:
Level 1 - Quoted prices are available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
Level 2 - Pricing inputs are other than quoted prices in active markets included in level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reported date, and include those financial instruments that are valued using models or other valuation methodologies.
Level 3 - Pricing inputs include significant inputs that are generally less observable from objective sources. These inputs may be used with internally developed methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company recognizes compensation expense for all equity-based payments in accordance with ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation” based on estimated fair values. The fair value of share-based payment awards is amortized over the requisite service period, which is defined as the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for an award. The Company recognizes the expense for the awards ratably over the service period for each separately vesting tranche.
Awards granted by the Company generally vest over the requisite service periods, typically over a four-year or five-year period. Awards granted to non-employee directors generally vest over a one-year period from the grant date.
The fair value of a restricted stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of Company stock on the date of grant.
The fair value of an option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the value of the underlying share, the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, and the dividend yield on the underlying stock. Expected volatility is calculated using the historical volatilities of the Company’s common stock traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market over the expected term. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term. The expected life of the option is calculated utilizing the “Simplified Method”. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero as the Company has never paid or declared any cash dividends on its Common stock and does not intend to pay dividends on its Common stock in the foreseeable future. The Company accounts for the impact of forfeitures as they occur.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations are presented for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
Year Ended June 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended June 30, 2020
Revenue
The Company recorded revenue of $6.6 million for the year-ended June 30, 2021 as compared to $1.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase of $4.8 million was primarily due to an increase in filter revenue of $3.0 million and an increase in engineering services of $2.1 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in MEMS revenue of $0.3 million, a product line that the Company exited during fiscal year 2020.
Cost of Revenue
The Company recorded cost of revenue of $10.6 million in fiscal year 2021 as compared to $2.4 million for fiscal year 2020. The $8.2 million increase is primarily due to costs associated with filter revenue which increased by $7.4 million and an increase in engineering services costs of $0.9 million. Cost of revenue includes direct labor, material, NRV adjustments, and facility costs primarily associated with the foundry services revenue, manufacturing of filter product and engineering services. Gross margin related to filter product revenue has historically been negative primarily due fixed costs in the manufacturing facility. As filter product represented a higher percentage of revenue in for the twelve months ended June 30, 2021 than the same period ending June 30, 2020, total gross margin declined.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses were $24.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, which were $3.6 million, or 17%, higher than the prior year amount of $20.5 million. The year-over-year increase was primarily in the areas of R&D personnel, stock-based compensation, depreciation, and facility costs. R&D expenses include personnel costs, stock-based compensation, facility and material costs and depreciation expense. Personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, increased by $1.4 million over fiscal year 2020 primarily due to R&D personnel in our acquired NY Facility, as well as incremental R&D hires in our North Carolina location. Facility and material costs, which include utilities, repair and maintenance, R&D supplies and equipment parts, increased by $2.3 million compared to the prior year. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in depreciation expense of $0.3 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) costs include salaries and wages for executive and administrative staff, stock-based compensation, professional fees, insurance costs and other general costs associated with the administration of our business. General and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $13.3 million versus $10.9 million for the comparative period ended June 30, 2020. The increase of $2.4 million, or 22%, was primarily driven by an increase in compensation, including stock-based compensation and severance expense of $1.8 million, an increase in sales and marketing expense of $0.2 million and an increase in general expenses of $0.4 million.
Other Income/(Expense)
Other expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $2.8 million compared to other expenses of $4.1 million in fiscal year 2020. The $1.3 million decrease in expense was primarily due to an increase in forgiveness of debt income of $1.6 million and changes in the real estate contingent liability and derivative liabilities resulting in a gain of $0.5 million. These were offset by an increase in interest expense of $0.6 million and a decrease in rental income of $0.2 million.
Net Loss
The Company recorded a net loss of $44.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of $36.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The year-over-year incremental loss of $8.0 million, or 22.2%, was primarily driven by an increase in cost of revenue of $8.2 million, higher R&D and G&A personnel costs, including stock based compensation of $3.2 million, an increase in R&D/Fabrication supplies of $2.3 million, an increase in general expenses of $0.5 million. These were partially offset by a reduction in other expenses of $1.3 million and an increase in revenue of $4.8 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has recorded approximately $1.1 million of revenue from contract research and government grants and $5.2 million of revenue from microelectromechanical systems (“MEMS”) foundry and engineering review services. Our operations thus far have been funded primarily with sales of equity and debt securities, as well as contract research and government grants, foundry services and engineering services.
The Company had $88.3 million of cash on hand as of June 30, 2021, which reflects an increase of $44.0 million compared to $44.3 million as of June 30, 2020. The $44.0 million increase is primarily due to $82.8 million of cash proceeds from sales of common stock and $2.9 million received from various equity plans. Offsetting the cash proceeds were cash used in operating activities of $29.4 million and cash used for capital expenditures of $12.5 million.
Financing Activities
On May 8, 2020, the Company entered into an ATM Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with BofA Securities, Inc. and Piper Sandler & Co. (each, a “Sales Agent” and, together, the “Sales Agents”), which was amended on February 19, 2021 (as amended, the “Sales Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Sales Agreement, the Company may sell from time-to-time through the Sales Agents shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100,000,000 (the “Equity Offering Program”). Sales, if any, may be made by means of transactions that are deemed to be “at the market” offerings as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act, including block trades, ordinary brokers’ transactions on the Nasdaq Capital Market or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices or by any other method permitted by law. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company sold 5,556,589 shares of Common Stock under the Sales Agreement for proceeds of approximately $62.7 million, net of approximately $0.9 million of compensation paid to the sales agents, but excluding transaction expenses.
On February 19, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with a limited number of institutional investors for the registered direct offering of an aggregate of 1,500,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $14.3592 per share (the “Registered Direct Offering”). The Registered Direct Offering closed on February 23, 2021 and resulted in gross proceeds of approximately $21.5 million.
Balance Sheet and Working Capital
June 30, 2021 Compared to June 30, 2020
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had current assets of $93.2 million made up primarily of cash on hand of $88.3 million. As of June 30, 2020, current assets were $46.2 million comprised primarily of cash on hand of $44.3 million. The $47.0 million increase is primarily due to an increase in cash on hand of $44.0 million.
Property, Plant and Equipment was $30.7 million as of June 30, 2021 as compared to a balance of $23.6 million as of the year ended June 30, 2020. The approximate $7.1 million year-over-year increase is primarily due to the purchase of equipment for the NY facility of $11.7 million primarily offset by depreciation of $4.6 million.
Total assets as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 were $125.0 million and $71.4 million, respectively.
Current liabilities as of June 30, 2021 were $7.3 million and increased year-over-year by $1.2 million which was primarily due to increases in employee compensation accruals offset by decreases in fixed asset purchase commitments.
Long-term liabilities totaled $0.3 million as of June 30, 2021, compared to $23.8 million for the prior year period. The decrease of $23.5 million was primarily due to the reduction in the convertible debt offerings of $21.6 million, forgiveness of the PPP loan of $1.6 million and the reduction in the lease liability of $0.3 million.
Stockholders’ equity was $117.4 million as of June 30, 2021, compared to $41.5 million as of June 30, 2020. Additional paid-in-capital (“APIC”) was $265.1 million as of June 30, 2021 and increased by $120.0 million. The year-over-year increase was primarily due to an increase from net proceeds of $83.1 million for the issuance of common stock during the year, common stock issued in note conversion of $25.3 million, common stock issued for services in the amount of $8.2 million, proceeds from exercise of warrants and options of $2.4 million and common stock issued in payment of convertible note interest of $0.6 million. The $75.9 million increase in stockholders’ equity consisted of the $120.1 million increase in APIC reduced by the $44.2 million net loss recorded for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Cash Flow Analysis
Year Ended June 30, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended June 30, 2020
Operating activities used cash of $29.4 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 and $21.3 million for the 2020 comparative period. The $8.1 million year-over-year increase in cash used was attributable to higher operating expenses associated with the ramp up of development and commercialization activities (primarily R&D personnel and material costs), higher spend on G&A costs for support personnel and professional fees.
Investing activities used cash of $12.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $9.9 million for the comparative year ended June 30, 2020. The $2.6 million year-over-year increase was primarily due to increased spend on R&D and manufacturing equipment.
Financing activities provided cash of $85.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 versus $45.5 million for the 2020 comparative period. The $40.3 million increase was due to additional proceeds from common stock offset by lower proceeds from loans issued during the period compared to the prior period.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
The Company did not engage in any “off-balance sheet arrangements” (as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K) as of June 30, 2021.