Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a precision genetic medicine company dedicated to our mission of developing gene therapies with the potential to restore, improve, and preserve high-acuity physiologic hearing for individuals who live with disabling hearing loss worldwide. We have built a precision genetic medicine platform that incorporates a proprietary vector library consisting of variants of a small virus commonly used in gene therapy, known as adeno-associated virus, or AAV, and a novel delivery approach. We are executing on our core strategic initiatives, which include the advancement of our lead product candidate, AK-OTOF; expansion of our pipeline to include programs focused on monogenic and inner ear conditions of complex etiology, such as AK-antiVEGF for vestibular schwannoma; and development of internal manufacturing capabilities and, ultimately, a commercial infrastructure. Our aim is to leverage our capabilities to become a fully integrated biotechnology company. We believe our platform and our team together provide a unique advantage to efficiently develop potential genetic medicines for a variety of inner ear conditions.
Since our inception, we have focused substantially all of our resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, conducting research and development activities, filing and prosecuting patent applications, identifying potential product candidates, soliciting input from regulators regarding development of these product candidates, and undertaking nonclinical studies. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of preferred stock (including borrowings under convertible promissory notes, which converted into preferred stock in 2017) and, most recently, with proceeds from our initial public offering, or IPO. On June 30, 2020, we completed an IPO of our common stock and issued and sold 14,375,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $223.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Upon completion of the IPO, all shares of outstanding convertible preferred stock automatically converted into 18,969,672 shares of common stock.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate any product revenue or product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. We reported net losses of $48.6 million and $25.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $81.7 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our expenses and capital expenditures will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if and as we:
● submit an investigational new drug application, or IND, and initiate a planned Phase 1/2 clinical trial of our lead product candidate, AK-OTOF, for the treatment of otoferlin gene (OTOF)-mediated hearing loss;
● the progress, costs, and results of our IND enabling studies to support our planned IND submission for AK-antiVEGF, and any future clinical development of AK-antiVEGF;
● continue our current research programs and our nonclinical development of product candidates from our current research programs;
● advance additional product candidates into nonclinical and clinical development;
● build a current good manufacturing practice manufacturing facility;
● expand the capabilities of our genetic medicine platform;
● expand our facilities;
● seek marketing approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● ultimately establish a sales, marketing, and distribution infrastructure; scale up manufacturing capabilities; and commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● expand, maintain, and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, regulatory, and other scientific personnel; and
● add operational, legal, compliance, financial, and management information systems personnel, including personnel to support our research, product development, and future commercialization efforts and support our operations as a public company.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, and distribution. Further, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements, and strategic alliances. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
The COVID-19 pandemic, which began in December 2019 and has spread worldwide, may affect our ability to initiate and complete nonclinical studies, delay the initiation of our planned clinical trial or future clinical trials, disrupt regulatory activities, or have other adverse effects on our business, results of operations, and financial condition. In addition, the pandemic has adversely impacted economies worldwide and could impact the financial markets, both of which could result in adverse effects on our business and operations and our ability to raise additional funds to support our operations.
To date, we have experienced a business disruption at our third-party manufacturer, specifically manufacturing delays, including delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are continuing to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial statements. We have not incurred impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets as a result of the pandemic. We are following, and will continue to follow, recommendations from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as federal, state, and local governments regarding work-from-home practices for non-essential employees as well as return-to-work policies and procedures. As a result, we have modified our business practices, including implementing a work-from-home policy for all employees who are able to perform
their duties remotely and restricting all non-essential travel. In May 2020, when Massachusetts began implementation of its staged reopening plan, we commenced implementation of a comprehensive and staged return to work plan, in accordance with guidance from, and requirements by, federal and state authorities. We expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other business partners in light of the pandemic.
We cannot be certain what the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will be on our business, and it has the potential to adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, and prospects.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from any sources, including product sales, and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, payments from collaboration or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties, or any combination thereof.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our programs. These expenses include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
● expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical development of our product candidates and research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors, and CROs;
● the cost of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug products for use in our research and nonclinical studies, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors, and third-party manufacturers;
● laboratory supplies and research materials;
● facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance; and
● payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed, or when it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered or the services rendered. Upfront payments under license agreements are expensed upon receipt of the license, and annual maintenance fees under license agreements are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. Milestone payments under license agreements are accrued, with a corresponding expense being recognized, in the period in which the milestone is determined to be probable of achievement and the related amount is reasonably estimable.
Our direct external research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis, including our early-stage programs, and consist of costs that include fees, reimbursed materials, and other costs paid to consultants, contractors, third-party manufacturers, and CROs in connection with our research, nonclinical, and manufacturing activities. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies, and facilities expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and our platform and, as such, are not separately classified.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future. In particular, we expect that the research and development expenses of our AK-OTOF and AK-antiVEGF programs will increase substantially in the near term. These substantial increases in expenses relate to plans to submit an IND for AK-OTOF for OTOF-mediated hearing loss to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, in the first half of 2022, initiate a planned Phase 1/2 clinical trial of AK-OTOF, and to submit an IND for AK-antiVEGF for vestibular schwannoma to FDA in 2022. We also expect that the research and development expenses of our AK-CLRN1 and GJB2 programs will increase in the near term as we initiate IND-enabling activities for those product candidates. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, including the following:
● the timing and progress of nonclinical studies, including IND-enabling studies;
● the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● raising additional funds necessary to complete clinical development of our product candidates;
● the timing of filing and acceptance of INDs or comparable foreign applications that allow commencement of our planned clinical trial or future clinical trials for our product candidates;
● the successful initiation, enrollment, and completion of clinical trials, including under current good clinical practices;
● our ability to achieve positive results from our future clinical programs that support a finding of safety and effectiveness and an acceptable risk-benefit profile of our product candidates in the intended populations;
● the availability of specialty raw materials for use in production of our product candidates;
● our ability to establish arrangements through our own facilities or with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply;
● our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements;
● the receipt and related terms of regulatory approvals from FDA and other applicable regulatory authorities;
● our ability to establish and maintain patent, trademark, and trade secret protection or regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
● our ability to procure intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity and enforce and defend our intellectual property rights and claims; and
● our ability to maintain a continued acceptable safety, tolerability, and efficacy profile of our product candidates following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, legal, finance and accounting, human resources, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include; legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters; professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, consulting, and tax services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our programs and platform. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, director and officer insurance, and investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
Our Series A preferred stock purchase agreement obligated the Series A investors to participate in a subsequent offering of Series A preferred stock upon the achievement of specified development milestones by us or upon the vote of at least 55% of the holders of the Series A preferred stock, which we refer to as the preferred stock tranche right. The preferred stock tranche right was classified as a liability and initially recorded at fair value upon the issuance date of the right. The liability was subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until settled, and changes in fair value of the preferred stock tranche liability were recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. In September 2019, pursuant to a vote of the holders of Series A preferred stock, the preferred stock tranche right was exercised, upon which we issued additional shares of Series A preferred stock. Immediately prior to the issuance of such shares, the preferred stock tranche right was remeasured to fair value for the last time with the change in fair value recognized as a component of other income (expense). Upon the issuance of the additional shares of preferred stock in September 2019, the preferred stock tranche liability was settled. As a result, we no longer recognize changes in the fair value of the preferred stock tranche liability in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash and marketable securities balances. We expect our interest income will increase as we invest the cash received from the sale of Series B preferred stock in February 2020 and the net proceeds received from our IPO in June 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net includes interest expense related to a finance lease, any realized gains or losses on the sale of marketable securities, and miscellaneous other income and expense unrelated to our core operations.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred or for the research and development tax credits earned in each year and interim period, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of $71.7 million, which may be available to offset future taxable income, of which $0.4 million begin to expire in 2036, while the remaining $71.3 million do not expire but are limited in their usage to an annual deduction equal to 80% of annual taxable income. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had state net operating loss carryforwards of $71.3 million, which may be available to offset future taxable income and expire at various dates beginning in 2036. As of December 31, 2020, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $2.2 million and $0.8 million, respectively, which may be available to reduce future tax liabilities and expire at various dates beginning in 2036 and 2033, respectively. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Results of Operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $34.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4.0 million in direct costs related to our AK-OTOF program was primarily due to $2.9 million of external research costs incurred for nonclinical toxicology studies and $1.0 million of increased manufacturing costs. The increase of $0.7 million in research and development expenses for our other early-stage programs was primarily due to advancement of research in our existing early-stage programs.
The decrease of $0.4 million in platform-related external costs was primarily due to decreases in spending related to the development of The Sing Registry. The increase of $6.1 million in personnel-related costs was primarily due to increased headcount in our research and development function. Personnel-related costs included stock-based compensation expense of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $3.4 million in facility-related and other expenses was primarily due to an increase in facility costs and laboratory costs, and our expanded discovery efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $14.6 million, compared to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Personnel-related costs increased by $6.5 million primarily as a result of the increase in headcount in our general and administrative function, as well as one-time charges of $1.3 million and $0.3 million related to separation costs of former employees. Personnel-related costs included stock-based compensation expense of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Professional and consultant fees increased by $3.0 million primarily due to increased patent activities and increases in accounting, audit, and legal fees incurred as we began operating as a public company, as well as an increase in director and officer insurance premiums. The increase in facility-related and other expenses of $1.7 million was primarily due to an increase in facility costs related to our corporate headquarters.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Tranche Liability. The change in the fair value of the preferred stock tranche liability resulted in other expense of $2.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in the fair value of the preferred stock tranche liability during 2019 was primarily due to an increase in the fair value of the underlying preferred stock during the year. Upon the issuance of the additional shares of preferred stock subject to the preferred stock tranche right in September 2019, the preferred stock tranche liability was settled. As a result, there was no preferred stock tranche right outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Income. Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.6 million and $0.4 million, respectively, consisting of interest earned on invested cash balances.
Other Income (Expense), Net. Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.3 million and less than $0.1 million, respectively, and was related to our finance lease liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and, if successful, the clinical development of our programs. To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from sales of preferred stock (including borrowings under convertible promissory notes, which converted into preferred stock in 2017) and through proceeds from our IPO. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $308.0 million.
On June 30, 2020 we completed our IPO and issued and sold 14,375,000 shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $244.4 million, or net proceeds of $223.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and offering expenses.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $40.8 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $48.6 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $7.0 million and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.9 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a $3.3 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by a $1.6 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $0.6 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $19.5 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $25.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $3.1 million and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $3.1 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of a $3.3 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities and a $0.7 million increase in operating lease liabilities, both partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $0.1 million decrease in accounts payable.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and prepaid expenses and other current assets in all periods were generally due to growth in our business, the advancement of our research programs, increases in payroll related accruals, and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $243.9 million, related to purchases of property and equipment of $4.5 million, purchases of marketable securities of $268.8 million, and partially offset by maturities of marketable securities of $29.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $3.4 million, due to purchases of property and equipment. The purchases of property and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2019 were related to leasehold improvements and furniture and fixture purchases for our new corporate headquarters, which we moved into in 2019.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $328.5 million, consisting of net proceeds from the issuance of our Series B preferred stock of $104.8 million in February 2020 and of net proceeds from our IPO in June 2020 of $227.3 million, partially offset by initial public offering costs of $3.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $25.0 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the issuance of our Series A preferred stock.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the nonclinical activities and studies and initiate clinical trials for our product candidates in development. The timing and amount of our funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress, costs, and results of our planned Phase 1/2 clinical trial of AK-OTOF and any future clinical development of AK-OTOF;
● the progress, costs, and results of our IND-enabling studies to support our planned IND submission for AK-antiVEGF, and any future clinical development of AK-antiVEGF
● the scope, progress, costs, and results of preclinical and clinical development for our other product candidates and development programs;
● the number and development requirements of other product candidates that we pursue;
● the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● the cost and timing of completion of clinical and commercial-scale manufacturing activities;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the amount and timing of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval, which in turn depends on the sales price and the availability of coverage and adequate third-party reimbursement;
● the costs of operating as a public company;
● the costs to retain and attract our personnel;
● the costs and timing of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
● the cash requirements of any future acquisitions or discovery of product candidates;
● the extent to which we may acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; and
● the severity, duration, and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may adversely impact our business, including our planned Phase 1/2 clinical trials and manufacturing activities for AK-OTOF and AK-antiVEGF, and planned development activities for other product candidates.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next two years. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the
ownership interests of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of such stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, licensing arrangements, or strategic alliances with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our research, product development, or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market drugs that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Amounts in the table reflect payments due for our lease of office and laboratory space in Boston, Massachusetts under an operating lease agreement that expires in February 2028. Subsequently, the Company has entered into an amendment to the property lease agreement for its office and laboratory space located at 645 Summer Street in Boston, Massachusetts.
(2) Amounts in the table reflect payments due for our lease of laboratory equipment under a finance lease agreement that expires in September 2021.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, third-party manufacturers, and other third parties for nonclinical research studies and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the preceding table as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
We have also entered into license agreements under which we are obligated to make specified milestone and royalty payments. We have not included future payments under these agreements in the table of contractual obligations above since the payment obligations under these agreements are contingent upon future events, such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory, and sales milestones, or generating product sales. As of December 31, 2020, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future product sales.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. At each period end, we corroborate the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include those related to fees paid to:
● vendors in connection with discovery and preclinical development activities;
● CROs in connection with nonclinical studies and testing; and
● third-party manufacturers in connection with the process development and scale up activities and the production of materials.
We record the expense and accrual related to contract research and manufacturing based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended considering a number of factors, including our knowledge of the progress towards completion of the research, development, and manufacturing activities; invoicing to date under contracts; communication from the CROs, third-party manufacturers, and other companies of any actual costs incurred during the period that have not yet been invoiced; and the costs included in the contracts and purchase orders. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure all stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employees, and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for options or the difference, if any, between the purchase price per share of the award and the fair value of our common stock for restricted stock awards. Compensation expense for employee awards is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Compensation expense for non-employee awards is recognized in the same manner as if we had paid cash in exchange for the goods or services, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We use the straight-line method to record the expense of awards with only service-based vesting conditions. We have not issued any stock-based awards with performance-based or market-based vesting conditions.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options, and our expected dividend yield.
Valuation of Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
Our Series A preferred stock purchase agreement obligated the Series A investors to participate in a subsequent offering of Series A preferred stock upon the achievement of specified development milestones by us or upon the vote of at least 55% of the holders of Series A preferred stock, which we refer to as the preferred stock tranche right. We determined that the preferred stock tranche right was required to be recorded as a liability because it was a freestanding financial instrument that would require us to transfer assets upon exercise of the right. The preferred stock tranche right met the definition of a freestanding financial instrument because it was legally detachable and separately exercisable from the Series A preferred stock. The preferred stock tranche right was classified as a liability and initially recorded at fair value upon the issuance date of the right. The liability was subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until settled, and changes in the fair value of the preferred stock tranche liability were recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. In September 2019, pursuant to a vote of the holders of Series A preferred stock, the preferred stock tranche right was exercised, upon which we issued additional shares of Series A preferred stock. Immediately prior to the issuance of such shares, the preferred stock tranche right was remeasured to fair value for the last time with the change in fair value recognized as a component of other income (expense). Upon the issuance of the additional shares of preferred stock in September 2019, the preferred stock tranche liability was settled, resulting in a reclassification of the $6.0 million fair value of the preferred stock tranche liability at that time to the carrying value of the Series A preferred stock.
We utilized the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which incorporated assumptions and estimates, to value the preferred stock tranche liability prior to its settlement. Estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement included the fair value per share of the underlying Series A preferred stock, the expected term of the preferred stock tranche right, risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, and expected volatility of the price of the underlying preferred stock. The most significant assumptions in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model impacting the fair value of the preferred stock tranche right were the fair value of the Series A preferred stock as of each remeasurement date and the estimated remaining term of the tranche right as of each remeasurement date. We determined the fair value per share of the underlying preferred stock by taking into consideration the most recent sales of our preferred stock as well as additional factors that we deemed relevant. We assessed these assumptions and estimates on a quarterly basis as additional information impacting the assumptions was obtained. As of September 25, 2019, the final measurement date of the preferred stock tranche right, the fair value of our Series A preferred stock was $0.41 per share. We historically have been a private company and lack company-specific historical and implied volatility information of our stock. Therefore, we estimated our expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a representative group of public companies in the biopharmaceutical industry for the expected terms. The risk-free interest rate was determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the preferred stock tranche right. We estimated a 0% dividend yield based on the expected dividend yield and the fact that we have never paid or declared dividends.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected not to “opt out” of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates
for public or private companies, we will adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard and will do so until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an emerging growth company. We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for private companies.