ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Air Lease Corporation is a leading aircraft leasing company that was founded by aircraft leasing industry pioneer, Steven F. Udvar-Házy. We are principally engaged in purchasing new commercial jet aircraft directly from aircraft manufacturers, such as Boeing and Airbus, and leasing those aircraft to airlines throughout the world with the intention to generate attractive returns on equity. In addition to our leasing activities, we sell aircraft from our operating lease portfolio to third-parties, including other leasing companies, financial services companies, airlines and other investors. We also provide fleet management services to investors and owners of aircraft portfolios for a management fee. Our operating performance is driven by the growth of our fleet, the terms of our leases, the interest rates on our debt, and the aggregate amount of our indebtedness, supplemented by gains from aircraft sales and our management fees.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
On January 30, 2020, the spread of the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization (the "WHO"). On March 11, 2020, the WHO characterized the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, governments around the world have implemented numerous measures to try to contain the virus, including travel restrictions. These measures, coupled with a significant decrease in spending on travel as a result of COVID-19, have materially impacted airline traffic and operations throughout the world, including our airline customers. It is unclear how long and to what extent these measures will remain in place and they may remain in place in some form for an extended period of time. Aircraft manufacturers and suppliers also have been impacted, including causing the temporary closure of Boeing and Airbus' final assembly facilities and also closures of various facilities across their supply chain in early 2020. Boeing and Airbus resumed production at these facilities during the second quarter of 2020, but with reduced output.
As the virus spread globally, its impact on the global economy increased significantly, resulting in a rapid decline in global air travel. While domestic and regional airline traffic improved from the lows witnessed earlier in 2020, air travel demand remains significantly challenged, especially in the international and business travel segments of the market. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, several COVID-19 vaccines were approved for use in a number of countries. While widespread vaccination could reduce the impact of COVID-19 on the commercial airline industry, it is difficult to predict the pace of vaccinations and how long it will take the industry to recover.
Since the pandemic began in the first quarter of 2020, we have received requests from our customers for accommodations such as deferrals of lease payments or other lease concessions. As of February 22, 2020, most of our lessees have requested some form of accommodation. On a case-by-case basis, we have agreed to accommodations with approximately 61% of our lessees. Generally, these accommodations have been in the form of partial lease deferrals for payments due during 2020, typically with a short repayment period. The majority of these deferrals are to be repaid within 12 months from the date the deferrals were granted, and in many cases, include lease extensions. As of February 22, 2021, our total deferrals, net of repayments, was $144.3 million. To date, we have agreed to defer $240.4 million in lease payments, of which $96.1 million or 40% of the total deferrals have been repaid. These lease deferrals have negatively impacted our cash flow provided by operating activities but our net deferrals only represented approximately 1.9% of our total available liquidity as of December 31, 2020. While the majority of the accommodations are in the form of lease deferrals, we have also entered into some lease restructurings, which typically included lease extensions. These restructurings decreased our total revenue by approximately $49.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We remain in active discussions with our airline customers and may continue to provide accommodations on a case-by-case basis.
Our collection rate for both the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 88%. We expect that our collection rate will remain under pressure because of the impact of COVID-19. Collection rate is defined as the sum of cash collected from lease rentals and maintenance reserves, and includes cash recovered from outstanding receivables from previous periods, as a percentage of the total contracted receivables due for the period. The collection rate is calculated after giving effect to lease deferral arrangements made as of February 22, 2021. In addition, we did not recognize rental revenue of $21.2 million and $49.4 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, respectively, because collection was not reasonably assured for certain lessees. Aircraft on lease with these lessees represented approximately 7.8% of our fleet by net book value as of December 31, 2020. The severity and the length of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on air travel and the adverse impact of the pandemic on our airline customers continues to be uncertain and could intensify. As a result, we could experience increased requests for lease deferrals, a continuing decline in our collection rate and additional lease revenue that will not be recognized in future quarters because collection will not be reasonably assured for certain lessees.
Our lease utilization rate for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 99.8%. The lease utilization rate is calculated based on the number of days each aircraft was subject to a lease or letter of intent during the period, weighted by the net book value of the aircraft. The severity and longevity of the COVID-19 pandemic on our airline customers could result in a decline in our lease utilization rate if our lessees return aircraft to us before the return date in their lease agreement or experience insolvency or initiate bankruptcy or similar proceedings that result in aircraft being returned to us. If this occurs, we may not be able to reposition the aircraft with other airlines as quickly as we have historically been able to do and we may incur increased costs in repositioning such aircraft. A decline in our lease utilization rate would adversely impact our financial results, including our revenue and profitability.
During the fourth quarter, our employees continued to work remotely. Due to travel restrictions and business limitations and shutdowns, some transitions of our aircraft from one lessee to another lessee have been delayed and we expect continuing challenges when transitioning, acquiring or selling aircraft during the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have experienced aircraft delivery delays related to COVID-19. While the commitment table in "Item 2. Properties" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K above and the discussion of "Our Fleet" below reflects our current delivery expectations, we are in ongoing discussions with Boeing and Airbus to determine the extent and duration of delivery delays. The delays could result in a cancellation of leases for those aircraft. As of December 31, 2020, we have canceled our orders for 20 737 MAX aircraft with Boeing. While we have planned our capital expenditures for 2021 and beyond based on currently expected delivery schedules, given the current industry circumstances, our aircraft delivery schedule could continue to be subject to material changes. In any case, our capital expenditures will be significantly less than what we planned prior to the pandemic, which will slow our revenue growth, but will further improve our strong liquidity position.
Similar to 2020, we anticipate reduced sales activity in 2021 compared to previous years due to aircraft delivery delays from Boeing and Airbus. We also anticipate that the market for aircraft sales will be weaker due to a reduction in the available aircraft financing in the market as a result of the pandemic. The decline in demand for used aircraft may also continue and ultimately could result in impairment charges to the aircraft in our fleet.
COVID-19 has caused disruption in the financial markets. We finance the purchase of aircraft and our business with available cash balances, internally generated funds, including through aircraft sales, and debt financings. As of December 31, 2020, we had an undrawn balance of $6.0 billion under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below). During the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to access to the unsecured debt capital markets issuing approximately $3.8 billion in aggregate principal Medium-Term Notes with a weighted average interest rate of 2.6%. If we were to lose access, we could also seek to enter into secured debt financings, including financings supported through the Export-Import Bank of the United States or other export credit agencies ("ECAs") to fund future aircraft deliveries from our orderbook. Our liquidity is discussed below in more detail under "Liquidity and Capital Resources."
We expect our business, results of operations and financial condition will continue to be negatively impacted in the near term, and the pandemic could have a larger impact on our results of operations in 2021 than has been reflected during 2020. In addition, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the continued
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial condition for the foreseeable future.
We believe, however, that the airline industry will eventually recover and aircraft travel will return to historical levels over the long term. See "Aircraft Industry and Sources of Revenues" below. Further, we believe we are well positioned to offer solutions for airlines, because we can offer the ability to lease younger, more fuel-efficient aircraft at a time when airlines will be focused on reducing capital requirements and managing costs.
2020 Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we purchased and took delivery of 26 aircraft from our new order pipeline, purchased 15 incremental aircraft in the secondary market, and sold eight aircraft, ending the period with a total of 332 aircraft in our operating lease portfolio with a net book value of $20.4 billion. The weighted average lease term remaining on our operating lease portfolio was 6.9 years and the weighted average age of our fleet was 4.1 years as of December 31, 2020. The net book value of our fleet grew by 9.0%, to $20.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $18.7 billion as of December 31, 2019. Our managed fleet decreased slightly to 81 aircraft as compared to the prior year primarily due to aircraft sales from our managed fleet. We have a globally diversified customer base comprised of 112 airlines in 60 countries. Our lease utilization rate for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 99.8%.
As of December 31, 2020, we had commitments to purchase 361 aircraft from Boeing and Airbus for delivery through 2027, with an estimated aggregate commitment of $23.9 billion. We ended 2020 with $26.8 billion in committed minimum future rental payments. We have placed approximately 92% of our committed orderbook on long-term leases for aircraft delivering through the end of 2022 and 73% through the end of 2023. We have $13.6 billion in contracted minimum rental payments on the aircraft in our existing fleet and $13.2 billion in minimum future rental payments related to aircraft which will deliver between 2021 through 2025.
We finance the purchase of aircraft and our business with available cash balances, internally generated funds, including through aircraft sales, and debt financings. Our debt financing strategy is focused on raising unsecured debt in the global bank and debt capital markets, with a limited utilization of government guaranteed export credit or other forms of secured financing. In 2020, we issued approximately $4.5 billion in aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes with maturities ranging from 2025 to 2030 and a weighted average interest rate of 2.93%. We ended 2020 with total debt outstanding, net of discounts and issuance costs, of $16.5 billion, of which 93.0% was at a fixed rate and 98.2% of which was unsecured. As of December 31, 2020, our composite cost of funds was 3.13%.
Our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 0.1% to $2.0 billion as compared to 2019. Despite the continued growth of our fleet, our revenues decreased due to a reduction in our aircraft sales, trading and other activity. Additionally, we were not able to recognize $49.4 million of rental revenue because collection was not reasonably assured for certain of our leases. Finally, we entered into lease restructurings, which typically included lease extensions, resulting in a decrease of approximately $49.2 million in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net income available to common stockholders was $500.9 million compared to $575.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our diluted earnings per share for the full year 2020 was $4.39 compared to $5.09 for the full year 2019. The decrease in net income available to common stockholders in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to the decrease in revenues as discussed above and an increase in depreciation and interest expense from the growth of our fleet and due to our increased liquidity position, partially offset by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Our adjusted net income before income taxes excludes the effects of certain non-cash items, one-time or non-recurring items that are not expected to continue in the future and certain other items. Our adjusted net income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $692.0 million or $6.07 per diluted share, compared to $781.2 million, or $6.91 per diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2019. As discussed above, the decrease in our adjusted net income before income taxes in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to the decrease in revenues and an increase in depreciation and interest expense, partially offset by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses. Adjusted net income before income taxes and adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes are measures of financial and operational performance that are not defined by U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles (“GAAP”). See Note 3 in “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of adjusted net income before income taxes and adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes as non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation of these measures to net income available to common stockholders.
Our Fleet
We have continued to build one of the world’s youngest operating lease portfolios, including some of the most fuel-efficient commercial jet aircraft. Our fleet, based on net book value, increased by 9.0%, to $20.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $18.7 billion as of December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we took delivery of 26 aircraft from our new order pipeline, purchased 15 incremental aircraft in the secondary market and sold eight aircraft, ending the year with a total of 332 aircraft in our operating lease portfolio. The weighted average fleet age and weighted average remaining lease term of our operating lease portfolio as of December 31, 2020 were 4.1 years and 6.9 years, respectively. We also managed 81 aircraft as of December 31, 2020.
Portfolio metrics of our fleet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
(1) Weighted-average fleet age and remaining lease term calculated based on net book value of our operating lease portfolio.
(2) As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any aircraft classified as flight equipment held for sale. As of December 31, 2019, we had eight aircraft classified as flight equipment held for sale which are included in Other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. All of these aircraft are excluded from the owned fleet count and included in our managed fleet count.
(3) As of December 31, 2020, we had options to acquire up to 25 Airbus A220 aircraft. As of December 31, 2019, we had options to acquire up to 45 Boeing 737-8 MAX aircraft and up to 25 Airbus A220 aircraft.
The following table sets forth the net book value and percentage of the net book value of our flight equipment subject to operating leases in the indicated regions based on each airline’s principal place of business as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table sets forth the number of aircraft in our flight equipment subject to operating leases by aircraft type as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
As of December 31, 2020, we had commitments to purchase 361 new aircraft, with an estimated aggregate purchase price (including adjustments for anticipated inflation) of $23.9 billion, for delivery through 2027 as shown in the following table. The table is subject to change based on Airbus and Boeing delivery delays. As noted below, we expect delivery delays for some aircraft deliveries in our orderbook. We remain in discussions with Boeing and Airbus to determine the extent and duration of delivery delays; however, we are not yet able to determine the full impact of the delivery delays.
(1) In addition to our commitments, as of December 31, 2020, we had options to acquire up to 25 Airbus A220 aircraft. If exercised, deliveries of these aircraft are scheduled to commence in 2023 and continue through 2028.
(2) Our Airbus A320/321neo aircraft orders include 40 long-range variants and 29 extra long-range variants.
(3) The table above reflects our estimate of future Boeing 737 MAX aircraft delivery delays based on information currently available to us.
Aircraft Delivery Delays
Pursuant to our purchase agreements with Boeing and Airbus for new aircraft, we and each manufacturer agree to contractual delivery dates for each aircraft ordered. These dates can change for a variety of reasons, and in the last several years manufacturing delays have significantly impacted our actual delivery dates. We have experienced delivery delays for certain of our Airbus orderbook aircraft, including the A320neo family aircraft and the A330neo aircraft. The worldwide grounding of the Boeing 737 MAX beginning in March 2019 has also resulted in material delivery delays of those aircraft from our orderbook. The FAA and EASA lifted their grounding order on November 18, 2020 and January 27, 2021, respectively. Although certain countries and regulatory entities have also approved return to service of the aircraft, the 737 MAX still remains grounded in many jurisdictions. Production of the 737 MAX resumed at a modest pace during the second quarter of 2020. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, deliveries resumed for markets where the aircraft had been approved to return to service. The grounding of the aircraft has caused airlines to adjust flight schedules, cancel flights, or keep older aircraft in service longer. We are unable to speculate as to when the grounding in the remaining countries and jurisdictions will be lifted; even after the grounding is lifted globally. We are currently in discussions with Boeing regarding the mitigation of damages resulting from the grounding of, and the delivery delays associated with the 737 MAX aircraft that we own or have on order.
As of December 31, 2020, we owned and leased 15 737 MAX aircraft and we had 106 737 MAX aircraft on order. With respect to the 15 737 MAX aircraft we own and lease, our airline customers are obligated to continue to make payments under the lease, irrespective of any difficulties in which the lessees may encounter, including an aircraft fleet grounding. However, the lease payments for some of our airline customers for these 15 737 MAX are in arrears.
We expect that if the grounding continues in certain countries and jurisdictions for an extended time, or if there are significant 737 MAX delivery delays even after the grounding is lifted, more of our customers may seek to cancel their lease contracts with us. As of February 22, 2021, we have canceled our orders for 20 737 MAX aircraft with Boeing. It is unclear at this point if we will cancel more of our 737 MAX delivery positions with Boeing or attempt to find replacement lessees. We are currently in discussions with Boeing regarding the mitigation of damages resulting from the grounding of and the delivery delays associated with the 737 MAX aircraft that we own and have on order.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, Boeing identified manufacturing defects on the 787 aircraft. As a result, Boeing has not delivered any 787 aircraft since October 2020. We are not yet able to determine the impact of the delivery delays from these manufacturing defects.
As a result of the aforementioned items occurring with both the 737 MAX and 787 aircraft, as of February 22, 2021 we anticipate that Boeing may continue to experience challenges in delivering these aircraft resulting in delivery delays on both the 737 MAX and 787 throughout 2021.
For several years, Airbus has also had delivery delays for certain of its aircraft, primarily the A320neo family aircraft and, to a lesser extent, A330neo aircraft. Airbus has told us to continue to expect several months of delivery delays relating to such aircraft scheduled to deliver through 2022. These delays also have impacted airline operations and the profitably of certain airlines.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has also caused delivery delays of aircraft in our orderbook. As discussed in further detail in the “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” section under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in numerous travel restrictions and business shutdowns or other operating limitations, including the temporary closure of final aircraft assembly facilities for each of Boeing and Airbus. Boeing and Airbus resumed production at these facilities during the second quarter of 2020 but with reduced output.
As a result of the manufacturing delays and the delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, many of our expected aircraft deliveries in 2020 were delayed. We are in ongoing discussions with Boeing and Airbus to determine the impact and duration of delivery delays. However, we are not yet able to determine the impact of the delivery delays, and as such, our expected delivery dates could materially change. While we have planned our capital expenditures for the remainder of 2021 and beyond based on currently expected delivery schedules, given the current industry circumstances, our aircraft delivery schedule could continue to be subject to material changes.
The aircraft purchase commitments discussed above also could be impacted by lease cancellation. Our leases typically provide that we and our airline customer each have a cancellation right related to certain aircraft delivery delays. Our purchase agreements with Boeing and Airbus also generally provide that we and the manufacturer each have cancellation rights that typically are parallel with our cancellation rights in our leases. Our leases and our purchase agreements with Boeing and Airbus generally provide for cancellation rights starting at one year after the original contractual delivery date, regardless of cause. As of February 22, 2021, we have canceled our orders for 20 737 MAX aircraft with Boeing. We believe that the majority of our 737 MAX aircraft and some of our 787 aircraft deliveries in our orderbook will be delayed more than 12 months, which would give us, our airline customers and Boeing the right to cancel these aircraft commitments.
The following table, which is subject to change based on Airbus and Boeing delivery delays, shows the number of new aircraft scheduled to be delivered as of December 31, 2020, along with the lease placements of such aircraft as of February 22, 2021. As noted above, we expect delivery delays for all aircraft deliveries in our orderbook. We remain in discussions with Boeing and Airbus to determine the extent and duration of delivery delays, but given the dynamic nature of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we are not yet able to determine the full impact of the delivery delays.
Aircraft Industry and Sources of Revenues
Our revenues are principally derived from operating leases with commercial airlines throughout the world. As of December 31, 2020, we had a globally diversified customer base of 112 airlines in 60 different countries, with over 95% of our business revenues from airlines domiciled outside of the U.S., and we anticipate that most of our revenues in the future will be generated from foreign customers.
Performance of the commercial airline industry is linked to global economic health and development, which may be negatively impacted by economic disruption, macroeconomic conditions and geopolitical and policy risks, among other factors. COVID-19 has caused significant disruption to the commercial airline industry resulting in a significant decline in air travel, negatively impacting airlines, aircraft manufacturers, and other related businesses. The International Air Transport Association (“IATA”) reported that passenger traffic fell 66% year-over-year in calendar year 2020, and 70% year-over-year for the month of December 2020, primarily due to COVID-19. While domestic and regional airline traffic have improved since the industry low in April 2020, passenger traffic remains challenged, especially with respect to international and business air travel demand. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, several COVID-19 vaccines had been approved for use in a number of countries. While widespread vaccination could reduce the impact of COVID-19 on the commercial airline industry, it is difficult to predict the pace of vaccinations and how long it will take the industry to recover.
We expect our airline customers to continue to experience financial difficulties through 2021 and potentially longer, which could result in additional requests for lease accommodations, requests to return aircraft early and lease defaults. We also expect more airline reorganizations, liquidations, or other forms of bankruptcies, which may include our aircraft customers and result in the early return of aircraft or changes in our lease terms. As of the date of this filing, we had 25 aircraft across six airlines which were subject to various forms of insolvency proceedings.
Approximately 73% of the net book value of our fleet are leased to flag carriers or airlines that have some form of governmental ownership; however, this does not guarantee our ability to collect contractual rent payments. We believe that having a large portion of the net book value of our fleet on lease with flag carriers or airlines with some form of governmental ownership, coupled with the overall quality of our aircraft and security deposits and maintenance reserves under our leases will help mitigate our customer default risk.
We expect the aviation industry to recover over time from the impact of COVID-19, and in the long-term we remain optimistic. While we believe some aircraft lessors may consolidate or cease operations as a result of the pandemic, we believe the aircraft leasing industry has remained resilient over time across a variety of global economic conditions and remain optimistic about the long-term fundamentals of our business. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, some airlines have accelerated their plans to retire older, less fuel-efficient aircraft that have higher maintenance costs in the current environment, and we anticipate that airlines will continue to accelerate the retirement of this type of aircraft, ultimately increasing demand for newer aircraft over time. We also anticipate that when airlines need to add new aircraft to their fleet, they will increasingly elect to lease aircraft instead of purchasing aircraft to reduce capital requirements and manage other operating expenses, and that we will benefit from that trend. A number of these trends have emerged in 2020 and are continuing in 2021.
We and airlines around the world have continued to experience delivery delays from Boeing and Airbus and been impacted by the 737 MAX grounding, as discussed above in “Our Fleet--Aircraft Delivery Delays.” Aircraft manufacturer delays and the 737 MAX grounding have impacted the growth of our company as well as the growth of our airline customers, passenger growth and airline profitability and we expect this to continue. As a result of continued manufacturing delays and the impact of COVID-19, we expect aircraft deliveries to be lower than previously anticipated for 2021 and delivery delays could potentially extend well into 2022 and beyond. We also anticipate lower aircraft sales compared to previous years because of the delivery delays.
As a result of various impacts of COVID-19 including border restrictions and other travel limitations particularly on long-haul intercontinental travel, we have seen further reduced demand for certain widebody aircraft in our fleet. Due to the grounding of the Boeing 737 MAX and other narrow body delivery delays, our fleet currently has a greater concentration of widebody aircraft than we typically target.
In October 2019, the U.S. government imposed a 10% tariff on new aircraft imported from Europe, including Airbus aircraft. In March 2020, the tariff was raised to 15%. Effective November 10, 2020, the European Union (“E.U.”) imposed a 15% tariff on new aircraft imported into the E.U. from the U.S., including Boeing aircraft. Our leases are primarily structured as triple net leases, whereby the lessee is responsible for all operating costs including taxes, insurance, aircraft maintenance and the costs associated with the importation of the aircraft. However, we are currently monitoring the impact of U.S. trade policies on our future Airbus deliveries to U.S. customers, and our Boeing deliveries to customers in the E.U and future demand for our orderbook aircraft.
We cannot predict what further actions may ultimately be taken with respect to tariffs or trade relations between the U.S. and U.S. trading partners. Accordingly, it is difficult to predict exactly how, and to what extent, such actions may impact our business, or the business of our lessees or aircraft manufacturers. Any unfavorable government policies on international trade, such as capital controls or tariffs, may affect the demand for aircraft, increase the cost of aircraft components, further delay production, impact the competitive position of certain aircraft manufacturers or prevent aircraft manufacturers from being able to sell aircraft in certain countries.
Given the impact of COVID-19 on our industry, it is unclear at this time how competition within the aircraft leasing industry will evolve or change in the coming months and what the corresponding impact on lease rates will be as a result of the change in the competitive landscape, COVID-19, trade matters, the aircraft delays from Airbus and Boeing or other items.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We finance the purchase of aircraft and our business with available cash balances, internally generated funds, including through aircraft sales and trading activity, and an array of financing products. We have structured ourselves with the goal to maintain investment-grade credit metrics and our debt financing strategy has focused on funding our business on an unsecured basis with primarily fixed-rate debt. Unsecured financing provides us with operational flexibility when selling or transitioning aircraft from one airline to another. We also have the ability to seek debt financing secured by our assets, as well as financings supported through the Export-Import Bank of the United States and other export credit agencies for future aircraft deliveries. Our access to a variety of financing alternatives including unsecured public bonds, private capital, bank debt, secured financings and preferred stock issuances serves as a key advantage in managing our liquidity. Aircraft delivery delays as a product of the COVID-19 pandemic, 737 MAX grounding and other manufacturer delays are expected to further reduce our aircraft investment and debt financing needs for the next six to twelve months and potentially beyond. We continue to monitor COVID-19 and its impact on our overall liquidity position and outlook.
We ended 2020 with total debt outstanding, net of discounts and issuance costs, of $16.5 billion compared to $13.6 billion in 2019. Our unsecured debt outstanding increased to $16.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $13.3 billion as of December 31, 2019. Our unsecured debt as a percentage of total debt increased to 98.2% as of December 31, 2020 from 96.6% as of December 31, 2019.
Our cash flows provided by operating activities decreased by 21.7% or $302.3 million to $1.1 billion in 2020, as compared to $1.4 billion in 2019. The decrease in our cash flow provided by operating activities is primarily due to an increase in deferred lease payments and lease restructurings as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our cash flow used in investing activities was $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted primarily from the purchase of aircraft, partially offset by proceeds from our aircraft sales and trading activity. Our cash flow provided by financing activities was $2.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted primarily from the issuance of unsecured notes partially offset by the repayment of outstanding debt. We expect the impact of COVID-19, including as a result of rent deferrals and other lease concessions made or that we may make in the future to our customers, will continue to have negative impact on cash flow from operating activities.
We ended 2020 with available liquidity of $7.7 billion which is comprised of unrestricted cash of $1.7 billion and undrawn balances under our unsecured revolving credit facilities of $6.0 billion. Our revolving credit facility does not condition our ability to borrow on the lack of a material adverse effect to us or the general economy. We believe that
we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy the operating requirements of our business through at least the next 12 months. A key component of the ongoing liquidity available to us is our revolving credit facility, for which the substantial majority of the commitments mature in 2023. Our revolving credit facility is currently syndicated across 50 financial institutions from around various regions of the world, diversifying our reliance on any individual lending institution.
We have a balanced approach to capital allocation based on the following priorities, ranked in order of importance: first, investing in modern, in-demand aircraft to profitably grow our core aircraft leasing business while maintaining strong fleet metrics and creating sustainable long-term shareholder value; second, maintaining our investment grade balance sheet utilizing unsecured debt as our primary form of financing; and finally, in lockstep with the aforementioned priorities, returning excess cash to shareholders through our dividend policy as well as regular evaluation of share repurchases, as appropriate.
The ultimate impact the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business, results of operations and financial condition over the next 12 months is currently uncertain and will depend on certain developments, including, among others, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our airline customers and the magnitude and duration of the pandemic. We currently believe that our cash on hand, current debt arrangements and general ability to access the capital markets will be sufficient to finance our operations and fund our debt service requirements and capital expenditures, including aircraft acquisition over the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance in all material respects with the covenants contained in our debt agreements. While a ratings downgrade would not result in a default under any of our debt agreements, it could adversely affect our ability to issue debt and obtain new financings, or renew existing financings, and it would increase the costs of certain financings.
Our liquidity plans are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including those described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Debt
Our debt financing was comprised of the following as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) This rate does not include the effect of upfront fees, facility fees, undrawn fees or amortization of debt discounts and issuance costs.
Senior unsecured notes (including Medium-Term Note Program)
As of December 31, 2020, we had $15.6 billion in aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes outstanding with remaining terms ranging from 0.17 years to 9.92 years and bearing interest at fixed rates ranging from 2.25% to 4.625%, with two notes bearing interest at a floating rate of LIBOR plus 1.125% and a floating rate of three-month LIBOR plus 0.67%. As of December 31, 2019, we had $12.4 billion in aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes outstanding bearing interest at fixed rates ranging from 2.125% to 4.85%, with two notes bearing interest at a floating rate of LIBOR plus 1.125% and a floating rate of three-month LIBOR plus 0.67%.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued $4.5 billion in aggregate principal amount of U.S. dollar denominated senior unsecured notes comprised of (i) $750.0 million due 2025 at a fixed rate of 2.30% (ii) $650.0 million due 2030 at a fixed rate of 3.00% (iii) $850.0 million due 2025 at a fixed rate of 3.375% (iv) $1.45 billion due 2026 at a fixed rate of 2.875% and (v) $750.0 million due 2030 at a fixed rate of 3.125%.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased $206.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Floating Rate Medium-Term Notes due 2021. The debt repurchases resulted in a gain of $14.0 million and is included in Aircraft sales, trading and other revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.
In January 2021, we issued $750.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Medium-Term Notes due 2024 bearing interest at a fixed rate of 0.70%.
Public senior notes (including Medium-Term Note Program). Of our $15.6 billion aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes outstanding as of December 31, 2020, approximately $15.5 billion of such notes have been registered with the SEC. All of our public senior notes may be redeemed at our option in part or in full at any time and from time to time prior to maturity at the redemption prices specified in such public senior notes. Our public senior notes also require us to offer to purchase all of the notes at a purchase price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest if a “change of control repurchase event” (as defined in the applicable indenture or supplemental indenture) occurs.
Each of the indentures and the applicable supplemental indentures governing these public senior notes requires us to comply with certain covenants, including restrictions on our ability to (i) incur liens on assets and (ii) merge, consolidate or transfer all or substantially all of our assets.
The covenants contained in all of the indentures and applicable supplemental indentures governing our public senior notes are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the applicable indenture. We believe that, as of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance in all material respects with all covenants contained in the indentures governing our public senior notes. In addition, the indentures and the applicable supplemental indentures governing all of our public senior notes outstanding as of December 31, 2020 also provide for customary events of default. If any event of default occurs, any amount then outstanding under the relevant indentures and supplemental indentures may immediately become due and payable. These events of default are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in such indentures and supplemental indentures.
On November 20, 2018, we established a Medium-Term Note Program, under which we may issue, from time to time, up to $15.0 billion of debt securities designated as our Medium-Term Notes, Series A. All of our public senior notes issuances in 2019 and 2020 consisted of Medium-Term Notes, Series A, issued under our Medium-Term Note Program. As of December 31, 2020, we have issued a total of $7.4 billion under our Medium-Term Note Program.
Private placement notes. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $75.0 million of notes that have not been registered with the SEC and are governed by a purchase agreement. Our private placement notes, like our public senior notes, may be redeemed at our option in part or in full at any time and from time to time prior to maturity at specified redemption prices. Our private placement notes also require us to offer to purchase all of the notes at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest if a “change in control” (as defined in the purchase agreement governing such notes) occurs.
The purchase agreement governing our private placement notes contains financial maintenance covenants relating to our consolidated net worth, consolidated unencumbered assets, interest coverage, and consolidated leverage ratio. In addition, the purchase agreement contains covenants that, among other things, (i) limit our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to alter their lines of business and engage in affiliate transactions; (ii) limit the ability of our subsidiaries to incur unsecured indebtedness; and (iii) limit our ability and the ability of each note guarantor subsidiary, if any, to consolidate, merge or sell all or substantially all of its assets. These covenants are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the purchase agreement, including the suspension of the financial maintenance covenant relating to interest coverage when the private placement notes governed by such purchase agreement have an “investment grade rating” (as defined in the purchase agreement). As of December 31, 2020, all of our private placement notes were investment grade rated as defined in the purchase agreement. We believe that, as of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance in all material respects with all covenants contained in the purchase agreement governing our private placement notes.
The purchase agreement governing our private placement notes also provide for customary events of default. If any event of default occurs, any amount then outstanding under the purchase agreement may immediately become due and payable. These events of default are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the purchase agreements.
Unsecured term financings
From time to time, we enter into unsecured term facilities. During 2020, we entered into a $50.0 million term facility with a term of one year and bearing interest at a floating rate of LIBOR plus 1.00%. During 2020, we also entered into an agreement to increase our $600.0 million term facility by $30.0 million to an aggregate principal amount of $630.0 million, with a term of three years and bearing interest at a floating rate of LIBOR plus 1.125%.
The outstanding balance on our unsecured term facilities as of December 31, 2020 was $811.6 million, bearing interest at fixed rates ranging from 2.75% to 3.50% and four facilities bearing interest at floating rates ranging from LIBOR plus 0.95% to LIBOR plus 1.125%. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining maturities of all unsecured term facilities ranged from approximately 0.13 years to approximately 3.75 years. As of December 31, 2019, the outstanding balance on our unsecured term facilities was $883.1 million.
Unsecured revolving credit facility
We have a senior unsecured revolving credit facility governed by a second amended and restated credit agreement, dated May 5, 2014 (as amended, modified and supplemented thereafter) (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we increased the aggregate capacity of the Revolving Credit Facility by $250.0 million. On May 5, 2020, commitments totaling $92.7 million of the Revolving Credit Facility matured. As of December 31, 2020, lenders held revolving commitments totaling approximately $5.8 billion that mature on May 5, 2023, commitments totaling $245.0 million that mature on May 5, 2022, and commitments totaling $5.0 million that mature on May 5, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the unsecured revolving credit facility provides us with financing capacity of up to $6.0 billion subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein.
As of December 31, 2020, borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility will generally bear interest at either (i) LIBOR plus a margin of 1.05% per year or (ii) an alternative base rate plus a margin of 0.05% per year, subject, in each case, to increases or decreases based on declines in the credit ratings for our debt. We are required to pay a facility fee of 0.20% per year (subject to increases or decreases based on declines in the credit ratings of our debt) in respect of total commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility are used to finance our working capital needs in the ordinary course of business and for other general corporate purposes.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any amounts outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility. The total amount outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility was $20.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
The Revolving Credit Facility provides for certain covenants, including covenants that limit our subsidiaries’ ability to incur, create, or assume certain unsecured indebtedness, and our subsidiaries’ abilities to engage in certain
mergers, consolidations, and asset sales. The Revolving Credit Facility also requires us to comply with certain financial maintenance covenants including a maximum consolidated leverage ratio, minimum consolidated shareholders’ equity, and minimum consolidated unencumbered assets, as well as an interest coverage test that is suspended when the Revolving Credit Facility or certain of our other indebtedness is rated investment grade (as defined in the Revolving Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the Company maintained the needed investment grade rating for suspension of this covenant. In addition, the Revolving Credit Facility contains customary events of default. In the case of an event of default, the lenders may terminate the commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility and require immediate repayment of all outstanding borrowings.
In February 2021, we entered into an agreement to increase our revolving unsecured bank commitments by $200.0 million, which mature on May 5, 2023, to approximately $6.2 billion.
Secured term financings
We fund some aircraft purchases through secured term financings. Our various consolidated entities will borrow through secured bank facilities to purchase an aircraft. The aircraft are then leased by our entities to airlines. We guarantee the obligations of the entities under certain of the loan agreements. The loans may be secured by a pledge of the shares of the entities, the aircraft, the lease receivables, security deposits, maintenance reserves or a combination thereof.
The secured term facilities contain customary covenants for financings of these types, including covenants that limit the borrowers’ actions to those of special purpose entities engaged in the ownership and leasing of a particular aircraft and restrict their ability to incur, create, or assume certain indebtedness, to incur or assume certain liens, to purchase, hold or acquire certain investments, to declare or make certain dividends and distributions, and to engage in certain mergers, consolidations and asset sales. The secured term facilities also contain limitations on our ability to transfer the equity interests of such subsidiaries or to incur, create or assume liens on such equity interests or the collateral securing such secured term facilities. In addition, the secured term facilities contain customary events of default for such financings. In the case of an event of default, the lenders may require immediate repayment of all outstanding loans. These provisions are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the loan agreements governing the secured term facilities. We believe, as of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance in all material respects with the covenants contained in our secured term facilities.
As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on our secured term facilities was $276.0 million and we had pledged 11 aircraft as collateral with a net book value of $596.6 million. The outstanding balance under our secured term facilities as of December 31, 2020 was comprised of a $49.3 million fixed rate facility with an interest rate of 2.36% and $226.7 million of floating rate debt with interest rates ranging from three-month LIBOR plus 0.84% to one-month LIBOR plus 2.00%. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining maturities of all secured term facilities ranged from approximately 0.48 years to approximately 8.84 years.
As of December 31, 2019, the outstanding balance on our secured term facilities was $428.8 million and we had pledged 14 aircraft as collateral with a net book value of $857.1 million. The outstanding balance under our secured term facilities as of December 31, 2019 was comprised of $54.6 million fixed rate debt with an interest rate of 2.36% and $374.3 million floating rate debt, with interest rates ranging from LIBOR plus 0.80% to LIBOR plus 2.50%.
Export credit financings
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $25.0 million and $31.6 million in government guaranteed export credit financing outstanding, respectively.
In March 2013, we issued $76.5 million in secured notes due 2024 guaranteed by the Export-Import Bank of the United States. The notes mature on August 15, 2024 and bear interest at a rate of 1.617% per annum. We had one aircraft that serves as collateral for the notes with a net book value of $32.1 million and $33.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Preferred equity
On March 5, 2019, we issued 10,000,000 shares of 6.150% Fixed-to-Floating Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A (the “Series A Preferred Stock”), $0.01 par value, with a liquidation preference of $25.00 per share. We will pay dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock only when, as and if declared by the board of directors. Dividends accrue, on a non-cumulative basis, on the stated amount of $25.00 per share at a rate per annum equal to: (i) 6.150% during the first five years and payable quarterly in arrears beginning on June 15, 2019, and (ii) three-month LIBOR plus a spread of 3.65% per annum from March 15, 2024, reset quarterly and payable quarterly in arrears beginning on June 15, 2024.
We may redeem shares of the Series A Preferred Stock at our option, in whole or in part, from time to time, on or after March 15, 2024, for cash at a redemption price equal to $25.00 per share, plus any declared and unpaid dividends to, but excluding, the redemption date, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. We may also redeem shares of the Series A Preferred Stock at our option under certain other limited conditions.
We paid a cash dividend of $0.384375 per share on our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock on each of March 15, 2020, June 15, 2020, September 15, 2020, and December 15, 2020.
Potential Impact of LIBOR Transition
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.2 billion of floating rate debt outstanding that used LIBOR as the applicable reference rate to calculate the interest on such debt. Additionally, our Series A Preferred Stock will in the future accrue dividends at a floating rate determined by reference to LIBOR, if available. The Chief Executive of the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (the “FCA”), which regulates LIBOR, has announced that the FCA will no longer persuade or compel banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after 2021. However, for U.S dollar LIBOR, it now appears that the relevant date may be deferred to June 30, 2023 for certain tenors (including overnight and one, three, six and 12 months), at which time the LIBOR administrator has indicated that it intends to cease publication of U.S. dollar LIBOR. Despite this potential deferral, the LIBOR administrator has advised that no new contracts using U.S. dollar LIBOR should be entered into after December 31, 2021. These actions indicate that the continuation of U.S. LIBOR on the current basis cannot and will not be guaranteed after June 30, 2023. Moreover, it is possible that U.S. LIBOR will be discontinued or modified prior to June 30, 2023. The U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have begun publishing a Secured Overnight Funding Rate and a reformed Sterling Overnight Index Average, respectively, which are intended to serve as alternative reference rates to LIBOR. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of any such changes, any establishment of alternative reference rates or any other reforms to LIBOR that may be implemented in the United Kingdom or elsewhere.
Furthermore, due to the uncertainty surrounding the discontinuation of LIBOR and the effects resulting therefrom, financial market participants have yet to establish standard fallback provisions governing the calculation of floating rate interest and dividends in the event LIBOR is unavailable. The lack of a market practice and inconsistency in fallback provisions is reflected across our floating rate debt and Series A Preferred Stock and the discontinuation of LIBOR could lead to unexpected outcomes that may vary between our various debt and equity securities that reference LIBOR to determine the rate in which interest or dividends, as applicable, accrue. For example, if LIBOR is discontinued, the various fallback provisions contained in our floating rate debt agreements could lead to such debt bearing interest at, among other things, a rate of interest equal to the interest rate last in effect for which LIBOR was determinable, a floating rate determined in reference to a predetermined fallback reference rate or an alternative reference rate to be agreed upon by the parties to such agreement, and a rate of interest representative of the cost to applicable lenders of funding their participation in the debt.
If the rate used to calculate interest on our outstanding floating rate debt that currently uses LIBOR and our Series A Preferred Stock were to increase by 1.0% either as a result of an increase in LIBOR or the result of the use of an alternative reference rate determined under the fallback provisions in the applicable debt if LIBOR is discontinued, we would expect to incur additional interest expense on such indebtedness as of December 31, 2020 of approximately $11.7 million on an annualized basis. Further, if LIBOR is discontinued and there is no acceptable alternative reference rate, some of our floating rate debt, including our senior unsecured notes issued under our Medium-Term Note Program,
may effectively become fixed rate debt. As a result, the cost of this debt would increase to us if and as interest rates decreased.
While we do not expect the potential impact of any LIBOR transition to have a material effect on our financial results based on our currently outstanding debt, uncertainty as to the nature of potential changes to LIBOR, fallback provisions, alternative reference rates or other reforms could adversely impact our interest expense on our floating rate debt that currently uses LIBOR as the applicable reference rate and our Series A Preferred Stock. In addition, any alternative reference rates to LIBOR may result in interest or dividend payments that do not correlate over time with the payments that would have been made on our indebtedness or Series A Preferred Stock, respectively, if LIBOR was available in its current form. Further, the discontinuance or modification of LIBOR and uncertainty of an alternative reference rate may result in the increase in the cost of future indebtedness, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, cash flow and results of operations. We intend to closely monitor the financial markets and the use of fallback provisions and alternative reference rates in anticipation of the discontinuance or modification of LIBOR by the end of 2021.
Credit Ratings
Our investment-grade corporate and long-term debt credit ratings help us to lower our cost of funds and broaden our access to attractively priced capital. Our long-term debt financing strategy is focused on continuing to raise unsecured debt in the global bank and investment grade capital markets.
The following table summarizes our current credit ratings:
While a ratings downgrade would not result in a default under any of our debt agreements, it could adversely affect our ability to issue debt and obtain new financings, or renew existing financings, and it would increase the cost of our financings.
Results of Operations
(1) Adjusted net income before income taxes (defined as net income available to common stockholders excluding the effects of certain non-cash items, one-time or non-recurring items, such as settlement expense, net of recoveries, that are not expected to continue in the future and certain other items), adjusted pre-tax profit margin (defined as adjusted net income before income taxes divided by total revenues, excluding insurance recoveries), adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes (defined as adjusted net income before income taxes plus assumed conversions divided by the weighted average diluted common shares outstanding) and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity (defined as adjusted net income before income taxes divided by average common shareholders’ equity) are measures of operating performance that are not defined by GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income available to common stockholders, pre-tax profit margin, earnings per share, diluted earnings per share and pre-tax return on common equity, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted net income before income taxes, adjusted pre-tax profit margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity are presented as supplemental disclosure because management believes they provide useful information on our earnings from ongoing operations.
Management and our board of directors use adjusted net income before income taxes, adjusted pre-tax profit margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity to assess our consolidated financial
and operating performance. Management believes these measures are helpful in evaluating the operating performance of our ongoing operations and identifying trends in our performance, because they remove the effects of certain non-cash items, one-time or non-recurring items that are not expected to continue in the future and certain other items from our operating results. Adjusted net income before income taxes, adjusted pre-tax profit margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity, however, should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our operating results or cash flows as reported under GAAP. Adjusted net income before income taxes, adjusted pre-tax profit margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity do not reflect our cash expenditures or changes in our cash requirements for our working capital needs. In addition, our calculation of adjusted net income before income taxes, adjusted pre-tax profit margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity may differ from the adjusted net income before income taxes, adjusted pre-tax profit margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax return on common equity, or analogous calculations of other companies in our industry, limiting their usefulness as a comparative measure.
The following tables show the reconciliation of net income available to common stockholders to adjusted net income before income taxes and adjusted pre-tax profit margin (in thousands, except percentages):
The following table shows the reconciliation of net income available to common stockholders to adjusted diluted earnings per share before income taxes (in thousands, except share and per share amounts):
The following table shows the reconciliation of net income available to common stockholders to adjusted pre-tax return on common equity (in thousands, except percentages):
2020 Compared to 2019
Rental revenue
As of December 31, 2020, we owned 332 aircraft, with a net book value of $20.4 billion, and recorded $1.95 billion in rental revenue for the year then ended, which included amortization expense related to initial direct costs, net of overhaul revenue, of $31.9 million. In the prior year, as of December 31, 2019, we owned 292 aircraft with a net book value of $18.7 billion and recorded $1.92 billion in rental revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019, which included overhaul revenue, net of amortization of initial direct costs, of $11.1 million. The increase in rental revenue was primarily due to the increase in net book value of our operating lease portfolio to $20.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $18.7 billion as of December 31, 2019, partially offset by approximately $49.4 million of rental revenue we were not able to recognize because collection was not reasonably assured for certain of our leases and the impact of lease restructurings entered into during the period, which decreased our total revenue by approximately $49.2 million for the year ending December 31, 2020.
Aircraft sales, trading, and other revenue
Aircraft sales, trading, and other revenue totaled $68.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $31.1 million was related to the sale of eight aircraft and lease termination fees recognized during the year then ended. In addition, we recorded $14.0 million in other revenue related to the repurchase of $206.1 million in aggregate principal amount of our Floating Rate Medium-Term Notes due in 2021. Aircraft sales, trading and other revenue totaled $100.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $67.8 million was related to the sale of 30 aircraft from our operating lease portfolio and lease termination fees recognized during 2019. The decrease in our aircraft sales, trading, and other revenue for the year 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to fewer aircraft sales.
Interest expense
Interest expense totaled $474.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $434.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in our aggregate debt balance driven by the growth of our fleet and the increase in our liquidity position, partially offset by the decrease in our composite interest rate. We ended the year with an available liquidity balance of $7.7 billion. We expect that our interest expense will increase as our average debt balance outstanding continues to increase. Interest expense will also be impacted by changes in our composite cost of funds.
Depreciation expense
We recorded $780.7 million in depreciation expense of flight equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $702.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in depreciation expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the growth of our fleet.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
We recorded selling, general, and administrative expenses of $95.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $123.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Selling, general, and administrative expense as a percentage of total revenue decreased to 4.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 6.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses is primarily due to lower transactional costs incurred and a decrease in operating expenses during the period.
Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we reported an effective tax rate of 20.2%.
Net income available to common stockholders
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported consolidated net income available to common stockholders of $500.9 million, or $4.39 per diluted share, compared to a consolidated net income available to common stockholders of $575.2 million, or $5.09 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Despite the continued growth of our fleet, our net income available to common stockholders decreased for the year 2020 as compared to 2019, due to the decrease in our revenues as described above and an increase in depreciation and interest expense, partially offset by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Adjusted net income before income taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded adjusted net income before income taxes of $692.0 million, or $6.07 per diluted share, compared to an adjusted net income before income taxes of $781.2 million, or $6.91 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted net income before income taxes decreased for year 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in total revenues as described above and an increase in depreciation and interest expense, partially offset by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Adjusted net income before income taxes is a measure of financial and operational performance that is not defined by GAAP. See Note 3 in “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of adjusted net income before income taxes as a non-GAAP measure and a reconciliation of this measure to net income.
2019 Compared to 2018
Rental revenue
As of December 31, 2019, we owned 292 aircraft, with a net book value of $18.7 billion, and recorded $1.9 billion in rental revenue for the year then ended, which included overhaul revenue, net of amortization of initial direct costs, of $11.1 million. In the prior year, as of December 31, 2018, we owned 275 aircraft with a net book value of $15.7 billion and recorded $1.6 billion in rental revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018, which included overhaul revenue, net of amortization of initial direct costs, of $0.3 million. The increase in rental revenue was primarily due to the increase in net book value of our operating lease portfolio to $18.7 billion as of December 31, 2019 from $15.7 billion as of December 31, 2018.
Aircraft sales, trading, and other revenue
Aircraft sales, trading, and other revenue totaled $100.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $48.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $52.2 million in gains from the sale of 30 aircraft from our operating lease portfolio. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded $28.5 million in gains from the sale of 15 aircraft from our operating lease portfolio. The increase in aircraft sales, trading and other revenue was also due to an increase in forfeitures of security deposits and servicing fee revenue from our managed fleet.
Interest expense
Interest expense totaled $434.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $342.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily due to an increase in our average outstanding debt balances partially offset by a decrease in our composite cost of funds. We expect that our interest expense will increase as our average debt balance outstanding continues to increase. In addition, interest expense will also be impacted by changes in our composite cost of funds.
Depreciation expense
We recorded $702.8 million in depreciation expense of flight equipment for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $582.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in depreciation expense for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily attributable to the continued growth of our fleet.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
We recorded selling, general, and administrative expenses of $123.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $97.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Selling, general, and administrative expense as a percentage of total revenue increased to 6.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 5.8% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased due in part to increased transactional expenses incurred during 2019. As we continue to add new aircraft to our portfolio, we expect over the long-term, selling, general, and administrative expense to continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenue.
Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 we reported an effective tax rate of 20.2%.
Net income available to common stockholders
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we reported consolidated net income available to common stockholders of $575.2 million, or $5.09 per diluted share, compared to a consolidated net income available to common stockholders of $510.8 million, or $4.60 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to the continued growth in our fleet and an increase in our aircraft sales, trading and other activity, partially offset by increases in our interest expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Adjusted net income before income taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded adjusted net income before income taxes of $781.2 million, or $6.91 per diluted share, compared to an adjusted net income before income taxes of $690.3 million, or $6.20 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to the continued growth in our fleet and an increase in our aircraft sales, trading and other activity, partially offset by increases in our interest expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Adjusted net income before income taxes is a measure of financial and operational performance that is not defined by GAAP. See Note 3 in “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of adjusted net income before income taxes as a non-GAAP measure and a reconciliation of this measure to net income.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
(1) Future interest payments on floating rate debt are estimated using floating rates in effect at December 31, 2020.
(2) Purchase commitments reflect our estimate of future Boeing and Airbus aircraft deliveries based on information currently available to us. The actual delivery dates of such aircraft and expected time for payment of such aircraft may differ from our estimates and could be further impacted by ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the length of the 737 MAX grounding in certain jurisdictions and the pace at which Boeing can deliver aircraft following the lifting of the 737 MAX grounding, among other factors. Purchase commitments include only the costs of aircraft in our committed orderbook and do not include costs of aircraft that we have the option to purchase or have the right to purchase through memorandums of understanding or letters of intent.
(3) Due to the expected aircraft delivery delays, we expect approximately $5.2 billion of our purchase commitments will be subject to cancellation, at our option, by the time of delivery.
The above table does not include any dividends we may pay on our Series A Preferred Stock or common stock.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not established any unconsolidated entities for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We have, however, from time to time established subsidiaries or trusts for the purpose of leasing aircraft or facilitating borrowing arrangements which are consolidated.
We have non-controlling interests in two investment funds in which we own 9.5% of the equity of each fund. We account for our interest in these funds under the equity method of accounting due to our level of influence and involvement in the funds. Also, we manage aircraft that we have sold through our Thunderbolt platform. In connection with the sale of these aircraft portfolios through our Thunderbolt platform, we hold non-controlling interests of approximately 5.0% in two entities. These investments are accounted for under the cost method of accounting.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe the following critical accounting policies can have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial position, and financial statement disclosures, and may require subjective and complex estimates and judgments.
Lease revenue
We lease flight equipment principally under operating leases and report rental income ratably over the life of each lease. Rentals received, but unearned, under the lease agreements are recorded in Rentals received in advance on our Consolidated Balance Sheets until earned. The difference between the rental income recorded and the cash received under the provisions of the lease is included in Lease receivables, as a component of Other assets on our Consolidated
Balance Sheets. An allowance for doubtful accounts will be recognized for past-due rentals based on management’s assessment of collectability. Our management team monitors all lessees with past due lease payments (if any) and discusses relevant operational and financial issues facing those lessees with our marketing executives in order to determine an appropriate allowance for doubtful accounts. In addition, if collection is not reasonably assured, we will not recognize rental income for amounts due under the applicable lease contracts and will recognize revenue for such lessees on a cash basis. Should a lessee’s credit quality deteriorate, we may be required to record an allowance for doubtful accounts and/or stop recognizing revenue until cash is received.
Our aircraft lease agreements typically contain provisions which require the lessee to make additional contingent rental payments based on either the usage of the aircraft, measured on the basis of hours or cycles flown per month (a cycle is one take-off and landing), or calendar-based time (“Maintenance Reserves”). These payments represent contributions to the cost of major future maintenance events (“Qualifying Events”) associated with the aircraft and typically cover major airframe structural checks, engine overhauls, the replacement of life limited parts contained in each engine, landing gear overhauls and overhauls of the auxiliary power unit. These Maintenance Reserves are generally collected monthly based on reports of usage by the lessee or collected as fixed monthly rates.
In accordance with our lease agreements, Maintenance Reserves are subject to reimbursement to the lessee upon the occurrence of a Qualifying Event. The reimbursable amount is capped by the amount of Maintenance Reserves payments we receive, net of previous reimbursements. We are only required to reimburse for Qualifying Events during the lease term. We are not required to reimburse for routine maintenance or additional maintenance costs incurred during a Qualifying Event. All amounts of Maintenance Reserves unclaimed by the lessee at the end of the lease term are retained by us.
We record as rental revenue the portion of Maintenance Reserves that we are virtually certain we will not reimburse to the lessee as a component of “Rental of flight equipment” in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Maintenance Reserves which we may be required to reimburse to the lessee are reflected in our overhaul reserve liability, as a component of “Security deposits and maintenance reserves on flight equipment leases” in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Estimating when we are virtually certain that Maintenance Reserves payments will not be reimbursed requires judgments to be made as to the timing and cost of future maintenance events. In order to determine virtual certainty with respect to this contingency, our Technical Asset Management department analyzes the terms of the lease, utilizes available cost estimates published by the equipment manufacturers, and thoroughly evaluates an airline’s Maintenance Planning Document (“MPD”). The MPD describes the required inspections and the frequency of those inspections. Our Technical Asset Management department utilizes this information, combined with their cumulative industry experience, to determine when Qualifying Events are expected to occur for each relevant component of the aircraft, and translates this information into a determination of how much we will ultimately be required to reimburse to the lessee. We record the revenue from Maintenance Reserves as the aircraft is operated when we determine that a Qualifying Event will occur outside the non-cancellable lease term or after we have collected Maintenance Reserves equal to the amount that we expect to reimburse to the lessee as the aircraft is operated.
Should such estimates be inaccurate, we may be required to reverse revenue previously recognized. In addition, we will stop recognizing revenue from the Maintenance Reserves of a particular lease if we can no longer make accurate estimates with respect to such lease.
Any Maintenance Reserves or end of lease payments collected that were not reimbursed to the lessee during the term of the lease for a Qualifying Event are recognized as rental revenues at the end of the lease. Leases that contain provisions which require us to pay a portion of a lessee's costs associated with a Qualifying Event based on the usage of the aircraft and major life-limited components that were incurred prior to the current lease are recorded as lease incentives based on estimated payments we expect to pay the lessee. These lease incentives are amortized as a reduction of rental revenues over the term of the lease.
All of our lease agreements are triple net leases whereby the lessee is responsible for all taxes, insurance, and aircraft maintenance. In the future, we may incur repair and maintenance expenses for off-lease aircraft. We recognize all such expenditures as Selling, general, and administrative expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Lessee-specific modifications such as those related to modifications of the aircraft cabin are expected to be capitalized as initial direct costs and amortized over the term of the lease into rental revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Flight equipment
Flight equipment under operating lease is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Purchases, major additions and modifications, and interest on deposits during the construction phase are capitalized. We generally depreciate passenger aircraft on a straight-line basis over a 25-year life from the date of manufacture to a 15% residual value. Changes in the assumption of useful lives or residual values for aircraft could have a significant impact on our results of operations and financial condition. At the time flight equipment is retired or sold, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the related accounts and the difference, net of proceeds, is recorded as a gain or loss.
Major aircraft improvements and modifications incurred during an off-lease period are capitalized and depreciated over the remaining life of the flight equipment. In addition, costs paid by us for scheduled maintenance and overhauls are capitalized and depreciated over a period to the next scheduled maintenance or overhaul event. Miscellaneous repairs are expensed when incurred.
Our management team evaluates on a quarterly basis the need to perform an impairment test whenever facts or circumstances indicate a potential impairment has occurred. An assessment is performed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an aircraft may not be recoverable. Recoverability of an aircraft’s carrying amount is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the aircraft to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the aircraft. The undiscounted cash flows consist of cash flows from currently contracted leases, future projected lease rates, and estimated residual or scrap values for each aircraft. We develop assumptions used in the recoverability analysis based on our knowledge of active lease contracts, current and future expectations of the global demand for a particular aircraft type, and historical experience in the aircraft leasing market and aviation industry, as well as information received from third-party industry sources. The factors considered in estimating the undiscounted cash flows are affected by changes in future periods due to changes in contracted lease rates, economic conditions, technology, and airline demand for a particular aircraft type. In the event that an aircraft does not meet the recoverability test and the aircraft’s carrying amount falls below estimated values from third-party industry sources, the aircraft will be recorded at fair value in accordance with our Fair Value Policy, resulting in an impairment charge. Deterioration of future lease rates and the residual values of our aircraft could result in impairment charges which could have a significant impact on our results of operations and financial condition.
We record flight equipment at fair value if we determine the carrying value may not be recoverable. We principally use the income approach to measure the fair value of aircraft. The income approach is based on the present value of cash flows from contractual lease agreements and projected future lease payments, including contingent rentals, net of expenses, which extend to the end of the aircraft’s economic life in its highest and best use configuration, as well as a disposition value based on expectations of market participants. These valuations are considered Level 3 valuations, as the valuations contain significant non-observable inputs.