Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (see Part I, Item 1A) for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by any forward-looking statement contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $266.8 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses as we continue our development of, and seek marketing approvals for, our product candidates, prepare for and begin the commercialization of any approved products, and add infrastructure and personnel to support our product development efforts and operations as a public company in the United States.
As a clinical-stage company, our revenues, expenses and results of operations are likely to fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We believe that period-to-period comparisons of our results of operations should not be relied upon as indicative of our future performance.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $251.3 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our consolidated statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Revenue
We generate revenue from the receipt of royalty revenue, upfront or license fees and milestone payments. License agreements with commercial partners generally include nonrefundable upfront fees and milestone payments, the receipt of which is dependent upon the achievement of specified development, regulatory or commercial milestone events, as well as royalties on product sales of licensed products, if and when such product sales occur, and payments for pharmaceutical ingredient or related procurement services. For these agreements, management applies judgment in the allocation of total agreement consideration to the performance obligations on a reliable basis that reasonably reflects the selling prices that might be expected to be achieved in stand-alone transactions. For additional information about our revenue recognition, refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized revenue of $8.3 million and $9.6 million, respectively, related to our agreement with EA Pharma. We expect that any future revenue recognized under our license agreement with EA Pharma will fluctuate from quarter to quarter and year to year as a result of royalties for the period from EA Pharma, as well as the uncertain timing of future milestone payments, if any.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation) for employees in research and development functions, costs associated with nonclinical and clinical development services, including clinical trials and related manufacturing costs, third-party contract research
organizations, or CROs, and related services and other outside costs, including fees for third-party professional services such as consultants. Our nonclinical studies and clinical studies are performed by CROs. We expect to continue to focus our research and development efforts on nonclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase for the foreseeable future.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs such as fees paid to CROs and others in connection with our nonclinical and clinical development activities and related manufacturing. We do not allocate employee costs or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Successful development of our current and potential future product candidates is highly uncertain. Completion dates and costs for our programs can vary significantly by product candidate and are difficult to predict. As a result, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs we will incur in connection with development of any of our product candidates. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into licensing, collaboration and similar arrangements with respect to current or potential future product candidates, the success of research and development programs and our assessments of commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation) for our executive, finance and other administrative employees. In addition, general and administrative expenses include fees for third-party professional services, including consulting, information technology, legal and accounting services and other corporate expenses and allocated overhead.
Other Operating (Income), Expense
Other operating (income), expense consists primarily of foreign currency exchange gains or losses associated with revaluation of intercompany loans.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of non-cash interest expense recorded in connection with the sale of future royalties, related to sales of elobixibat in Japan in addition to interest expense associated with our note payable. In addition, interest expense, net includes interest income associated with our interest-bearing cash and cash equivalents.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate them on an ongoing basis. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates and judgments. In addition, our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary if new accounting standards are enacted that are applicable to our business.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that our accounting policies relating to revenue recognition, research and development expenses and accounting for the liability related to sale of future
royalties are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. We have identified these policies as critical because they both are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to make judgments and estimates on matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in future periods. For more information regarding these policies, you should refer to Note 1 of our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from the receipt of upfront or license fees, milestone payments, royalties, and payments for pharmaceutical ingredient or related procurement services that are made pursuant to license agreements or related supply agreements. Substantially all of our revenue to date has been derived from our license agreement with EA Pharma and a now-terminated license agreement with Ferring International Center S.A., or Ferring.
We enter into licensing agreements which are within the scope of ASC 606, under which we may exclusively license rights to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements may include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement of certain costs; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must use significant judgment to determine: (a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above and (b) the transaction price under step (iii) above. We use our judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties, should be included in the transaction price as described further below. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied.
Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of the Company or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, the Company reevaluates the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, the Company recognizes revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation) for employees in research and development functions, costs associated with nonclinical and clinical development services, including clinical trials and related manufacturing costs, third-party contract research organizations, or CROs, and related services and other outside costs, including fees for third-party professional services such as consultants. Our nonclinical studies and clinical studies are performed by CROs. We expect to continue to focus our research and development efforts on nonclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase for the foreseeable future.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs such as fees paid to CROs and others in connection with our nonclinical and clinical development activities and related manufacturing. We do not allocate employee costs or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Successful development of our current and potential future product candidates is highly uncertain. Completion dates and costs for our programs can vary significantly by product candidate and are difficult to predict. As a result, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs we will incur in connection with development of any of our product candidates. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into licensing, collaboration and similar arrangements with respect to current or potential future product candidates, the success of research and development programs and our assessments of commercial potential.
Monetization of Future Royalties
In December 2017, we entered into a royalty interest acquisition agreement (RIAA) with HealthCare Royalty Partners III, L.P. (HCR) pursuant to which it sold to HCR the right to receive all royalties from sales in Japan and sales milestones achieved from any covered territory potentially payable to us under the Agreement, up to a specified maximum “cap” amount of $78.8 million, based on the funds we received from HCR. In January 2018, we received $44.5 million from HCR, net of certain transaction expenses, under the RIAA. On June 8, 2020, the parties entered into an amendment to the RIAA pursuant to which HCR agreed to pay us an additional $14.8 million, net of certain transactions expenses, in exchange for the elimination of the (i) $78.8 million cap amount on HCR’s rights to receive royalties on sales in Japan and sales milestones for elobixibat in certain other territories that may become payable by EA Pharma and (ii) the $15.0 million payable to us if a specified sales milestone is achieved for elobixibat in Japan. We are obligated to make royalty interest payments to HCR under the RIAA only to the extent it receives future Japanese royalties, sales milestones or other specified payments from EA Pharma. Although we sold our rights to receive royalties from the sales of elobixibat in Japan, as a result of its ongoing involvement in the cash flows related to these royalties, we will continue to account for these royalties as revenue. Upon receipt of the payments from HCR we recorded net cash totaling $59.3 million as a liability related to sale of future royalties (royalty obligation). The royalty obligation will be amortized using the effective interest rate method.
We record estimated royalties due for the current period in accrued other expenses until the payment is received from EA Pharma at which time we then remit payment to HCR. In order to determine the accretion of the royalty obligation, we are required to estimate the total amount of future royalty payments to be received and submitted to HCR. The sum of these amounts less the $59.3 million proceeds we received will be recorded as interest expense over the life of the royalty obligation. At December 31, 2020, our estimate of total interest expense resulted in an annual effective interest rate of approximately 19.0%.
We periodically assess the estimated royalty payments to HCR and to the extent such payments are greater or less than our initial estimates or the timing of such payments is materially different than its original estimates, we will prospectively adjust the accretion of interest on the royalty obligation. There are a number of factors that could materially affect the amount and the timing of royalty payments, most of which are not within our control. Such factors
include, but are not limited to, the rate of elobixibat prescriptions, the number of doses administered, the introduction of competing products, manufacturing or other delays, patent protection, adverse events that result in governmental health authority imposed restrictions on the use of the drug products, significant changes in foreign exchange rates as the royalties remitted to HCR are in U.S. dollars while sales of elobixibat are in Japanese yen, and sales never achieving forecasted numbers, which would result in reduced royalty payments and reduced non-cash interest expense over the life of the royalty obligation. To the extent future royalties result in an amount less than the liability, we are not obligated to fund any such shortfall.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Result of Operations
Revenue
Revenue was $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with revenue of $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.3 million. The decrease in revenue primarily relates to a sales-based milestone achieved in 2019 offset by higher sales-based royalties earned in 2020.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $76.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $45.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $31.2 million. The higher research and development expenses for the 2020 period were principally due to personnel expenses as we continue to increase our headcount and program activities. The increase in program activities related primarily to odevixibat for regulatory submissions in PFIC,
the initiation of clinical trials for additional indications for biliary atresia and Alagille syndrome, and preclinical programs.
The following table summarizes our principal product development programs and the out-of-pocket third-party expenses incurred with respect to each clinical-stage product candidate and our preclinical programs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1) Other project costs are leveraged across multiple programs.
(2) Other costs include facility, supply, consultant and overhead costs that support multiple programs.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $19.5 million. The increase is attributable to personnel and related expenses as we continue to increase our headcount, and commercialization readiness activity.
Other operating (income) expense, net
Other operating (income) expense, net totaled $14.6 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $2.2 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, a difference of $16.9 million. The difference primarily relates to changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the two periods.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net totaled $11.4 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a difference of $6.1 million. The difference was principally attributable to higher non-cash interest expense recorded in connection with the sale of future royalties, related to sales of elobixibat in Japan in addition to interest expense associated with our note payable offset by interest income associated with our interest-bearing cash and cash equivalents.
Other non-operating income
Other non-operating income was $0.0 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $3.7 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2019, a difference of $3.7 million. The difference is primarily related to the proceeds from a legal settlement in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales unless and until we or a potential future licensee or collaborator obtains marketing approval for, and commercializes, one or more of our current or potential future product candidates (other than elobixibat as a treatment for chronic constipation in Japan), which we do not expect to occur until at least the second half of 2021, if at all. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates. We are subject to all of the risks applicable to the development of new pharmaceutical products and may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may harm our business. We expect that we will need substantial additional funding to complete development of and potentially commercialize our product candidates.
Our operations have historically been financed primarily through issuances of equity or convertible debt, upfront fees paid upon entering into license agreements, payments received upon the achievement of specified milestone events under license agreements, grants and venture debt borrowings and the HCR royalty monetization transactions. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, personnel-related costs, third party expenses associated with our research and development programs, including the conduct of clinical trials, and manufacturing-related costs for our product candidates.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were approximately $251.3 million.
During the first quarter of 2018, following the Japanese MHLW’s approval of elobixibat for the treatment of chronic constipation in January 2018, we received a $44.5 million payment, net of certain transaction expenses, from HCR under our RIAA. Additionally, this approval triggered a milestone payment to us from EA Pharma of $11.2 million. In June 2020, we entered into an amendment to the RIAA with HCR pursuant to which HCR agreed to pay us an additional $14.8 million, net of certain transaction expenses in exchange for the elimination of the (i) $78.8 million cap amount on HCR’s rights to receive royalties on sales in Japan and sales milestones for elobixibat in certain other
territories that may become payable by EA Pharma and (ii) $15.0 million payable to us if a specified sales milestone is achieved for elobixibat in Japan. As of December 31, 2020, we have received approximately $49.9 million in upfront and milestone payments from EA Pharma under a license agreement for the development and commercialization of elobixibat in specified countries in Asia. We are eligible to receive additional amounts of up to $5.3 million under the amended agreement, if a specified regulatory event is achieved for elobixibat. Pursuant to the RIAA, any additional royalties and sales milestone payments that we receive from EA Pharma will be payable by us to HCR under the RIAA.
In March 2019, we entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, with respect to an at-the-market offering program for us to offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. Subsequently, in May 2019, we sold 637,367 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $20.8 million pursuant to the sales agreement. This agreement terminated on May 7, 2020.
In addition, in February 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 2,190,750 shares of our common stock under our universal shelf registration statement for net proceeds of approximately $43.0 million.
On May 7, 2020, we filed a new universal shelf registration on Form S-3, or the 2020 Form S-3, with the SEC, which was declared effective on May 18, 2020, pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $200.0 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine. On May 7, 2020, we also entered into a new sales agreement, with respect to an at-the-market offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. This agreement terminated on September 9, 2020.
On September 14, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,000,000 shares of our common stock under this registration statement. We received net proceeds from this offering of approximately $150.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, but before deducting offering expenses. As of December 31, 2020, $40.0 million of securities remain available for issuance under the 2020 Form S-3.
On June 8, 2020, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with the several banks and other financial institutions or entities from time to time parties to the Loan and Security Agreement, as lenders, or collectively referred to as the Lender, and Hercules Capital, Inc., in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent for itself and Lender (in such capacity, the Agent or Hercules). The Loan and Security Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $80.0 million to be delivered in multiple tranches, (the Term Loans). The tranches consist of (i) a term loan advance to Borrower in an aggregate principal amount of up to $15.0 million, of which (A) we agreed to borrow an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million on the date on which all conditions to the funding of the Term Loans by the Lender were met (the Closing Date), but we did not request that the Lender make an additional term loan advance to us in an aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million prior to December 15, 2020 as permitted under the agreement, (ii) subject to the achievement of certain initial performance milestones, or Performance Milestone I, we have the right to request that the Lender make additional term loan advances to us in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million from January 1, 2021 through December 15, 2021 in minimum increments of $10.0 million, and (iii) subject to the Lender’s investment committee’s sole discretion, we have the right to request that the Lender make additional term loan advances to us in an aggregate principal amount of up to $45.0 million through March 31, 2022 in minimum increments of $5.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million and an aggregate principal amount of up to $65.0 million remains available for future borrowings.
Under the Loan and Security Agreement, we also agreed to issue to Hercules warrants to purchase a number of shares of our common stock equal to 1% of the aggregate amount of the Term Loans that are funded, as such amounts are funded. On the Closing Date, we issued a warrant for 5,311 shares of our common stock. The warrants will be exercisable for a period of seven years from the date of the issuance of each warrant at a per-share exercise price equal to $18.83, subject to certain adjustments as specified in the warrants. The shares of common stock underlying the warrants were subsequently registered on Form S-3 with the SEC, which was declared effective on August 18, 2020.
On or about February 25, 2021, we expect to file a new universal shelf registration on Form S-3 with the SEC, pursuant to which we expect to register for sale up to 400million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, which we refer to as the 2021 Form S-3. On or about February 25, 2021, we intend to enter into a new sales agreement, which we refer to as the 2021 Sales Agreement, with respect to an at-the-market offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million. Our issuance and sale, if any, of shares under the 2021 Sales Agreement is subject to the effectiveness of the 2021 Form S-3. We make no assurances as to if or when the 2021 Form S-3 will become effective or, if it does become effective, as to the continued effectiveness of the 2021 Form S-3. No additional securities registered under the 2020 Form S-3 will be offered or sold after date of effectiveness of the 2021 Form S-3. This report shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any shares under the 2021 Sales Agreement that we intend to enter into or any securities under the 2021 Form S-3 that we intend to file with the SEC, nor shall there be any sale of such securities in any state in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such state.
Cash Flows
Years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities of $101.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of our $107.6 million net loss from operations and a net decrease in assets and liabilities of $4.7 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by decreases in prepaid expenses and other current assets, decreases in accrued expenses, as well as decreases in other current and long-term liabilities. This decrease was offset by non cash items, including $14.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, $14.6 million of foreign currency adjustments, and $10.8 million of accretion of liability related to sale of future royalties. Cash used in operating activities of $52.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily a result of our $62.7 million net loss from operations and a net decrease in assets and liabilities of $10.3 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by a decrease in accrued expenses and an increase to prepaid expenses and other current asset, and accounts payable. This decrease was offset by non cash items, including $8.4 million of accretion of liability related to sale of future royalties, $7.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $4.0 million of foreign currency adjustments.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.1 million compared to $0.5 million for 2019. The change was primarily due to higher purchases of property and equipment in 2019.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $220.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to proceeds from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs of $193.3 million, proceeds from the HCR
royalty agreement of $14.8 million, proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance costs of $9.5 million, and proceeds from exercise of options of $2.8 million. Cash provided by financing activities of $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to proceeds from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs of $20.8 million and proceeds from exercise of options of $2.7 million.
Funding Requirements
Cash used to fund operating expenses is affected by the timing of when we pay expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements into 2023 including for the commercial launch of odevixibat, if approved, for our open-label trial in PFIC for odevixibat, in addition to Phase 3 clinical programs for odevixibat in biliary atresia and Alagille syndrome, as well as A3907, A2342 and our preclinical programs. We anticipate an operating cash burn rate in the range of $120.0 to $130.0 million in 2021. However, our operating plans may change as a result of many factors, including those described below, and we may need additional funds sooner than planned to meet operational needs and capital requirements. In addition, if the conditions for raising capital are favorable we may seek to raise additional funds at any time.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
● any unfavorable development or delay in our odevixibat program in PFIC, including the review or approval of our odevixibat marketing applications in the United States and Europe for PFIC and the costs and timing of our pre-commercialization preparations;
● the costs, design, duration and any potential delays of the pivotal clinical trial of odevixibat in biliary atresia and the pivotal clinical trial of odevixibat in ALGS;
● the scope, number, progress, initiation, duration, cost, results and timing of clinical trials and nonclinical studies of our current or future product candidates;
● whether and to what extent milestone events are achieved under our license agreement with EA Pharma or any potential future licensee or collaborator;
● the outcomes and timing of regulatory reviews, approvals or other actions;
● our ability to obtain marketing approval for our product candidates;
● our ability to establish and maintain additional licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements on favorable terms and whether and to what extent we retain development or commercialization responsibilities under any new licensing, collaboration or similar arrangement;
● the success of any other business, product or technology that we acquire or in which we invest;
● our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio;
● our ability to manufacture any approved products on commercially reasonable terms;
● our ability to establish a sales and marketing organization or suitable third-party alternatives for any approved product;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates and programs that we pursue;
● current and potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business;
● the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies;
● our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
● the costs to operate as a public company in the United States, including the need to implement additional financial and reporting systems and other internal systems and infrastructure for our business;
● market acceptance of our product candidates, to the extent any are approved for commercial sale; and
● the effect of competing technological and market developments.
We cannot determine precisely the dates of potential regulatory approval of odevixibat in PFIC or the dates of our potential commercial launch, or the completion dates and related costs of our development programs due to inherent uncertainties in outcomes of clinical trials and the regulatory approval process. We cannot be certain that we will be able to successfully complete our pre-commercialization activities or research and development programs or establish licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements for our product candidates. Our failure or the failure of any current or potential future licensee to complete research and development programs for our product candidates could have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations.
We expect to continue to incur losses. Our ability to achieve and maintain profitability is dependent upon the successful development, regulatory approval and commercialization of our product candidates and achieving a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure. We may never achieve profitability.
If the conditions for raising capital are favorable, we may seek to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings or other financings. Additionally, if we need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, complete clinical trials, or potentially commercialize our product candidates, we may likewise seek to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings or other financings. The necessary funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
We have an effective universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $200 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine. As of December 31, 2020, $40.0 million of securities remain available for issuance under the shelf registration statement, which we refer to as the 2020 Form S-3. On or about February 25, 2021, we expect to file a new universal shelf registration on Form S-3 with the SEC, pursuant to which we expect to register for sale up to $400million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, which we refer to as the 2021 Form S-3, including up to $100 million of our common stock pursuant to the new sales agreement with respect to an at-the-market offering program. We make no assurances as to if or when the 2021 Form S-3 will become effective or, if it does become effective, as to the continued effectiveness of the 2021 Form S-3. No additional securities registered under the 2020 Form S-3 will be offered or sold after the date of effectiveness of the 2021 Form S-3. This report shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any shares under the 2021 Sales Agreement that we intend to enter into or any securities under the 2021 Form S-3 that we intend to file with the SEC, nor shall there be any sale of such securities in any state in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such state.
The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities may result in significant dilution to our stockholders, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. In addition, following the closing of our September 2020 public offering of common stock, we have a limited number of authorized shares of common stock available for future issuance that are not already issued or reserved for issuance. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt may provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. We may also seek to finance future cash needs through potential future licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements. These arrangements may not be available on acceptable terms or at all, and we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate our development programs or obtain funds through third-party arrangements that may require us to relinquish rights to certain product candidates that we might otherwise seek to develop or commercialize independently.