ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Special Note Regarding Forward-looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the risk factors and business sections in this Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Operations, Financial Condition, Liquidity and Results of Operations
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or us, may determine are needed.
The occurrence of COVID-19 pandemic had negativeimpact on our operations. Some tenants have delayed on rent payment and some of the universities and laboratories with which we collaborate were temporarily closed. Our general development operations have continued during the COVID-19 pandemic and we have not had significant disruption. However, we are uncertain if the COVID-19 pandemic will impact future operations at our laboratory, or our ability to collaborate with other laboratories and universities. In addition, we are unsure if the COVID-19 pandemic will impact future clinical trials. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the duration of business disruption and reduced traffic, the related financial effect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is expected to adversely impact the Company’s business for the year of 2021.
We have limited cash available to fund planned operations and although we have other sources of capital described below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” management continues to pursue various financing alternatives to fund our operations so we can continue as a going concern. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has created significant economic uncertainty and volatility in the credit and capital markets. Management plans to secure the necessary financing through the issue of new equity and/or the entering into of strategic partnership arrangements but the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to raise additional capital is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak and new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic. We may not be able to raise sufficient additional capital and may tailor our operations based on the amount of funding we are able to raise in the future. Nevertheless, there is no assurance that these initiatives will be successful. Further, there is no assurance that capital available to us in any future financing will be on acceptable terms.
Overview
The Company is a clinical-stage, vertically integrated, leading CellTech bio-developer dedicated to advancing and empowering innovative, transformative immune effector cell therapy, exosome technology, as well as COVID-19 related diagnostics and therapeutics. The Company also provides strategic advisory and outsourcing services to facilitate and enhance its clients’ growth and development, as well as competitiveness in healthcare and CellTech industry markets. Through its subsidiary structure with unique integration of verticals from innovative R&D to automated bioproduction and accelerated clinical development, the Company is establishing a leading role in the fields of cellular immunotherapy (including CAR-T/NK), exosome technology (ACTEX™), and COVID-19 related vaccine and therapeutics.
Avalon achieves and fosters seamless integration of unique verticals to bridge and accelerate innovative research, bio-process development, clinical programs and product commercialization. Avalon’s upstream innovative research includes:
● Development of Avalon Clinical-grade Tissue-specific Exosome (“ACTEX™”)
● Novel therapeutic and diagnostic targets development utilizing QTY-code protein design technology with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) including using the QTY code protein design technology for development of a hemofiltration device to treat Cytokine Storm.
● Co-development of next generation, transposon-based, multi-target CAR-T, CAR-NK and other immune effector cell therapeutic modalities with Arbele Limited.
● Strategic partnership with the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU) in Vienna, Austria to develop an S-layer vaccine that can be administered by an intranasal or oral route against SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 disease.
Avalon’s midstream bio-processing and bio-production facility is located in Nanjing, China with state-of-the-art, automated GMP and QC/QA infrastructure for standardized bio-manufacturing of clinical-grade cellular products involved in our clinical programs in immune effector cell therapy, regenerative therapeutics, as well as bio-banking.
Avalon’s downstream medical team and facility consists of top-rated affiliated hospital network and experts specialized in hematology, oncology, cellular immunotherapy, hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell transplant, as well as regenerative therapeutics. Our major clinical programs include:
● AVA-001: Avalon has initiated its first-in-human clinical trial of CD19 CAR-T candidate, AVA-001 in August 2019 at the Hebei Yanda Lu Daopei Hospital and Beijing Lu Daopei Hospital in China (the world’s single largest CAR-T treatment network with over 600 patients being treated with CAR-T) for the indication of relapsed/refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. The AVA-001 candidate (co-developed with China Immunotech Co. Ltd) is characterized by the utilization of 4-1BB (CD137) co-stimulatory signaling pathway, conferring a strong anti-cancer activity during pre-clinical study. It also features a shorter bio-manufacturing time which leads to the advantage of prompt treatment to patients where timing is important related hematologic malignancies. Avalon has successfully completed the first-in-human clinical trial of its AVA-001 anti-CD19 CAR-T cell therapy as a bridge to allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for patients with relapsed/refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia at the Lu Daopei Hospital (registered clinical trial number NCT03952923) with excellent efficacy (90% complete remission rate) and minimal adverse side effects. Avalon is currently expanding the patient recruitment for AVA-001 to include relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients.
● ACTEX™: Stem cell-derived Avalon Clinical-grade Tissue-specific Exosomes (ACTEX™) is one of the core technology platforms that has been co-developed by Avalon GloboCare and Weill Cornell Medicine. The Company formed a strategic partnership with HydroPeptide, LLC, a leading epigenetics skin care company, to engage in co-development and commercialization of a series of clinical-grade, exosome-based cosmeceutical and orthopedic products. As part of this agreement, the Company signed a three-way Material Transfer Agreement between Avalon GloboCare, HydroPeptide and Weill Cornell Medicine.
● FLASH-CAR™: The Company advanced its next generation immune cell therapy using RNA-based, non-viral FLASH-CAR™ technology co-developed with the Company’s strategic partner Arbele Limited. The adaptable FLASH-CAR™ platform can be used to create personalized cell therapy from a patient’s own cells, as well as off-the-shelf cell therapy from a universal donor. Our leading candidate, AVA-011, is currently at process development stage to generate clinical-grade cell-therapy products for subsequent clinical studies.
● AVA-Trap™: Avalon’s AVA-Trap™ therapeutic program plans to enter animal model testing followed by expedited clinical studies with the goal of providing an effective therapeutic option to combat COVID-19 and other life-threatening conditions involving cytokine storms. The Company initiated a sponsored research and co-development project with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) led by Professor Shuguang Zhang as Principal Investigator in May 2019. Using the unique QTY code protein design platform, six water-soluble variant cytokine receptors have been successfully designed and tested to show binding affinity to the respective cytokines.
We generated revenue by providing medical related consulting services in advanced areas of immunotherapy and second opinion/referral services through our wholly-owned subsidiary Avalon (Shanghai) Healthcare Technology Co., Ltd., or Avalon Shanghai. We also own and operate rental commercial real property in New Jersey, where we are headquartered.
The value of the Renminbi (“RMB”), the main currency used in China, fluctuates and is affected by, among other things, changes in China’s political and economic conditions. The conversion of RMB into foreign currencies such as the U.S. dollar have generally been based on rates set by the People’s Bank of China, which are set daily based on the previous day’s interbank foreign exchange market rates and current exchange rates on the world financial markets.
Going Concern
The Company is a clinical-stage, vertically integrated, leading CellTech bio-developer dedicated to advancing and empowering innovative, transformative immune effector cell therapy, exosome technology, as well as COVID-19 related diagnostics and therapeutics. The Company also provides strategic advisory and outsourcing services to facilitate and enhance its clients’ growth and development, as well as competitiveness in healthcare and CellTech industry markets. Through its subsidiary structure with unique integration of verticals from innovative R&D to automated bioproduction and accelerated clinical development, the Company is establishing a leading role in the fields of cellular immunotherapy (including CAR-T/NK), exosome technology (ACTEX™), and regenerative therapeutics.
In addition, the Company owns commercial real estate that houses its headquarters in Freehold, New Jersey and provides outsourced, customized international healthcare services to the rapidly changing health care industry primarily focused in the People’s Republic of China. The Company did not generate any revenue from development services and sales of developed products segment during the year ended December 31, 2020. These consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $42,041,375 at December 31, 2020, and has incurred recurring net loss and generated negative cash flow from operating activities of $12,679,438 and $7,546,100 for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. The Company has a limited operating history and its continued growth is dependent upon the continuation of providing medical consulting services to its only few clients who are related parties and generating rental revenue from its income-producing real estate property in New Jersey and performing development services for hospitals and other customers and sales of developed products to hospitals and other customers; hence generating revenues, and obtaining additional financing to fund future obligations and pay liabilities arising from normal business operations. In addition, the current cash balance cannot be projected to cover the operating expenses for the next twelve months from the release date of this report. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital, implement its business plan, and generate significant revenues. There are no assurances that the Company will be successful in its efforts to generate significant revenues, maintain sufficient cash balance or report profitable operations or to continue as a going concern. The Company plans on raising capital through the sale of equity to implement its business plan. However, there is no assurance these plans will be realized and that any additional financings will be available to the Company on satisfactory terms and conditions, if any.
The occurrence of an uncontrollable event such as the COVID-19 pandemic had negatively impact on the Company’s operations. Some tenants have delayed on rent payment and our occupancy of our rental property has decreased. Our general development operations have continued during the COVID-19 pandemic and we have not had significant disruption. However, we are uncertain if the COVID-19 pandemic will impact future operations at our laboratory, or our ability to collaborate with other laboratories and universities. In addition, we are unsure if the COVID-19 pandemic will impact future clinical trials. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the duration of business disruption and reduced traffic, the related financial effect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is expected to adversely impact the Company’s business for the year of 2021.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability or classification of asset-carrying amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to the useful life of property and equipment and investment in real estate, assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-term assets, valuation of deferred tax assets and the associated valuation allowances, and valuation of stock-based compensation.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any future changes to these estimates and assumptions could cause a material change to our reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). The core principle of the revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
● Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer
● Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 3: Determine the transaction price
● Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 5: Recognize revenue when the company satisfies a performance obligation
In order to identify the performance obligations in a contract with a customer, a company must assess the promised goods or services in the contract and identify each promised goods or service that is distinct. A performance obligation meets ASC 606’s definition of a “distinct” goods or service (or bundle of goods or services) if both of the following criteria are met:
● The customer can benefit from the goods or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (i.e., the goods or service is capable of being distinct).
● The entity’s promise to transfer the goods or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (i.e., the promise to transfer the goods or service is distinct within the context of the contract).
If a goods or service is not distinct, the goods or service is combined with other promised goods or services until a bundle of goods or services is identified that is distinct.
The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer, excluding amounts collected on behalf of third parties (for example, some sales taxes). The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable amounts, or both. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved.
The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The transaction price allocated to each performance obligation is recognized when that performance obligation is satisfied, at a point in time or over time as appropriate.
Types of revenue:
● Service fees under consulting agreements with related parties to provide medical related consulting services to its clients. The Company is paid for its services by its clients pursuant to the terms of the written consulting agreements. Each contract calls for a fixed payment.
● Service fees under agreements to perform development services for hospitals and other customers. The Company does not perform contracts that are contingent upon successful results.
● Sales of developed products to hospitals and other customers.
Revenue recognition criteria:
● The Company recognizes revenue by providing medical related consulting services under written service contracts with its customers. Revenue related to its service offerings is recognized as the services are performed.
● Revenue from development services performed under written contracts is recognized as services are provided.
● Revenue from sales of developed items to hospitals and other customers is recognized when items are shipped to customers and titles are transferred.
We have determined that the ASC 606 does not apply to rental contracts, which are within the scope of other revenue recognition accounting standards.
Rental income from operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis under the guidance of ASC 842. Lease payments under tenant leases are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the related leases. The cumulative difference between lease revenue recognized under the straight-line method and contractual lease payments are included in rent receivable on the consolidated balance sheets.
We do not offer promotional payments, customer coupons, rebates or other cash redemption offers to our customers.
Income Taxes
We are governed by the income tax laws of China and the United States. Income taxes are accounted for pursuant to ASC 740 “Accounting for Income Taxes,” which is an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. The charge for taxes is based on the results for the period as adjusted for items, which are non-assessable or disallowed. It is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method in respect of temporary differences arising from differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax basis used in the computation of assessable tax profit. In principle, deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable temporary differences, and deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent that it is probably that taxable profit will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilized.
Deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realized or the liability is settled. Deferred tax is charged or credited in the income statement, except when it is related to items credited or charged directly to equity, in which case the deferred tax is changed to equity. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when they related to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and we intend to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Recent Accounting Standards
For details of applicable new accounting standards, please, refer to Recent Accounting Standards in Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements accompanying this report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and
Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had real property rental revenue of $1,206,854, as compared to $1,155,677 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $51,177, or 4.4%. The increase was primarily attributable to the increase of tenants in 2020. We expect that our revenue from real property rent will increase in the near future since our occupancy of our rental property increased in subsequent period.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had medical related consulting services revenue from related parties of $170,908, as compared to $355,544 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $184,636, or 51.9%. The decrease was mainly attributable to the decreased demand for our consulting service from our related parties. We expect that our revenue from medical related consulting services will increase in the near future.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not have any revenue from contract services through performing development services for hospitals and other customers and sales of developed products to hospitals and other customers. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had revenue from contract services through performing development services for hospitals and other customers and sales of developed products to hospitals and other customers of $35,084. We have discontinued sales of our exosome isolation system product. However, we are actively developing other unrelated proprietary exosome related products for sale or licensure.
Costs and Expenses
Real property operating expenses consist of property management fees, property insurance, real estate taxes, depreciation, repairs and maintenance fees, utilities and other expenses related to our rental properties.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our real property operating expenses amounted to $851,754, as compared to $818,662 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $33,092, or 4.0%. The increase was mainly due to an increase in property management fees of approximately $11,000, and an increase in other miscellaneous items of approximately $22,000.
Costs of medical related consulting services include the cost of labor and related benefits, travel expenses related to medical related consulting services, other related consulting costs, and other overhead costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, costs of medical related consulting services amounted to $135,805, as compared to $284,472 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $148,667, or 52.3%. The decrease was mainly due to the decrease in medical related consulting services revenue.
Costs of development services and sales of developed products include inventory costs, materials and supplies costs, labor and related benefits, depreciation, other overhead costs and shipping and handling costs incurred.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, costs of development services for hospitals and other customers and sales of developed products to hospitals and other customers amounted to $103,258. We had neither revenue nor cost of revenue from this segment in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Real Property Operating Income
Our real property operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $355,100, representing an increase of $18,085, or 5.4%, as compared to $337,015 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly attributable to the increase in rental revenue resulting from the increase of tenants as described above, offset by the increase in real property operating expenses. We expect our real property operating income will increase in the near future since our occupancy rate increased in subsequent period.
Gross Profit from Medical Related Consulting Services and Gross Margin
Gross profit from medical related consulting services for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35,103, as compared to $71,072 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a change of $35,969, or 50.6%.
Gross margin increased to 20.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from gross margin of 20.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. We estimate that our gross margin from medical related consulting services segment will remain at its current yearly level.
Gross Loss from Development Services and Sales of Developed Products and Gross Margin
We did not generate any gross profit from development services and sales of developed products in the year ended December 31, 2020. Our gross loss from development services and sales of developed products for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $68,174, with a gross margin of (194.3)%.
Other Operating Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, other operating expenses consisted of the following:
● Professional fees primarily consisted of accounting fees, audit fees, legal service fees, consulting fees, investor relations service charges and other fees incurred for service related to being a public company. For the year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees increased by $558,880, or 9.3%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in consulting fees of approximately $989,000 mainly due to the increase in stock-based consulting fees resulting from the increase in use of consulting service providers, an increase in accounting service charges of approximately $103,000 as a result of the increase in stock-based accounting fees and an increase in other miscellaneous items of approximately $49,000, offset by a decrease in legal service fees of approximately $582,000 as a result of decrease in use of legal service providers. We expect that our professional fees will remain in its current yearly level with minimal increase in the near future.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, compensation and related benefits decreased by $4,587,541, or 52.5%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in stock-based compensation of approximately $4,133,000 which reflected the value of options granted and vested to our management, and a decrease in bonus for our three key officers of approximately $354,000, and a decrease in compensation and related benefits for other employees and directors of approximately $101,000, mainly due to the termination of employment in August 2019. We expect that our compensation and related benefits will remain in its current yearly level with minimal increase in the near future.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses decreased by $898,014, or 50.4%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our first project with Arbele was completed in January 2020 and no further research and development project was incurred in 2020. Our research and development contract with Weill Cornell Medicine expired as of November 2019. Therefore, our research and development expenses decreased. We expect our research and development expenses will increase in the near future.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, advertising expenses decreased by $390,712 or 57.0% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreased advertising activities incurred as a result of stricter control on corporation spending. We expect that our advertising expenses will continue to decrease in the near future.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, amortization expense from intangible assets decreased by $245,678, or 100.0%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. At the end of September 2019, our intangible assets were impaired to zero and therefore, no amortization expense was recorded related to intangible assets in the year ended December 31, 2020.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, travel and entertainment expense decreased by $347,505, or 66.5%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was mainly due to decreased business travel activities and decreased entertainment expenditure resulting from COVID-19. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the spread of COVID-19 has caused public health officials to recommend precautions to mitigate the spread of the virus, such as, cease traveling to non-essential jobs and curtail all unnecessary travel, and stay at home as much as possible.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, Directors and Officers Liability Insurance premium increased by $91,605, or 49.7%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to different insurance provider with different premium.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, rent and related utilities expenses increased by $1,337, or 1.5%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
● Other general and administrative expenses mainly consisted of NASDAQ listing fee, academic sponsorship, and other miscellaneous items. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other general and administrative expenses decreased by $45,282, or 9.9%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was mainly due to a decrease in academic sponsorship expenditure of approximately $95,000, offset by an increase in other miscellaneous items of approximately $50,000.
● In September 2019, we assessed our intangible assets for any impairment and concluded that there were indicators of impairment as of September 30, 2019 and we calculated that the estimated undiscounted cash flows were less than the carrying amount of those intangible assets. We have not been able to realize the financial projections provided by Dr. Zhou at the time of the intangible assets purchase and have decided to impair the intangible assets to zero. Based on our analysis, we recognized an impairment loss of $1,010,011 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which reduced the value of intangible assets purchased to zero. We did not record any impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss from Operations
As a result of the foregoing, for the year ended December 31, 2020, loss from operations amounted to $12,454,019, as compared to $19,377,230 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $6,923,211, or 35.7%.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) mainly includes interest expense, change in fair value of warrants liabilities, allocated financing costs, loss from equity method investment, and loss from noncontrolling interest deficit adjustment.
Other expense, net, totaled $225,419 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to other income, net, of $1,307,069 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1,532,488, or 117.2%, which was primarily attributable to a decrease in change in fair value of warrants liabilities of approximately $2,817,000, an increase in interest expense of approximately $86,000, a decrease in other income of approximately $21,000, offset by a decrease in allocated financing expense of approximately $525,000, a decrease in loss from noncontrolling interest deficit adjustment of approximately $862,000, and a decrease in loss from equity method investment of approximately $4,000.
Income Taxes
We did not have any income taxes expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 since we incurred losses in these periods.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors described above, our net loss was $12,679,438 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $18,070,161 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $5,390,723 or 29.8%.
Net Loss Attributable to Avalon GloboCare Corp. Common Shareholders
The net loss attributable to Avalon GloboCare Corp. common shareholders was $12,679,438 or $(0.16) per share (basic and diluted) for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $18,070,161, or $(0.24) per share (basic and diluted) for the year ended December 31, 2019, a change of $5,390,723 or 29.8%.
Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment
Our reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. The functional currency of our parent company, AHS, Avalon RT 9, Genexosome, Avactis, and Exosome, is the U.S. dollar and the functional currency of Avalon Shanghai and Beijing Genexosome, is the Chinese Renminbi (“RMB”). The financial statements of our subsidiaries whose functional currency is the RMB are translated to U.S. dollars using period end rates of exchange for assets and liabilities, average rate of exchange for revenues, costs, and expenses and cash flows, and at historical exchange rates for equity. Net gains and losses resulting from foreign exchange transactions are included in the results of operations. As a result of foreign currency translations, which are a non-cash adjustment, we reported a foreign currency translation gain of $67,237 and a foreign currency translation loss of $20,887 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This non-cash gain/loss had the effect of decreasing/increasing our reported comprehensive loss.
Comprehensive Loss
As a result of our foreign currency translation adjustment, we had comprehensive loss of $12,612,201 and $18,091,048 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has a limited operating history and its continued growth is dependent upon the providing medical consulting services to its only few clients who are related parties and generating rental revenue from its income-producing real estate property in New Jersey and performing development services for hospitals and other customers and sales of developed products to hospitals and other customers; hence generating revenues, and obtaining additional financing to fund future obligations and pay liabilities arising from normal business operations. In addition, the current cash balance cannot be projected to cover the operating expenses for the next twelve months from the release date of this report. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital, implement its business plan, and generate significant revenues. There are no assurances that the Company will be successful in its efforts to generate significant revenues, maintain sufficient cash balance or report profitable operations or to continue as a going concern. The Company plans on raising capital through the sale of equity to implement its business plan. However, there is no assurance these plans will be realized and that any additional financings will be available to the Company on satisfactory terms and conditions, if any.
The occurrence of an uncontrollable event such as the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to negatively affect the Company’s operations. Efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus have intensified, including social distancing, travel bans and quarantine, and these are likely to negatively impact our tenants, employees and consultants. These, in turn, will not only impact our operations, financial condition and demand for our medical related consulting services but our overall ability to react timely to mitigate the impact of this event. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the duration of business disruption and reduced traffic, the related financial effect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is expected to adversely impact our business for the year of 2021.
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash balance of approximately $727,000 and $765,000, respectively. These funds are kept in financial institutions located as follows:
Under applicable PRC regulations, foreign invested enterprises, or FIEs, in China may pay dividends only out of their accumulated profits, if any, determined in accordance with PRC accounting standards and regulations. In addition, a foreign invested enterprise in China is required to set aside at least 10% of its after-tax profit based on PRC accounting standards each year to its general reserves until the cumulative amount of such reserves reach 50% of its registered capital. These reserves are not distributable as cash dividends.
In addition, a portion of our businesses and assets are denominated in RMB, which is not freely convertible into foreign currencies. All foreign exchange transactions take place either through the People’s Bank of China or other banks authorized to buy and sell foreign currencies at the exchange rates quoted by the People’s Bank of China. Approval of foreign currency payments by the People’s Bank of China or other regulatory institutions requires submitting a payment application form together with suppliers’ invoices, shipping documents and signed contracts. These currency exchange control procedures imposed by the PRC government authorities may restrict the ability of our PRC subsidiary to transfer its net assets to the Parent Company through loans, advances or cash dividends.
The current PRC Enterprise Income Tax (“EIT”) Law and its implementing rules generally provide that a 10% withholding tax applies to China-sourced income derived by non-resident enterprises for PRC enterprise income tax purposes unless the jurisdiction of incorporation of such enterprises’ shareholder has a tax treaty with China that provides for a different withholding arrangement.
The following table sets forth a summary of changes in our working capital from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020:
Our working capital deficit increased by $41,688 to $1,306,056 at December 31, 2020 from $1,264,368 at December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital deficit was primarily attributable to a decrease in accounts receivable - related party of approximately $215,000, a decrease in deferred financing costs of approximately $89,000, an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables of approximately $89,000, an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables of approximately $71,000, an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables - related parties of approximately $119,000, and an increase in operating lease obligation of approximately $76,000, offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of approximately $51,000, a decrease in accrued research and development fees of approximately $136,000, and a decrease in accrued payroll liability and directors’ compensation of approximately $334,000.
Because the exchange rate conversion is different for the consolidated balance sheets and the consolidated statements of cash flows, the changes in assets and liabilities reflected on the consolidated statements of cash flows are not necessarily identical with the comparable changes reflected on the consolidated balance sheets.
Cash Flows for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following summarizes the key components of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash flow used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7,546,100, which primarily reflected our consolidated net loss of approximately $12,679,000, and the changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily consisting of an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of approximately $207,000, a decrease in accrued liabilities and other payables of approximately $837,000, offset by a decrease in accounts receivable - related party of approximately $217,000, an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables - related parties of approximately $119,000, and the non-cash items adjustment primarily consisting of depreciation and amortization of approximately $315,000, and stock-based compensation and service expense of approximately $5,494,000.
Net cash flow used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $7,079,871, which primarily reflected our consolidated net loss of approximately $18,070,000, the non-cash item adjustment consisting of change in warrants derivative liabilities of approximately $2,817,000, and the changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily consisting of an increase in accounts receivable - related party of approximately $217,000, offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of approximately $480,000, and an increase in accrued liabilities and other payables of approximately $1,230,000, and the add-back of non-cash items mainly consisting of depreciation and amortization of approximately $507,000, stock-based compensation and service expense of approximately $9,209,000, allocated financing costs of approximately $525,000, impairment loss of approximately $1,010,000, and loss from noncontrolling interest deficit adjustment of approximately $862,000.
We expect our cash used in operating activities to increase due to the following:
● the development and commercialization of new products;
● an increase in professional staff and services; and
● an increase in public relations and/or sales promotions for existing and/or new brands as we expand within existing markets or enter new markets.
Net cash flow used in investing activities was $169,185 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $552,967 for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made payment for improvement of commercial real estate of approximately $111,000 and made additional investment in equity method investment of approximately $58,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we made payment for purchase of property and equipment of approximately $377,000, made payment for improvement of commercial real estate of approximately $16,000, and made payment for equity method investment of approximately $159,000.
Net cash flow provided by financing activities was $7,664,281 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6,154,910 for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received proceeds from related party borrowings of $600,000 and net proceeds from equity offering of approximately $7,264,000 (net of cash paid for commission and offering costs of approximately $540,000), offset by repayments made for note payable - related party of $200,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received proceeds from borrowings from a related party of $3,600,000, and net proceeds from equity offering of approximately $5,365,000 (net of offering costs of approximately $909,000), offset by repayments made to a related party for borrowings of $410,000, repayments for loan payable of $1,000,000, and payment made for repurchase of warrants of 1,400,000.
Our capital requirements for the next twelve months primarily relate to working capital requirements, including salaries, fees related to third parties’ professional services, reduction of accrued liabilities, mergers, acquisitions and the development of business opportunities. These uses of cash will depend on numerous factors including our sales and other revenues, and our ability to control costs. All funds received have been expended in the furtherance of growing the business. The following trends are reasonably likely to result in a material decrease in our liquidity over the near to long term:
● an increase in working capital requirements to finance our current business, including ongoing research and development programs, clinical studies, as well as commercial strategies;
● the use of capital for mergers, acquisitions and the development of business opportunities;
● addition of administrative personnel as the business grows; and
● the cost of being a public company.
In the third quarter of 2019, we had secured a $20 million credit facility (Line of Credit) provided by our Chairman, Wenzhao Lu. The unsecured credit facility bears interest at a rate of 5% and provides for maturity on drawn loans 36 months after funding. The note is not convertible to equity. As of December 31, 2020, the total principal amount outstanding under the Credit Line was $3.2 million and we have approximately $16.8 million remaining available under the Line Credit.
On December 13, 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM (the “Sales Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent (“Jefferies”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Jefferies, shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $20.0 million. On April 6, 2020, the date on which we filed our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, our registration statement became subject to the offering limits set forth in General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3. As of April 6, 2020, the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates, or public float, was $39,564,237, based on 23,691,160 shares of our outstanding common stock that were held by non-affiliates on such date and a price of $1.67 per share, which was the price at which our common stock was last sold on The Nasdaq Capital Market on February 19, 2020 (a date within 60 days of the date hereof), calculated in accordance with General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3. We have not offered any securities pursuant to General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3 in the 12 calendar months preceding the date of this prospectus supplement. We filed a prospectus supplement to amend and supplement the information in our prospectus and original prospectus supplement based on the amount of securities that we are eligible to sell under General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3. After giving effect to the $13,000,000 offering limit imposed by General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3, we may offer and sell additional shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $13,000,000 from time to time through Jefferies acting as our sales agent in accordance with the terms of the sales agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we sold a total of 4,052,008 shares of our common stock through Jefferies with an aggregate offering price of $7,077,835 and we have approximately $7.9 million offering price remaining available under the Sales Agreement.
We estimate that based on current plans and assumptions, that our available cash will be insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements under our present operating expectations through cash available under our Credit Line and sales of equity through our Sales Agreement. Other than funds received from the sale of our equity and advances from our related party, and cash resource generating from our operations, we presently have no other significant alternative source of working capital. We have used these funds to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations and grow our company. We will need to raise significant additional capital to fund our operations and to provide working capital for our ongoing operations and obligations. Therefore, our future operation is dependent on our ability to secure additional financing. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. However, the trading price of our common stock and a downturn in the U.S. equity and debt markets could make it more difficult to obtain financing through the issuance of equity or debt securities. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital may restrict our ability to grow and may reduce our ability to continue to conduct business operations. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we will be required to cease our operations. To date, we have not considered this alternative, nor do we view it as a likely occurrence.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
We have certain fixed contractual obligations and commitments that include future estimated payments. Changes in our business needs, cancellation provisions, and other factors may result in actual payments differing from the estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of payments. We have presented below a summary of the most significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the tables, in order to assist in the review of this information within the context of our consolidated financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. The following tables summarize our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, and the effect these obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We presently do not have off-balance sheet arrangements.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
A portion of our operations are in China. Thus, a portion of our revenues and operating results may be impacted by exchange rate fluctuations between RMB and US dollars. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an unrealized foreign currency translation gain of approximately $67,000 and an unrealized foreign currency translation loss of approximately $21,000, respectively, because of changes in the exchange rate.
Inflation
The effect of inflation on our revenue and operating results was not significant.