ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-looking Statements
Statements made in this Annual Report, which are not purely historical, are forward-looking statements with respect to the goals, plan objectives, intentions, expectations, financial condition, results of operations, future performance and our business, including, without limitation, (i) our ability to raise capital, and (ii) statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words “may,” “would,” “could,” “should,” “expects,” “projects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “plans,” “intends,” “targets” or similar expressions.
Forward-looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements, depending upon a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following: general economic or industry conditions; nationally and/or in the communities in which we may conduct business; changes in the interest rate environment; legislation or regulatory requirements; conditions of the securities markets; our ability to raise capital; changes in accounting principles; policies or guidelines; financial or political instability; acts of war or terrorism; and other economic, competitive, governmental, regulatory and technical factors affecting our current or potential business and related matters.
Accordingly, results actually achieved may differ materially from expected results in these statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made. We do not undertake, and specifically disclaim, any obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of such statements.
Plan of Operation
Our plan of operation for the next 12 months is to: (i) consider guidelines of industries in which we may have an interest; (ii) adopt a business plan regarding engaging in the business of any selected industry; and (iii) commence such operations through funding and/or the acquisition of a “going concern” engaged in any industry selected.
During the next 12 months, our only foreseeable cash requirements will relate to maintaining our good standing; the payment of our SEC reporting filing expenses, including associated legal and accounting fees; costs incident to reviewing or investigating any potential business venture; and maintaining our good standing as a corporation in our state of organization. We anticipate that these funds will be provided to us in the form of loans from Mirabella Holdings, LLC (“Mirabella”), our majority shareholder, although M irabella is under no obligation to provide any such loans in the future. Currently, any such loans that may be provided to us from time to time by Mirabella are made pursuant to a demand promissory note that has been issued by us to Mirabella, which loans are unsecured, payable on demand and bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum, compounded quarterly. See the description of that
demand promissory note contained in Part III, Item 13 of this Report, and a copy of that note included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have no current cash resources.
The Company is relying on its principal shareholder to pay all of its operating and other expenses until it can complete a reorganization or merger. While the Company's principal stockholder currently pays the Company's limited operating and other expenses, on the Company's behalf, that principal stockholder is not obligated to pay any of those expenses and the Company can provide no assurance that such stockholder will continue to pay any of those expenses in the future. This stockholder paid a total of $37,035 in expenses for the Company in the year ended December 31, 2020, increasing the aggregate principal amount of a demand note held by this stockholder to $601,094, plus accrued interest of $544,781, as of December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Other than maintaining its good corporate standing in the State of Utah, compromising and settling its debts and seeking the acquisition of assets, properties or businesses that may benefit the Company and its stockholders, the Company has had no material business operations in the two most recent calendar years.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $0 in assets. See the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
During the period ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net loss of $324,471, resulting from operations, as compared to a net loss of $394,866 for the same period ended December 31, 2019. Primarily all of these losses are the result of attorney’s fees, accounting fees and management fees. See the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Item 8 of this Report.
During calendar 2020, expenses were paid by Mirabella, a majority stockholder of the Company, in the aggregate amount of $37,034, and during calendar 2019 expenses were also paid by Mirabella in the aggregate amount of $53,402. The aggregate principal amount of $601,094 plus accrued interest of $544,781 outstanding as of December 31, 2020 on the loans provided to us by Mirabella, which includes the $1,275 of expenses paid by Mirabella during 2007 that were not converted into a capital contribution, is unsecured, bears interest at the rate of 10% per annum, compounded quarterly, and is due and payable to Mirabella on demand. See the description of our demand promissory note issued to Mirabella contained in Part III, Item 13 of this Report, and a copy of that note included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report.
While Mirabella currently pays our limited operating and other expenses on our behalf, Mirabella is not obligated to pay any of those expenses, and we can provide no assurance that Mirabella will continue to pay any of those expenses in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no Off-Balance Sheet arrangements of any kind for the year ended December 31, 2020.