ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited annual consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those described in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For further information regarding forward-looking statements, please refer to the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Projections” at the beginning of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Alimera Sciences, Inc., and its subsidiaries (we, our or us), is a pharmaceutical company that specializes in the commercialization and development of prescription ophthalmic pharmaceuticals. We presently focus on diseases affecting the back of the eye, or retina, because we believe these diseases are not well treated with current therapies and affect millions of people globally.
ILUVIEN
Our only product is ILUVIEN®, which has received marketing authorization and reimbursement in numerous countries for the treatment of DME. In the U.S. and certain other countries outside Europe, ILUVIEN is indicated for the treatment of DME in patients who have been previously treated with a course of corticosteroids and did not have a clinically significant rise in intraocular pressure. In 17 countries in Europe, ILUVIEN is indicated for the treatment of vision impairment associated with chronic DME considered insufficiently responsive to available therapies. ILUVIEN is also now indicated in 16 countries in Europe for prevention of relapse in recurrent non-infectious uveitis affecting the posterior segment of the eye (NIU-PS). See Item 1, “Business - Overview” above.
We market ILUVIEN directly in the U.S., Germany, the U.K., Portugal, and Ireland, and we are planning to launch directly in the Nordic Region (Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden) with the support of an exclusive wholesaler. In addition, we have entered into various agreements under which distributors are providing or will provide regulatory, reimbursement and sales and marketing support for ILUVIEN in Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and several countries in the Middle East. As of December 31, 2020, we have recognized sales of ILUVIEN to our international distributors in the Middle East, Austria, France, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands.
Accumulated Deficit
We commenced operations in June 2003. Since our inception we have incurred significant losses. As of December 31, 2020, we had accumulated a deficit of $392.9 million. We expect to incur additional expenses as we pursue our business strategy. See Item 1, “Business - Business Strategy” above.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $11.2 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The unprecedented events of the COVID-19 pandemic, and its unpredictable duration, in the regions where we have customers, employees and distributors have had an adverse effect on our sales of ILUVIEN and thus on our net revenues and may in the future have an adverse effect on our liquidity and financial condition. These adverse effects of the pandemic on us have resulted from the following, among other factors. Governments and private parties imposed limitations on in-person access to physicians, which adversely affects us in at least two ways. First, these limitations can affect patient access to treatment. Because ILUVIEN is administered only by an injection into the eye, telemedicine is not a viable substitute when administration of treatment is required. Second, limitations on in-person access to physicians also makes it difficult or impossible for our sales representatives (including those employed by our distributors) to meet with retina specialists and their staff to educate them about ILUVIEN.
Our business is also negatively affected by patients’ concerns in the current environment. Prior to the pandemic, most of our ILUVIEN sales were driven by the use of ILUVIEN to treat diabetic macular edema, or DME. Given that health authorities have cited diabetes as a factor that places a person at higher risk for severe illness from the COVID-19 pandemic, many DME patients are unwilling to visit their physicians in person (even if otherwise permitted) for fear of contracting the COVID-19 coronavirus.
In addition to the effects of limitations on in-person access to physicians, limitations on travel within and between the countries in which we market and sell ILUVIEN, as well as various types of “shelter in place” orders, have curtailed our in-person marketing activities.
These limitations and other effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have had an adverse impact on our revenues beginning late in the first quarter and continuing through the date of this report. We expect these factors to continue to adversely impact our revenue and capital resources, and the extent and duration of that impact is uncertain at this time, particularly in light of the emergence of COVID-19 variants that may increase the transmissibility of the coronavirus or be more deadly, or both. (See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Current Cash Position” below.) As more and more people in our markets are vaccinated and as governmental restrictions are gradually lifted, however, we look forward to the prospect of a return to more normal conditions later this year and continuing the growth trends we saw prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. (Please refer to “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Projections” above.)
In response to these developments, we have implemented measures to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on our financial position and operations. These measures include the following:
•We are managing our cost structure, minimizing all non-payroll spending where possible to mitigate our anticipated loss of revenue and conserve our cash.
•We are decreasing our external spending on commercial and medical affairs activities related to the promotion of ILUVIEN.
•Because we believe that our employees are critical to both (a) serving our customers and patients through alternative forms of engagement as the pandemic-related restrictions continue, and (b) realizing the long-term value of ILUVIEN, we have maintained our staffing levels and do not currently have any plans to reduce them.
For more information about the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the related risks we face, please see Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to the Public Health Pandemic.”
License Agreement with EyePoint Pharmaceuticals US, Inc.
In July 2017, we amended and restated our license agreement with EyePoint Pharmaceuticals US, Inc. (EyePoint), formerly known as pSivida US, Inc., which was made effective July 1, 2017 (the New Collaboration Agreement). Under the New Collaboration Agreement, we have rights to the technology underlying ILUVIEN for the treatment of uveitis, including NIU-PS, in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. The New Collaboration Agreement converted our previous profit share obligation to a royalty payable on global net revenues of ILUVIEN. We began paying a 2% royalty on net revenues and other related consideration to EyePoint effective July 1, 2017. The royalty amount increased to 6% as of December 12, 2018. We will pay an additional 2% royalty on global net revenues and other related consideration in excess of $75.0 million in any year. During 2020 and 2019, we recognized approximately $2,064,000 and $2,158,000 of royalty expense, respectively.
Following the signing of the New Collaboration Agreement, we retained a right to offset $15.0 million of future royalty payments. In March 2019, pursuant to the New Collaboration Agreement, we forgave $5,000,000 of the Future Offset in connection with the approval of ILUVIEN for NIU-PS in the U.K. As of December 31, 2020, the balance of the Future Offset was approximately $7,874,000. (See Note 10 of our notes to consolidated financial statements below.)
Sources of Revenues
Our revenues for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were generated from product sales primarily in the U.S., Germany and the U.K. In the U.S., two large pharmaceutical distributors accounted for 49% and 60% of our consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These U.S.-based distributors purchase ILUVIEN from us, maintain inventories of ILUVIEN and sell downstream to physician offices, pharmacies and hospitals. Internationally, in countries where we sell direct, our customers are hospitals, clinics and pharmacies. We sometimes refer to physician offices, pharmacies, hospitals and clinics as end users. In international countries where we sell to distributors, these distributors maintain inventory levels of ILUVIEN and sell to their customers.
Reclassifications
Within the operating expenses section of the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as well as within the International segment, we reclassified $683,000 in sales and marketing expenses associated with our country managers in Europe from general and administrative expenses to sales and marketing expenses. We made this reclassification to align these expenses with the true nature of the activity being performed and to conform them to the current year presentation. These changes had no impact on previously reported consolidated balance sheets, net loss on our statements of operations, comprehensive loss, stockholders’ deficit or cash flows.
‎
Results of Operations - Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
We generate revenue from ILUVIEN, our only product. In addition to generating revenue from product sales, we intend to seek to generate revenue from other sources such as upfront fees, milestone payments in connection with collaborative or strategic relationships, and royalties resulting from the licensing of ILUVIEN or any future product candidates and other intellectual property. Additionally, revenue from our international distributors fluctuates depending on the timing of the shipment of ILUVIEN to the distributors and the distributors’ sales of ILUVIEN to their customers.
Net revenue decreased by approximately $3.1 million, or 6%, to approximately $50.8 million for 2020, compared to approximately $53.9 million for 2019. The decrease was attributable to a $7.5 million revenue decrease in our U.S. business related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was offset by a $4.3 million revenue increase in our International segment, which was primarily due to expansion and growth into new and existing markets through our distributors. We also saw increased sales volume in the markets where we sell direct. These direct sales included sales for our uveitis indication.
Cost of Goods Sold, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization, and Gross Profit
Gross profit is affected by costs of goods sold, which includes costs of manufactured goods sold and royalty payments to EyePoint under the New Collaboration Agreement. Additionally, cost of goods sold by our international distributors fluctuates depending on the revenue share attributable to the respective contract.
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization increased by approximately $300,000, or 5%, to approximately $6.9 million for 2020, compared to approximately $6.6 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increased sales in our international segment, including to distributors, where costs of goods sold is a higher percentage of net revenue, and an increase in royalty expense payable on our global revenue as a result of the increased royalty percentage payable to EyePoint.
Gross profit decreased by approximately $3.4 million, or 7%, to approximately $43.9 million for 2020, compared to approximately $47.3 million for 2019. Gross margin was 86% and 88% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. As our revenues to our international distributors increase and our royalty expense payable to EyePoint increases, we expect our gross margin to decrease.
Research, Development and Medical Affairs Expenses
Currently, our research, development and medical affairs expenses are primarily focused on activities that support ILUVIEN and include salaries and related expenses for research and development and medical affairs personnel, including
medical science liaisons. Our research, development and medical affairs expenses also include costs related to the provision of medical affairs support, including symposia development for physician education, and costs related to compliance with FDA, EEA or other regulatory requirements. We expense both internal and external development costs as they are incurred.
Research, development and medical affairs expenses decreased by approximately $1.3 million, or 12%, to approximately $9.7 million for 2020, compared to approximately $11.0 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of approximately $650,000 in personnel costs, including international vacant positions, global bonus expenses and global stock-based compensation expenses; $620,000 in scientific communications expenses; $450,000 in travel expenses; and $420,000 in consulting costs. These decreases were offset by an increase of approximately $790,000 in clinical study costs, primarily consisting of costs associated with the NEW DAY Study.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation for employees in executive and administrative functions, including finance, accounting, information technology and human resources. Other significant costs include facilities costs and professional fees for accounting and legal services, including legal services associated with obtaining and maintaining patents. We expect to continue to incur significant costs to comply with the corporate governance, internal control and similar requirements applicable to public companies.
General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $1.6 million, or 12%, to approximately $11.7 million for 2020, compared to approximately $13.3 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of approximately $700,000 in global stock-based compensation expenses and $470,000 in professional fees. Additionally, in 2020 we benefitted from a one-time cash refund of approximately $400,000 associated with recovery of previously paid VAT expense in Germany for the years 2014 through 2018.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of third-party service fees and compensation for employees for the commercial promotion, the assessment of the commercial opportunity of, the development of market awareness for, the pursuit of reimbursement approval for and the commercialization of ILUVIEN, including launch plans for ILUVIEN in new markets. Other costs include professional fees associated with developing plans for ILUVIEN or any future products or product candidates and maintaining public relations.
Sales and marketing expenses decreased by approximately $5.3 million, or 21%, to approximately $20.4 million for 2020, compared to approximately $25.7 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of approximately $4.2 million in marketing costs related to cost controls we implemented to address the COVID-19 pandemic, the absence in 2020 of expenses we incurred in 2019 for the launch of our direct-to-patient advertising pilot program in the U.S., a decrease of $870,000 in travel expenses and a decrease of $400,000 in market access costs.
Operating Expenses
As a result of the changes in expenses described above, total operating expenses decreased by approximately $8.2 million, or 16%, to approximately $44.4 million for 2020, compared to approximately $52.6 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of approximately $5.3 million in sales and marketing expenses, $1.6 million in general and administrative expenses and $1.3 million in research, development and medical affairs expenses as described above.
Interest Expense and Other
On January 5, 2018, we entered into a $40.0 million loan and security agreement (the 2018 Solar Loan Agreement) with Solar Capital Ltd. (Solar Capital). On December 31, 2019, we refinanced the 2018 Solar Loan Agreement by entering into a $45.0 million loan and security agreement (the 2019 Solar Loan Agreement) with Solar Capital. For 2020 and 2019, interest expense consisted primarily of interest and amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts associated with our outstanding debt under the 2018 and 2019 Solar Loan Agreements. Interest income consisted primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Interest expense and other. Interest expense and other increased by approximately $500,000, or 10%, to approximately $5.4 million for 2020, compared to approximately $4.9 million for 2019. Interest expense consisted primarily of interest and amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts associated with our outstanding debt under the 2018 and 2019 Solar Loan Agreements with Solar Capital. For more detailed information, see Note 11 of our notes to consolidated financial statements below.
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Applicable to Common Stockholders per Share of Common Stock
We follow FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), Earnings Per Share (ASC 260), which requires the reporting of both basic and diluted earnings per share. Because our preferred stockholders participate in dividends equally with common
stockholders (if we were to declare and pay dividends), we use the two-class method to calculate EPS. However, our preferred stockholders are not contractually obligated to share in losses.
Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS is calculated in accordance with ASC 260 by adjusting weighted average shares outstanding for the dilutive effect of common stock options, restricted stock units and warrants. In periods where a net loss is recorded, no effect is given to potentially dilutive securities, since the effect would be anti-dilutive.
Common stock equivalent securities that would potentially dilute basic EPS in the future, but were not included in the computation of diluted EPS because they were either classified as participating or would have been anti-dilutive, totaled approximately 1.6 million and 2.3 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Results of Operations - Segment Review
The following selected unaudited financial and operating data are derived from our consolidated financial statements. The results and discussions that follow reflect how executive management monitors the performance of our reporting segments.
We have a U.S. segment and an International segment, and we report Other to reconcile back to consolidated totals. Each segment is separately managed and is evaluated primarily upon segment income or loss from operations. Non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization are categorized as Other. We allocate certain operating expenses among our reporting segments based on activity-based costing methods. These activity-based costing methods require us to make estimates that affect the amount of each expense category that is attributed to each segment. Changes in these estimates will directly affect the amount of expense allocated to each segment and therefore the operating profit of each reporting segment. There were no significant changes in our expense allocation methodology during 2020 or 2019.
U.S. Segment
U.S. Segment - Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue. Net revenue decreased by approximately $7.5 million, or 23%, to approximately $24.8 million for 2020, compared to approximately $32.3 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization. Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization decreased by approximately $600,000, or 17%, to approximately $2.9 million for 2020 compared to approximately $3.5 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales.
Research, development and medical affairs expenses. Research, development and medical affairs expenses increased by approximately $300,000, or 5%, to approximately $6.2 million for 2020, compared to approximately $5.9 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $1.0 million in clinical study costs, primarily consisting of costs associated with the NEW DAY Study and $280,000 in safety and quality expenses. These increases were offset by decreases of approximately $490,000 in scientific communications costs, $320,000 in consultant costs and $250,000 in travel expenses.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $400,000, or 5%, to approximately $8.0 million for 2020, compared to approximately $8.4 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases in costs related to operating as a public company, including professional fees and shareholder relations costs.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by approximately $3.3 million, or 19%, to approximately $14.3 million for 2020, compared to approximately $17.6 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of approximately $2.8 million in marketing costs related to cost controls we implemented to address the
COVID-19 pandemic, the absence in 2020 of expenses we incurred in 2019 for the launch of our direct-to-patient advertising pilot program in the U.S. and a decrease of $560,000 in travel expenses.
International Segment
International Segment - Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue. Net revenue increased by approximately $4.3 million, or 20%, to approximately $26.0 million for 2020, compared to approximately $21.7 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the expansion and growth into new and existing markets through our distributors, partially offset by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also saw increased sales volume in the markets where we sell direct. These direct sales included sales for our uveitis indication.
Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization. Cost of goods sold, excluding depreciation and amortization increased by approximately $1.0 million, or 32%, to approximately $4.1 million for 2020, compared to approximately $3.1 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to our increased sales volume including increased sales to our international distributors, where costs of goods sold is a higher percentage of net revenue.
Research, development and medical affairs expenses. Research, development and medical affairs expenses decreased by approximately $1.3 million, or 28%, to approximately $3.3 million for 2020, compared to approximately $4.6 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of approximately $550,000 in personnel and travel expenses, including savings associated with vacant positions; $350,000 in safety, quality and scientific communications expenses; $220,000 in costs associated with our 5-year open label registry study; and $130,000 in scientific communication costs.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $500,000, or 15%, to approximately $2.8 million for 2020, compared to approximately $3.3 million for 2019. We benefitted from a one-time cash refund of approximately $400,000 associated with recovery of previously paid VAT expense in Germany for the years 2014 through 2018.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by approximately $1.8 million, or 24%, to approximately $5.8 million for 2020, compared to approximately $7.6 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases of approximately $1.4 million in marketing costs related to cost controls we implemented to address the COVID-19 pandemic; $310,000 in travel expenses due in part to medical congresses being cancelled or moved online; and $290,000 in market access costs.
Other
Other - Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Our CEO, who is our chief operating decision maker (CODM), manages and evaluates our U.S. and International segments based on net gain or loss from operations adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization. Therefore, these non-cash expenses included in research, development and
medical affairs expenses, general and administrative expenses, and sales and marketing expenses are classified within Other within our consolidated financial statements.
Operating expenses. Operating expenses in Other decreased by approximately $1.1 million, or 22%, to $4.0 million for 2020, compared to approximately $5.1 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of $1.1 million in global stock-based compensation expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization was approximately $2.7 million for 2020 and approximately $2.6 million for 2019.
Prospective Changes to Segment Presentation
Historically, we have had a U.S. segment and an International segment, and we report Other in order to reconcile to consolidated totals. Beginning in 2021, our chief operating decision maker (CODM) changed the way he analyzes the business and respective segments to provide increased transparency and comparability of the performance of the U.S. and International segments.
In future SEC filings and press releases relating to periods beginning January 1, 2021, our segments will consist of a U.S. segment, an International segment and an Operating Cost segment, and we will present Other to reconcile to consolidated totals. The amounts in each of the segment columns in the following tables have been adjusted to reflect our segment results as if the new approach had been in effect for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The amounts in the Consolidated column are unchanged from the segment information provided in Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements. Other than the Consolidated column, the information in the columns in the tables below differ from the segment information presented in Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements. For our segment presentation, please see Note 19.
Operating Cost consists largely of expenses not allocated to the U.S. or International segments, including expenses associated with centrally managed departments such as regulatory, clinical operations, quality and supply chain management and other corporate functions, including public company costs, executive management, legal and global insurance; costs related to global marketing; and costs related to our U.S. and European headquarters. Consistent with past practice, non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization are still categorized in Other.
Our CODM will manage and evaluate each of our segments primarily based upon segment income or loss from operations. The objective of our change in segment reporting is to ensure comparability and consistency for our management and for investors and other users of the financial statements who assess our historical results and consider future cash flow prospects. We believe that the new segment structure will enable the CODM to better manage and monitor the business attributed to each segment.
Other than the Consolidated column, the information in the columns in the tables below differ from the segment information presented in Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements, to which you should refer for our segment information. The following tables reflect our segment results as if the new approach described above had been in effect for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As explained above in “Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic,” the unprecedented events of the COVID-19 pandemic, and its unpredictable duration, in the regions where we have customers, employees and distributors have had an adverse effect on our sales of ILUVIEN and thus on our net revenues and capital resources. The extent and duration of that impact is uncertain at this time, particularly in light of the emergence of COVID-19 variants that may increase the transmissibility of the coronavirus or be more deadly, or both.
Since January 2019, we have funded our operations through (a) cash received from our sales; (b) net proceeds of the 2018 and 2019 Solar Loan and Security Agreements that we obtained in January 2018 and December 2019, respectively; (c) a $1.0 million sale of common stock to a private investor in October 2019; and (d) an approximately $1,778,000 loan (the PPP Loan) we obtained in April 2020 under the Paycheck Protection Program established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act. Our loans do not include a revolving loan feature and have been fully advanced by the respective lenders. We currently have no additional borrowing capacity, and the 2019 Solar Loan Agreement generally prohibits any additional debt unless we obtain the prior consent of Solar Capital.
Indebtedness
2019 Solar Loan Agreement. On December 31, 2019, we refinanced our then existing $40.0 million loan and security agreement with Solar Capital and other lenders by entering into the $45.0 million 2019 Solar Loan Agreement with Solar Capital as Collateral Agent (Agent), and certain other lenders, including Solar Capital in its capacity as a lender. Under the 2019 Solar Loan Agreement, we borrowed $42.5 million on December 31, 2019 and $2.5 million on February 21, 2020 (the Solar Loan). The Solar Loan matures on July 1, 2024. We used the initial proceeds of the Solar Loan to pay off the previous $40.0 million 2018 Solar Capital loan, along with related prepayment, legal and other fees and expenses totaling approximately $2.3 million, which included $2.2 million in fees to Solar Capital. We used the remaining proceeds of the Solar Loan to provide additional working capital for general corporate purposes during 2020.
On May 1, 2020, we entered into a First Amendment (the Amendment) to the 2019 Solar Loan Agreement. The Amendment, among other things, requires that a minimum revenue covenant be measured at March 31, 2021 and at the last day of each quarter thereafter, with the minimum revenue amount equal to a percentage of our projected revenues in accordance with a plan we submitted to Agent in February 2021, and with such plan to be approved by our board of directors and Solar Capital in its sole discretion. The Amendment also included revised covenants that applied to our financial performance during 2020, all of which we met.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan. On April 22, 2020, we received an approximately $1,778,000 loan (the PPP Loan) under the Paycheck Protection Program established by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the SBA) as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act. The PPP Loan is unsecured and is evidenced by a note (the Note) in favor of HSBC Bank USA, National Association (HSBC) as the lender.
The interest rate on the Note is 1.0% per annum. The Note has a two-year term and is payable in 18 equal monthly payments of principal and interest beginning on the 180th day following the disbursement of the loan proceeds, subject to possible full
forgiveness and a deferred commencement date for beginning payments as described below. The Paycheck Protection Program provides for forgiveness of up to the full amount borrowed and any accrued interest as long as we use the loan proceeds during the 24-week period following disbursement for eligible purposes as described in the CARES Act and related guidance. Under the CARES Act, loan forgiveness is generally available for the sum of documented payroll costs, covered rent payments, covered mortgage interest and covered utilities during the 24-week period. We used all of the proceeds from the PPP Loan to pay expenses during the applicable period that we believe were for eligible purposes. On July 21, 2020, we submitted an application to HSBC for forgiveness of the PPP Loan. As of the date of this filing, the application for forgiveness is still pending review.
Under the revised rules for the PPP Loan program, we will not have to begin principal and interest payments before the date on which the SBA remits the loan forgiveness amount to HSBC (or notifies HSBC that no loan forgiveness is allowed). If no loan forgiveness is allowed, the Company will be required to pay HSBC payments of principal and interest based on the principal amount outstanding on the PPP Loan, plus interest outstanding at the end of the deferment period, and taking into account any reductions in the principal amount due to forgiveness, if any.
Current Cash Position
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $11.2 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared to $9.4 million as of December 31, 2019 and $11.3 million as of September 30, 2020. We have historically experienced seasonality in our first quarter revenue each year. Given that seasonality and the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, we anticipate a corresponding impact to our cash position as of March 31, 2021. In response to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have adjusted, and we expect to continue to adjust, our commercial spending to continue to operate with our existing cash resources. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our business strategy, including the continued commercialization of ILUVIEN and the retention of our current employees and staff. The actual amount of funds that we may need will depend on many factors, some of which are beyond our control. See “Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic” in this Item 2 above for an explanation of our strategy to conserve our cash and otherwise mitigate the impact of the pandemic on our financial position and operations.
We cannot ensure that our commercial spending controls will be effective or will continue to be effective throughout the currently unknown duration of the pandemic. We cannot be sure that additional financing will be available when needed or that, if available, the additional financing could be obtained on terms that are not significantly detrimental to us or our stockholders. If we were to raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, substantial dilution to existing stockholders would likely result, and the terms of any new equity securities could have a preference over our common stock. If we were to attempt to raise additional funds through strategic collaboration agreements, we may not be successful in obtaining those agreements, or in receiving milestone or royalty payments under them. If we were to attempt to raise additional funds through debt financing, (a) the terms of the debt may involve significant cash payment obligations as well as covenants and specific financial ratios that may restrict our ability to achieve our business strategy; and (b) we would be required to obtain the permission or participation of Solar Capital, which we might not be able to obtain. Our recurring losses and any potential needs to raise capital create substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the next 12 months following the issuance of the financial statements for the filing of this Form 10-K.
Sources and Uses of Cash in 2020 and 2019
For 2020, net cash used in our operations of $2.2 million was primarily due to our net loss of $5.3 million, a $1.6 million decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $1.3 million increase in inventory, a $680,000 increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $520,000 decrease in long-term liabilities. These decreases in cash were offset by $2.7 million of non-cash depreciation and amortization, a $2.6 million decrease in accounts receivable, $1.3 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense and $1.0 million of non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of our debt discount.
For 2019, net cash used in our operations of $4.2 million was primarily due to our net loss of $10.4 million, a $2.2 million increase in accounts receivable that was driven by increased revenue and an $830,000 increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets. These decreases in cash were offset by $2.6 million of non-cash depreciation and amortization, $2.5 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense and $840,000 of non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of our debt discount, a $1.4 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $450,000 decrease in deferred tax asset and a $390,000 increase in long-term liabilities.
For 2020, net cash used in our investing activities was approximately $620,000, which was primarily due to capital expenditures associated with the transfer of manufacturing to the facility at Cadence.
For 2019, net cash used in our investing activities was approximately $174,000, which was primarily due to the purchase of equipment and software.
For 2020, net cash provided by our financing activities was approximately $3.9 million, which was primarily due to borrowing the remaining $2.5 million under the 2019 Solar Loan Agreement and receiving the $1.8 million PPP Loan, offset by $430,000 of payments of finance lease obligations.
For 2019, net cash provided by our financing activities was approximately $869,000, which was primarily due to incurring $2.5 million of additional debt by entering into the $45.0 million 2019 Solar Loan Agreement and our sale of $1.0 million of common stock to Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC. These increases in cash were offset by payments of approximately $2.3 million, which included a $1.8 million fee to Solar Capital upon repayment of the 2018 Solar Loan that was previously accrued and a $400,000 prepayment fee to Solar Capital that was capitalized as deferred financing costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Net Revenue
We sell our products to major pharmaceutical distributors, pharmacies, hospitals and wholesalers (collectively, our Customers). In addition to distribution agreements with Customers, we enter into arrangements with healthcare providers and payors that provide for government-mandated and/or privately-negotiated rebates, chargebacks, and discounts with respect to the purchase of our products. All of our current contracts have a single performance obligation, as the promise to transfer the individual goods is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and is, therefore, not distinct.
Currently, all of our revenue is derived from product sales. We recognize revenues from product sales when the Customer obtains control, typically upon delivery. We accrue for fulfillment costs when the related revenue is recognized. Taxes collected from Customers relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenues.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had received a total of $1.0 million of milestone payments in connection with our Canadian distributor that we have not recognized as revenue based on our analysis in connection with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). These deferred revenues are included as a component of other non-current liabilities on our balance sheets.
Estimates of Variable Consideration
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for reserves related to statutory rebates to state Medicaid and other government agencies; commercial rebates and fees to Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), Group Purchasing Organizations (GPOs), distributors and specialty pharmacies; product returns; sales discounts (including trade discounts); distributor costs; wholesaler chargebacks; and allowances for patient assistance programs relating to sales of our products.
These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. Our estimates take into consideration historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and Customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration included in the net sales price is limited to the amount that is probable not to result in a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized in a future period. If actual results vary, we may adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment.
With respect to our international contracts with third party distributors, certain contracts have elements of variable consideration, and management reviews those contracts on a regular basis and makes estimates of revenue based on historical ordering patterns and known market events and data. The amount of variable consideration included in net sales in each period can vary depending on the terms of these contracts and the probability of reversal in future periods.
Additional Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. We evaluate the positive and negative evidence
bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets on an annual basis. Significant management judgment is involved in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. Due to uncertainties with respect to the realization of our U.S. deferred tax assets resulting from our history of operating losses, we have established a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax asset balances to reduce the net carrying value to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. As a result, we have fully reserved against the U.S. deferred tax asset balances. The valuation allowances are based on our estimates of taxable income in the jurisdictions in which we operate and the period over which deferred tax assets will be recoverable. If actual results differ from these estimates or we adjust these estimates in future periods, a change in the valuation allowance may be needed, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
Our deferred tax assets primarily consist of net operating loss (NOL) carry-forwards. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal NOL carry-forwards of approximately $131.4 million and state NOL carry-forwards of approximately $96.2 million, respectively, subject to further limitation based upon the final results of our analyses under Internal Revenue Code Sections 382 and 383. Except for the NOLs generated after 2017, the U.S. federal NOLs not fully utilized will expire at various dates between 2029 and 2037; most state NOL carry-forwards will expire at various dates between 2020 and 2040. Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, U.S. federal NOLs and some state NOLs generated after 2017 will carry forward indefinitely.
Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code limit the annual use of NOL carry-forwards and tax credit carry-forwards, respectively, following an ownership change. NOL carry-forwards may be subject to annual limitations under Internal Revenue Code Section 382 (Section 382) (or comparable provisions of state law) if certain changes in ownership were to occur. We periodically evaluate our NOL carry-forwards and whether certain changes in ownership have occurred that would limit our ability to utilize a portion of our NOL carry-forwards. If we determine that significant ownership changes have occurred since we generated our NOL carry-forwards, we may be subject to annual limitations on the use of these NOL carry-forwards under Section 382 (or comparable provisions of state law). We have determined that a Section 382 change in ownership occurred in late 2015. As a result of this change in ownership, we estimated that approximately $18.6 million of our federal NOLs and approximately $382,000 of federal tax credits generated prior to the change in ownership will not be utilized in the future. We are currently in the process of refining and finalizing these calculations, and upon finalization, will determine if a write-off is necessary. The reduction to our NOL deferred tax asset due to the annual Section 382 limitation and the NOL carryforward period would result in an offsetting reduction in valuation allowance recorded against the NOL deferred tax asset.
If we were to determine that we are able to realize any of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would adjust the valuation allowance to increase net income in the period in which we make that determination. We believe that the most significant uncertainty affecting the determination of our valuation allowance will be our estimation of the extent and timing of future net income, if any.
We considered our income tax positions for uncertainty in accordance with ASC 740. The balance of unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are approximately $65,970 and $58,000, respectively. Both balances relate to research and development tax credits. In accordance with ASC 740-10, such attributes are reduced to the amount that is expected to be recognized in the future. We do not accrue interest or penalties, as there is no risk of additional tax liability due to significant NOLs available. We do not expect any decreases to the unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months due to any lapses in statute of limitations. Tax years from 2015 to 2018 remain subject to examination in California, Georgia, Kentucky, New Jersey, Tennessee, Texas and on the federal level, provided that assessment of NOL carry-forwards available for use can be examined for all years since 2009. The statute of limitations on these years will close when the NOLs expire or when the statute closes on the years in which we use the NOLs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K) or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships. We enter into guarantees in the ordinary course of business related to the guarantee of our own performance and the performance of our subsidiaries.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our notes to consolidated financial statements below for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and expected effects on results of operations and financial condition, if known.