Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 26, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the Private Placement Warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial Business Combination, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on May 26, 2020. On May 29, 2020, we completed our Initial Public Offering of 103,500,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 13,500,000 units, sold to the public at the price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $1,035,000,000. Each Unit consists of one share of our Class A common stock and one-third of one redeemable warrant. Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of our Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale to the sponsors of an aggregate of 15,133,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $22,700,000. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one share of our Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The proceeds from the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account.
Following our Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $1,035,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $57,949,954 in transaction costs, including $20,700,000 of underwriting fees, $36,225,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $1,024,954 of other offering costs.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On January 25, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement by and among the Company, Alight, Alight Pubco, FTAC Merger Sub, Tempo Merger Sub, the Blocker Merger Subs and the Tempo Blockers. The Business Combination Agreement contemplates the consummation of the Pending Business Combination: (i) FTAC Merger Sub will merge with and into the Company, with the Company being the surviving corporation in the merger and becoming a subsidiary of Alight Pubco (the “Pubco Merger”) and (ii) Alight Pubco will, through a series of mergers and related transactions, acquire equity interests in Alight and the Tempo Blockers. Following the consummation of the Business Combination, the combined company will be organized in an “Up-C” structure, in which substantially all of the assets and business of Alight Pubco will be held by Alight. The combined company’s business will continue to operate through the subsidiaries of Alight.
The consideration to be paid to the pre-Closing equityholders of Alight and the pre-Closing equityholders of the Tempo Blockers (in connection with the merger of the Tempo Merger Sub with and into Alight (the “Tempo Merger”) and the merger of the Tempo Blocker Merger Subs with and into the Tempo Blockers, respectively, and certain other transactions at the closing of the Busines Combination (the “Closing”) will be a combination of cash and equity consideration.
The Business Combination will be consummated subject to the deliverables and provisions as further described in the Business Combination Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates.
For the period from March 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,556,540, which consists of formation and operating costs of $3,258,112 and a provision for income taxes of $147,695, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $849,267.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B ordinary shares by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
For the period from March 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $503,575. Net loss of $2,556,540 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $849,267 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $2,902,232 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities of $1,035,849,267 held in the Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes paid and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $496,471 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
In May 2020, the Company entered into forward purchase agreements with each of Cannae Holdings, Inc. and THL FTAC LLC. Pursuant to each agreement, Cannae Holdings, Inc. and THL FTAC LLC have each agreed to purchase shares of the Company’s Class A common stock in an aggregate share amount equal to 15,000,000 shares of the Company’s Class A Common stock (or a total of 30,000,000 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock), plus an aggregate of 5,000,000 redeemable warrants (or a total of 10,000,000 redeemable warrants) to purchase one share of the Company’s Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $150,000,000 (or a total of $300,000,000), or $10.00 for one share of the Company’s Class A common stock and onethird of one warrant, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of a Business Combination. The warrants to be sold as part of the forward purchase agreements will be identical to the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering.
We do not currently believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial Business Combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, related advisories and restrictions, and the availability of a vaccine. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy continue to be impacted for an extended period, our ability to complete our initial Business Combination may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 outbreak or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, and the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company's personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate our initial Business Combination in a timely manner.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements within the meaning of the applicable SEC rules as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsors a monthly fee up to $5,000 for office space and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on May 26, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $36,225,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We entered into forward purchase agreements with each of Cannae Holdings, Inc. and THL FTAC LLC. Pursuant to each agreement, Cannae Holdings, Inc. and THL FTAC LLC have each agreed to purchase shares of our Class A common stock in an aggregate share amount equal to 15,000,000 shares of our Class A Common stock (or a total of 30,000,000 shares of the our Class A common stock), plus an aggregate of 5,000,000 redeemable warrants (or a total of 10,000,000 redeemable warrants) to purchase one share of the Company’s Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $150,000,000 (or a total of $300,000,000), or $10.00 for one share of our Class A common stock and one-third of one warrant, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of a Business Combination. The warrants to be sold as part of the forward purchase agreements will be identical to the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.