ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. Our MD&A is organized as follows:
•
Overview. Discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting us to provide context for the remainder of MD&A.
•
Results of Operations. An analysis comparing our financial results for the year ended September 30, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”) to the year ended September 30, 2020 (“Fiscal 2020”).
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our cash flows and discussion of our financial condition and liquidity.
•
Contractual Obligations. Discussion of our contractual obligations as of September 30, 2021.
•
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. Discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements as of September 30, 2021.
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section provides a discussion of the significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.” The following discussion contains a number of forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Words such as "anticipates," "expects," "intends," "goals," "plans," "believes," "seeks," "estimates," "continues," "may," "will," "should," and variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such statements are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the risk and uncertainties described in “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.” Our actual results may differ materially.
Overview
ALJ Regional Holdings, Inc. (“ALJ” or “we”) is a holding company that operates Faneuil, Inc. (“Faneuil”) and Phoenix Color Corp. (“Phoenix”). Additionally, ALJ operated Floors-N-More, LLC, d/b/a Carpets N’ More (“Carpets”) through February 2021.
In January 2021, ALJ entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement (“PSA”), by and among ALJ, Superior Interior Finishes, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company (“Superior”) and Carpets, pursuant to which ALJ agreed to sell 100% of the membership interests of Carpets to Superior for an aggregate purchase price of $0.5 million (the “Purchase Price”) in cash (the “Transaction”). At the time of the PSA, Superior was 100% owned by Steve Chesin, the Chief Executive Officer of Carpets. ALJ entered into the PSA because its Carpets business segment had been deemed a non-core holding and had underperformed over the past several years. The Transaction, which was approved by a committee of the Board comprised solely of certain independent directors of the Company, closed in February 2021. As such, the results of operations, assets, liabilities, and cashflows of Carpets were classified as discontinued operations in ALJ’s financial statements for all periods presented. See “Part IV, Item 15 - Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 4. Acquisitions and Divestitures - Carpets Divestiture” for additional information about the divestiture of Carpets.
With several members of our senior management and Board of Directors coming from long careers in the professional services industry, ALJ is focused on acquiring and operating exceptional businesses.
We continue to see our business evolve as we execute our strategy of buying attractively valued assets. In analyzing the financial impact of any potential acquisition, we focus on earnings, operating margin, cash flow and return on invested capital targets. We hire successful and experienced management teams to run each of our operating companies and incentivize them to drive higher profits. We are focused on increasing our net revenue at each of our operating subsidiaries by investing in sales and marketing, expanding into new products and markets, and evaluating and executing on tuck-in acquisitions, while continually examining our cost structures to drive higher profits.
In June 2021, we replaced the Cerberus Term Loan with the Blue Torch Term Loan and amended the Cerberus/PNC Financing Agreement (referred to collectively as “Debt Refinance”) to (i) significantly reduce principal payments, (ii) consolidate debt, (iii) update financial covenants, and (iv) extend the maturity dates under both the Blue Torch Term Loan and the Amended PNC Revolver from November 2023 to June 2025. See “Part IV, Item 15 - Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 8. Debt” for additional information.
Impact of Coronavirus Pandemic - Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the world. COVID-19 is having an unprecedented impact on the U.S. economy as federal, state, and local governments react to this public health crisis.
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, all of ALJ’s subsidiaries have been deemed “Essential Services” and have continued to operate with limited disruption. To date, the impact of COVID-19 has been minimal. The Company took immediate actions to enable work-from-home where possible and put in place increased safety precautions, including social distancing, at other locations where essential services on site are required. The duration of these measures is unknown, may be extended, and additional measures may be imposed.
Although we have not been materially impacted by COVID-19, we could be impacted in the near term by lower volumes in several parts of our business, resulting in lower revenue and profit. While the impact of COVID-19 on our future financial position, results of operations and cash flows cannot be estimated with certainty, such impact could be significantly negative. Although some employees have recently started to return to work, we still have a significant portion of our work force working from home. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, including, among others, the duration of the outbreak, vaccination rate against the virus, new variants of the virus, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions, especially those taken by governmental authorities, to contain the pandemic or treat its impact. As events are rapidly changing, additional impacts may arise that are not known at this time. See “Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - Risks Related to our Businesses Generally - A widespread health crisis, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, may adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition,” for an additional discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain Consolidated Statements of Operations data as a percentage of net revenue, unless specifically footnoted, for each period as follows:
(1)
Percentage is calculated as segment net revenue divided by consolidated net revenue.
(2)
Percentage is calculated as a percentage of the respective segment net revenue.
(3)
Includes depreciation expense of $5.4 million and $4.6 million during Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
(4)
Primarily amortization of intangible assets. Total depreciation and amortization for Phoenix, including depreciation expense captured in cost of revenue, was $7.5 million and $6.8 million during Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Net Revenue
Faneuil Net Revenue
Faneuil net revenue for Fiscal 2021 was $325.2 million, an increase of $78.2 million, or 31.7%, compared to net revenue of $247.0 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was attributable to a $77.8 million and $17.9 million increase in revenues from new and existing customers, respectively, partly offset by a $17.5 million decrease driven by the completion of customer contracts.
Phoenix Net Revenue
Phoenix net revenue for Fiscal 2021 was $115.6 million, an increase of $12.6 million, or 12.2%, compared to net revenue of $103.0 million during Fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher component sales primarily related to trade sales.
Cost of Revenue
Faneuil Cost of Revenue
Faneuil cost of revenue for Fiscal 2021 was $267.3 million, an increase of $63.9 million, or 31.4%, compared to cost of revenue of $203.4 million for Fiscal 2020. The absolute dollar increase in cost of revenue was a direct result of the increased net revenue. During Fiscal 2021, as compared to Fiscal 2020, Faneuil cost of revenue as a percentage of segment net revenue remained consistent at 82.2% and 82.3%, respectively.
Phoenix Cost of Revenue
Phoenix cost of revenue for Fiscal 2021 was $87.9 million, an increase of $8.8 million, or 11.2% compared to cost of revenue of $79.1 million for Fiscal 2020. The absolute dollar increase in cost of revenue was a direct result of increased net revenue and to a lesser extent an increase in depreciation expense for new press equipment. During Fiscal 2021, as compared to Fiscal 2020, Phoenix cost of revenue as a percentage of segment net revenue decreased slightly to 76.0% from 76.8%, respectively. Phoenix experiences normal fluctuations to cost of revenue as a percentage of segment net revenue as a result of changes to the mix of products sold. Additionally, certain costs do not fluctuate directly with net revenue.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
Faneuil Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
Faneuil selling, general, and administrative expense for Fiscal 2021 was $40.1 million, an increase of $5.6 million, or 16.1%, compared to selling, general, and administrative expense of $34.6 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly attributable to higher legal fees, performance-related bonus expense, and other administrative expenses to support the overall growth in Faneuil’s business. During Fiscal 2021, as compared to Fiscal 2020, Faneuil selling, general, and administrative expense as a percentage of segment net revenue decreased to 12.3% from 14.0%. Certain selling, general, and administrative expenses do not fluctuate directly with net revenue. As such, we expect selling, general, and administrative expense as a percentage of segment net revenue to fluctuate.
Phoenix Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
Phoenix selling, general, and administrative expense for Fiscal 2021 was $13.0 million, an increase of $0.3 million, or approximately 2.6%, compared to $12.7 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly attributable to higher performance-related bonus expense offset by lower compensation and travel expenses as a result of COVID-19. Phoenix selling, general, and administrative expense as a percentage of segment net revenue decreased to 11.2% for Fiscal 2021 from 12.3% for Fiscal 2020, which was mainly attributable to the increase to Phoenix net revenue. Certain Phoenix selling, general, and administrative expenses do not fluctuate directly with net revenue. As such, we expect Phoenix selling, general, and administrative expense as a percentage of segment net revenue to fluctuate.
ALJ Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
ALJ selling, general, and administrative expense for Fiscal 2021 was $7.4 million, an increase of $2.5 million, or 51.7%, compared to selling, general, and administrative expense of $4.9 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly attributable to a $2.0 million increased bonus accrual and increased banking fees to support our various Financing Agreement amendments. We expect selling, general, and administrative expense to fluctuate in the future as we comply with SEC reporting requirements and regulations and allocate certain expenses to our subsidiaries.
Depreciation and Amortization
Faneuil Depreciation and Amortization
Faneuil depreciation and amortization expense for Fiscal 2021 was $14.1 million, an increase of $1.1 million, or 8.4%, compared to $13.0 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was attributable to capital equipment purchased to support new and expanded contracts, somewhat offset by fully depreciated and amortized assets. Because certain Faneuil contracts require capital investments such as lease buildouts, Faneuil depreciation and amortization expense is impacted by the timing of new contracts and the completion of existing contracts.
Phoenix Depreciation and Amortization
Phoenix depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets. Depreciation and amortization expense was consistent at $2.1 million and $2.2 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Impairment of Goodwill
As a result of the decline in ALJ’s market capitalization, downward economic pressure, declines in actual and forecasted results of operations, including the estimated effects of COVID-19, management determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill for all three reporting units was below each reporting unit’s respective carrying amount. As such, management performed an impairment test as of March 31, 2020, based on discounted cash flows, which were derived from internal forecasts and more cautious economic expectations for all three reporting units.
As a result of the test, ALJ recognized a non-cash impairment of goodwill totaling $56.5 million during Fiscal 2020. ALJ did not recognize any goodwill impairment during Fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $10.2 million and $10.5 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. Interest expense was impacted by our Debt Refinance in June 2021.
Interest from Legal Settlement
During Fiscal 2020, Faneuil received a onetime $1.5 million settlement, of which $0.2 million was attributable to interest. See “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 9. Commitments and Contingencies - Litigation, Claims, and Assessments” for additional information.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
We recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $2.1 million during Fiscal 2021, which was comprised of $1.2 million for the write off of deferred loan costs and $0.9 million of prepayment penalties. See “Part IV, Item 15 - Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 8. Debt” for additional information.
Income Taxes
ALJ recorded a provision for income taxes from continuing operations of $0.4 million and a benefit for income taxes from continuing operations of $2.0 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. The provision for Fiscal 2021 was the result of generating state taxable income. The benefit from income taxes for Fiscal 2020 was the result of changes to our valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets.
ALJ did not record a provision for or benefit from income taxes for discontinued operations during Fiscal 2021. ALJ recorded a provision for income taxes for discontinued operations of less than $0.1 million during Fiscal 2020.
Net Loss from Discontinued Operations
As a result of the sale of Carpets in February 2021, we recognized a net loss from discontinued operations of $1.1 million during Fiscal 2021, of which $0.8 million was attributable to the one-time loss on the sale of Carpets, and $3.5 million during Fiscal 2020, which was attributable to the operations of Carpets.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Faneuil Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Faneuil segment adjusted EBITDA for Fiscal 2021 was $19.3 million compared to segment adjusted EBITDA of $11.2 million for Fiscal 2020. Faneuil segment adjusted EBITDA increase for Fiscal 2021 was driven by the start of new contracts, operational improvements at existing contracts, reduced costs for medical and workers’ compensation claims, offset somewhat by continuing losses for one healthcare contract.
Phoenix Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Phoenix segment adjusted EBITDA for Fiscal 2021 was $20.3 million compared to segment adjusted EBITDA of $16.7 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher component sales primarily related to trade sales.
ALJ Segment Adjusted EBITDA
ALJ segment adjusted EBITDA loss for Fiscal 2021 was ($6.0) million compared to segment adjusted EBITDA loss of ($3.9) million for Fiscal 2020. ALJ segment adjusted EBITDA loss for Fiscal 2021 was impacted by an increased bonus expense.
Segment adjusted EBITDA is not considered a non-GAAP measure because we include segment adjusted EBITDA in our segment disclosures in accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification Topic 280 - Segment Reporting. See “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statements Schedules - Note 13. Reportable Segments and Geographic Information.”
Seasonality
Faneuil
Faneuil experiences seasonality within its various lines of business. For example, during the end of the calendar year through the end of the first calendar quarter, Faneuil generally experiences higher revenue attributable to its healthcare customers as the customer contact centers increase operations during the open enrollment periods of the healthcare exchanges. Faneuil revenue from its healthcare customers generally decreases during the remaining portion of the year after the open enrollment period. Seasonality is less pronounced with Faneuil customers in the transportation industry, though there is typically some volume increase during the summer months.
Phoenix
There is seasonality to the Phoenix business. Education book component sales (school and college) traditionally peak in the first and second quarters of the calendar year. Other book components sales traditionally peak in the third quarter of the calendar year. Book sales also traditionally peak in the third quarter of the calendar year. The fourth quarter of the calendar year has traditionally been the weakest quarter. These seasonal factors are not significant.
Climate Change
Our opinion is that neither climate change, nor governmental regulations related to climate change, have had, or are expected to have, any material effect on our operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity have been cash provided by operations and borrowings under various debt arrangements. On September 30, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity included cash and cash equivalents of $2.3 million and an available borrowing capacity of $23.5 million on our line of credit. Our principal uses of cash have been for acquisitions and to pay down debt. We anticipate that our principal uses of cash will continue to be to acquire businesses and pay down our debt.
Global financial and credit markets have been volatile in recent years and has been further exacerbated by COVID-19 since March 2020. Future adverse conditions of these markets could negatively affect our ability to secure funds or raise capital at a reasonable cost or at all. For additional discussion of our various debt arrangements see Contractual Obligations below.
In summary, our cash flows for each period were as follows:
We recognized a net loss of $4.6 million for Fiscal 2021, and generated cash from operating activities of $12.5 million, offset by cash used for both investing and financing activities of $8.1 million.
We recognized a net loss of $67.7 million for Fiscal 2020, and generated cash from operating activities of $12.9 million, offset by cash used for investing and financing activities of $9.5 million and $1.8 million, respectively.
Operating Activities
During Fiscal 2021, our operating activities provided $12.5 million, which was the result of our $4.6 million net loss, $28.0 million addback of net non-cash expenses, and $10.9 million of net cash used for changes in operating assets and liabilities. The most significant components of net non-cash expenses include depreciation and amortization expense of $21.6 million, loss on debt extinguishment of $2.1 million, $1.7 million interest expense and other bank fees accreted to term loans, and $1.2 million change in fair value of contingent consideration. The most significant components of changes in operating assets and liabilities were mostly attributable to the timing of Faneuil’s significant new customer implementations and included accounts receivable of $12.1 million, and deferred revenue and customer deposits of $6.5 million, which used cash, and accrued expenses of $5.9 million and other current liabilities and other non-current liabilities of $4.6 million, which provided cash.
During Fiscal 2020, our operating activities provided $12.9 million, which was the result of our $67.7 million net loss, $80.6 million addback of net non-cash expenses, and less than $0.1 million of net cash used for changes in operating assets and liabilities. The most significant components of net non-cash expenses include the impairment of goodwill of $56.5 million and depreciation and amortization expense of $19.8 million. The most significant components of changes in operating assets and liabilities were mostly attributable to the timing of Faneuil’s significant new customer implementations and included accounts receivable of $19.3 million, which used cash, offset by deferred revenue and customer deposits of $9.1 million, other current liabilities and other non-current liabilities of $4.9 million, and accrued expenses of $4.1 million, which provided cash. Additionally, the CARES Act allowed us to defer payment for $5.3 million of payroll-related taxes, which positively impacted our cash flow from operations. The CARES Act payroll liability is recorded in other non-current liabilities on September 30, 2020.
Cash provided by operations for Fiscal 2021 compared to cash provided by operations for Fiscal 2020, was impacted by higher cash earnings, increased accounts receivable due to the timing of Faneuil’s new customer implementations, managing vendor payments to preserve cashflow, and deferring payment of certain payroll-related taxes pursuant to the CARES Act.
Investing Activities
During Fiscal 2021, our investing activities used $8.1 million of cash, of which $3.8 million was used to purchase equipment and software for Faneuil’s new and existing customers, and $5.0 million was used to purchase capital equipment, mostly printing equipment for Phoenix, in the normal course of operations, offset by $0.4 million cash proceeds from the sale of Carpets and $0.3 million cash proceeds from the sale of redundant printing equipment.
During Fiscal 2020, our investing activities used $9.5 million of cash, of which $5.8 million was used to purchase equipment, software and leasehold improvements for Faneuil’s new and existing customers, and $3.7 million was used to purchase capital equipment in the normal course of operations.
Cash used for investing activities for Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 declined slightly due to Faneuil purchasing less equipment and software to support customers during Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, somewhat offset by Phoenix purchasing more printer equipment during Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020.
Financing Activities
During Fiscal 2021, our financing activities used $8.1 million of cash. In June 2021, we replaced our term loan with a new $95.0 million term loan and amended our revolving credit facility to (i) significantly reduce principal payments, (ii) consolidate debt, (iii) update financial covenants, and (iv) extend the maturity date from November 2023 to June 2025. In connection with the transaction, we paid deferred loan costs of $4.2 million. See “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 8. Debt.” for additional information.
During Fiscal, 2020, our financing activities used $1.8 million of cash. Net proceeds from our line of credit provided $4.6 million to fund working capital requirements at Faneuil, Phoenix, and Corporate. Our Ninth Amendment provided $1.5 million of cash, which was used to pay down our line of credit. Financing activities which used cash included $4.3 million to pay down our term loans, $2.8 million for capital lease payments, and $0.8 million for deferred loan costs related to the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Amendments to our Financing Agreement.
Cash used for financing activities for Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 was impacted by the replacement of our term loan and amendment of our revolving credit facility during June 2021.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations on September 30, 2021, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)
Refer to “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 8. Debt.”
(2)
Refer to “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 10. Leases.”
(3)
Amounts represent future cash payments to satisfy our short- and long-term workers’ compensation reserve, short- and long-term acquisition-related deferred and contingent liabilities, and other long-term liabilities recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. It excludes deferred revenue and non-cash items. Short- and long-term acquisition-related deferred and contingent payments are included in the table at total fair value, as defined by generally accepted accounting principles, of $4.7 million. On September 30, 2021, the total maximum amount of acquisition-related deferred and contingent cash payments was $5.0 million.
(4)
Total excludes contractual obligations already recorded on our consolidated balance sheets as current liabilities, except for the short-term portions of our term loans, short-term portion of acquisition-related deferred and contingent payments, and workers’ compensation reserve.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
On September 30, 2021, we had two types of off-balance sheet arrangements.
Surety Bonds. In the normal course of operations, certain Faneuil customers require surety bonds guaranteeing the performance of a contract. On September 30, 2021, the face value of such surety bonds, which represents the maximum cash payments that Faneuil would have to make under certain circumstances of non-performance, was approximately $41.9 million.
Letters of Credit. ALJ had letters of credit totaling $3.5 million outstanding on September 30, 2021, in connection with workers’ compensation insurance requirements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We regularly evaluate our estimates and assumptions related to the fair value of assets and liabilities, including intangible assets acquired and allocation of purchase price, useful lives, carrying value and recoverability of long-lived and intangible assets, the recoverability of goodwill, and revenue recognition. Certain accounting policies, as described below, are considered "critical accounting policies" because they are particularly dependent on estimates made by us about matters that are inherently uncertain and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of revenue, costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by us may differ materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations will be affected. A summary of all of our significant accounting policies is included in “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules - Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
We believe the following are critical accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates, assumptions, or judgments:
•
Valuation and allocation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business acquisitions;
•
Impairment of identified intangible assets and goodwill; and
•
Revenue recognition.
Business Acquisitions
Accounting for acquisitions requires our management to estimate the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, which involves a number of judgments, assumptions, and estimates that could materially affect the timing or amounts recognized in our financial statements. The items involving the most significant assumptions, estimates, and judgments include determining the fair value of the following:
-
Intangible assets, including valuation methodology, estimations of future cash flows, and discount rates, as well as the estimated useful life of the intangible assets;
-
Deferred tax assets and liabilities, uncertain tax positions, and tax-related valuation allowances, which are initially estimated as of the acquisition date;
-
Inventory; property, plant, and equipment; pre-existing liabilities or legal claims; deferred revenue; and contingent consideration, each as may be applicable; and
-
Goodwill, as measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
The goodwill and intangible assets acquired in business acquisitions are pushed down to the reporting unit that benefits from the business combination.
We use an independent valuation firm to assist with our valuation, and our assumptions and estimates are based upon comparable market data and information obtained from our management and the management of the acquired companies. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year following the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Long-Lived Asset Impairments
Identified Intangibles
We make judgments about the recoverability of purchased finite-lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. Recoverability of finite-lived intangible assets is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows that the asset is expected to generate.
The assumptions and estimates used to determine future values, such as expected future net cash flows, and remaining useful lives of our intangible and other long-lived assets are complex and subjective. They can be affected by internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or external factors such as industry and economic trends.
Goodwill
The application of the goodwill impairment test is considered a critical accounting estimate. We perform an annual impairment assessment of goodwill as of September 30 each year, or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist, which includes evaluating qualitative and quantitative factors to assess the likelihood of an impairment of goodwill. Each of our reporting units has goodwill assigned, which is assessed independently.
Qualitative factors considered in this assessment include industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting units. Additionally, as part of this assessment, we may perform a quantitative analysis to supplement and support the qualitative factors.
Our goodwill impairment test considers both the income method and the market method to estimate fair value. For both Faneuil and Phoenix, the goodwill impairment test is weighted 50% on the income method and 50% on the market method. For Carpets, the
goodwill impairment test is weighted 100% on the income method. The income method is based on a discounted future cash flow approach that uses the following major assumptions and inputs: revenue, based on assumed market segment growth rates and assumed market segment share, estimated costs, and weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”). WACC was estimated using guideline companies adjusted for a company-specific risk premium. Estimates of market segment growth, market segment share, and costs are based on historical data, various internal estimates, and a variety of external sources. The same estimates are also used in the Company’s business planning and forecasting process. The data is tested for reasonableness of the inputs and outcomes of our discounted cash flow analysis against available comparable market data. The market method used at Faneuil and Phoenix in estimating fair value is based on financial multiples and transaction prices of comparable companies. Significant judgment is required to estimate the fair value of reporting units which includes estimating future cash flows, determining appropriate discount rates and other assumptions. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or goodwill impairment.
During the year ended September 30, 2020, we wrote off 100% of our goodwill and recognized a non-cash impairment of goodwill totaling $56.5 million. The Company did not have any impairment of goodwill during the year ended September 30, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
We must make subjective estimates as to when our revenue is earned, the impact of pricing adjustments, and the collectability of our accounts receivable.
When upfront fees do not relate directly to the satisfaction or partial satisfaction of a performance obligation, the payments are deemed to be advance payments for future services. In such, instances, the fees are allocated to performance obligations and recognized when or as the performance obligations, typically call center services, are satisfied over the contract term, as defined under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). If a contract contains termination provisions, and such termination provisions are not substantive, the upfront nonrefundable fees may be fully recognized prior to the expiration of the stated term of the contract.
We record reductions to revenue for pricing adjustments, such as rebates, in the same period that the related revenue is recorded. Phoenix often has contracts with its customers that include prospective and retrospective volume rebates, credits, discounts, and other similar items that generally decrease the amount a customer pays Phoenix. These variable amounts generally are credited to the customer, based on achieving certain levels of sales activity during the contract term, or making payments within a specified number of days. Under ASC 606, with the exception of prospective volume rebates, these adjustments are classified as variable consideration, which is estimated at contract inception and included as part of the transaction price. Under ASC 606, prospective volume rebates are not part of the transaction price but are instead accounted for as a material right and separate performance obligation.