Item 7.
Management
’
s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a multi-national enterprise that leverages its proprietary data visualization technologies to design, develop, manufacture, distribute and service a broad range of products that acquire, store, analyze and present data in multiple formats. We organize our structure around a core set of competencies, including research and development, manufacturing, service, marketing and distribution. We market and sell our products and services through the following two segments:
•
Product Identification (“PI”) - offers color and monochromatic digital label printers, over-printers and custom OEM printers. PI also provides software to design, manage and print labeling and packaging images locally and across networked printing systems, as well as all related printing supplies such as pressure sensitive labels, tags, inks, toners and thermal transfer ribbons used by digital printers. PI also provides on-site
and remote service, spare parts and various service contracts.
•
Test and Measurement (“T&M”) - offers a suite of products and services that acquire data from local and networked data streams and sensors as well as wired and wireless networks. The T&M segment includes a line of aerospace printers used to print hard copies of data required for the safe and efficient operation of aircraft, including navigation maps, clearances, arrival and departure procedures, flight itineraries, weather maps, performance data, passenger data, and various air traffic control data. Aerospace products also include aircraft networking systems for high-speed onboard data transfer. T&M also provides repairs, service and spare parts.
We market and sell our products and services globally through a diverse distribution structure of direct sales personnel, manufacturers’ representatives and authorized dealers that deliver a full complement of branded products and services to customers in our respective markets. Our growth strategy centers on organic growth through product innovation made possible by research and development initiatives, as well as strategic acquisitions that fit into or complement existing core businesses. In fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, revenue from customers in various geographic areas outside the United States, primarily in Western Europe, Canada and Asia, amounted to $45.1 million, $49.8 million and $53.0 million, respectively.
We maintain an active program of product research and development. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we spent $6.2 million, $8.1 million and $7.8 million, respectively, on Company-sponsored product development. We are committed to continuous product development as essential to our organic growth and expect to continue our focus on research and development efforts in fiscal 2021 and beyond.
We also continue to invest in sales and marketing initiatives by expanding the existing sales force and using various marketing campaigns to achieve our goals of sales growth and increased profitability notwithstanding the challenging economic environment.
In fiscal 2018, we entered into an Asset Purchase and License Agreement (“Honeywell Agreement”) with Honeywell International, Inc. (“Honeywell”) pursuant to which, we acquired the exclusive perpetual world-wide license to manufacture Honeywell’s narrow format flight deck printers for the Boeing 737 and Airbus 320 aircraft.
COVID-19
Update-Overview
Our business has been materially adversely affected by the global COVID-19
pandemic, and will likely continue to be negatively impacted until the vaccine availability and inoculation rates reach the point where public health authorities conclude that the quarantines, travel restrictions, business closures, cancellations of public gatherings and other similar measures are no longer necessary. We operate in several regions of the world, with the largest concentration of team members in North America and Europe, and a small presence in Asia. Due to the COVID-19
pandemic, we and many other businesses and organizations with which we do business directly or which otherwise impact us have taken and are continuing to take steps to avoid or reduce infection, including limiting business travel and working from home as advised by the public health authorities. These measures have been and continue to be disrupting normal business operations both inside and outside of affected areas and have had significant negative impacts on our business, the businesses of our suppliers and customers, and on businesses and financial markets worldwide.
Since the COVID-19
pandemic began to impact us in early March 2020, we have closely monitored the government and health authority recommendations applicable to us and have made modifications to our operations based on that guidance and on our growing experience and knowledge of the situation. We responded by reducing our staffing levels and reducing other costs.
In response to the pandemic, we have established new procedures to monitor government recommendations and regulations and made good faith efforts to comply with both those regulations and the best practices recommendations issued by a variety of governmental health authorities and manufacturing industry organizations to which we belong. In addition, we have made significant modifications to our normal operations, including requiring most non-production
related team members to work remotely, for at least part-time. At this time, we expect that these measures will continue to remain in place for the near term, and we do not know when or if it will become practical to relax or eliminate them altogether. Since the start of the pandemic, we have maintained most of manufacturing operational capacity at our facilities located in West Warwick, Rhode Island, as well as our manufacturing facilities in Canada and Germany. However, there have been periods when a number of team members were unable to keep work schedules due to the effect of the COVID -19
pandemic, resulting in reduced production capacity and longer order fulfillment lead times and as a result, reduced revenues. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our manufacturing production in the future will depend on future
COVID-19
developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and any associated variants, the efficacy and distribution of vaccines, and the actions to contain COVID-19 or
treat its impact, among others. We also do not yet know to what extent our operations will be impacted permanently by remote work, increased safety protocols and the other temporary adaptations undertaken during the pandemic.
During the COVID-19
pandemic, we have experienced some difficulties in obtaining raw materials and components for our products. We have been able to recover from these difficulties, but we have had to incur some additional costs in expedited and express shipping fees. These difficulties have impacted our efficiency and our ability to satisfy customer requirements, but we have been able to keep these impacts to a minimum. We are currently monitoring the world-wide delays in transit time, as freight carriers are now experiencing significant delays in overseas shipments. We are addressing these issues through long range planning and supplementing inventories as needed. We are also monitoring the extended lead times on active electronic components and utilizing several strategies, including blanket orders, vendor bonded inventories, and extended commitments to our supply base. Additionally, we have taken actions to maintain regular contact with our important vendors and have increased our forecasting horizon for our products to help us better manage our supply chain. Our strategies to counteract the impact of the pandemic have tended to increase the amount of inventory we have had to maintain, but because of the complexity of our supply chain it is impossible to isolate the exact impact. We will continue to monitor our supply chain.
While it is not possible at this time to estimate the full scope of the impact that COVID-19
will have on our business, customers, suppliers or other business partners in the long run, we expect that the lasting presence of COVID-19
will continue to adversely impact our operational capacity and the efficiency of our team members and will continue to negatively affect our results of operations and financial condition for the near term.
Product Identification Update
The global COVID-19
pandemic has also negatively impacted sales of our Product Identification hardware products primarily as a result of the impact of travel restrictions on our sales efforts, as most customers historically have preferred in-person
demonstrations of these printers at their production sites prior to placing orders with us and those visits have been severely limited. Additionally, the widespread cancellation of trade shows, which traditionally provided an effective forum for customers to consider our products, has also had an adverse impact on traditional methods of sales lead generation. However, we believe we have been able to ameliorate these negative impacts by placing a greater reliance on various forms of digital advertising and internet-based marketing techniques, including remote video demonstrations and support, which has proven effective in obtaining sales. Despite favorable market reception to our recently refreshed and expanded product lines, the degree to which we will be able to maintain or grow the level of hardware revenues through the changes we have made to our go-to-market
strategies remains unclear. When the COVID-19
pandemic abates, and it is possible again for our direct sales force and distributors to travel to visit customers and attend and present products at trade shows (if they are even offered) it is likely that some reversion to those historical sales methods will occur, but some of the COVID-19
induced adaptations are also likely to become permanent. We do not know how that mix of sales strategies will evolve and how they will impact the results of operations for this segment.
Despite the pandemic, underlying overall demand remained strong through this period and in general, we believe that the diversified nature of our end markets and the relative concentration of business in consumer non-durable
market related applications impart a greater degree of near- and longer-term stability to our Product Identification segment.
Test & Measurement Update
Our sales of flight deck printers for Boeing 737 aircraft have been severely impacted by the chain of events that occurred after two 737 MAX aircraft crashed. In March 2019, all major civil aviation authorities worldwide grounded the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft for safety reasons. In April 2019, Boeing reduced the number of 737
MAX aircraft produced per month from 52 to 42, and in January 2020, Boeing ceased production of the 737 MAX completely. On May 27, 2020, in anticipation of an eventual certification, Boeing announced that it would re-start
production at low initial rates and gradually increase production in the future.
On August 3, 2020, the United States Federal Aviation Administration (the “FAA”) issued a notice of proposed rulemaking for a Boeing 737 MAX airworthiness directive, and on November 18, 2020 the FAA certified the model for return to service in the United States. On January 27, 2021, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) approved the return to service of the Boeing 737 MAX in Europe. The exact timing of re-certification
by other worldwide civil aviation authorities is unknown but we expect that most will permit a return to service later in 2021. Before any individual 737 MAX aircraft can return to commercial service, all civilian aviation authority agency certification requirements relevant to each carrier must be met. As these requirements vary, and can be quite extensive, the exact timing of the recertification and return to service of the 737 MAX fleet in each geographical area is unclear at this time and will depend on the ability of Boeing and each airline to complete the required steps.
Aircraft manufacturing rather than aircraft deliveries drives demand for our airborne printer products. We have experienced very low levels of 737 MAX new printer orders and shipments since the production halt, as Boeing is now producing a small number of new aircraft per month. The majority of our future 737 MAX printer sales volume will be tied to the pace of Boeing’s manufacturing dates and delivery schedules, and the recovery is expected to be prolonged. We believe that Boeing has already installed our printers in most of the airplanes that it has completed and that require our printers to be installed prior to delivery. Further, due to the COVID-19
pandemic, global air travel demand precipitously declined, and the number of flights scheduled by airlines declined sharply. As a result, order demand from airlines for new deliveries of most aircraft models has declined. The demand for air travel and the demand for new airplanes from the airlines is expected to remain lower for an unknown period due to the unpredictable course of the pandemic and the perceived infection risk of air travel. Aircraft manufacturers have reduced their projected production rates across most or all of their product lines. As the COVID-19
pandemic impact on the air travel industry continues, the financial health of the airlines and airframe manufacturers may become further stressed, and the ultimate impact on the structure of the industry and the individual companies that comprise it is unknown. Because we are the primary source for aircraft cabin printers to the airframe manufacturers for a majority of aircraft models produced in the world, the longer-term demand for our products is defined less by the impact of COVID-19
on particular airlines within the industry than the health of the industry as a whole. Although we do not know what the timing and rate of recovery will be, we do expect that the industry, and hence the demand for our products, will continue to recover slowly after effective vaccines and treatments for COVID-19
become both widely available and accepted, and as demand for air travel recovers.
Demand for aerospace spare products, paper, parts and repairs has also been significantly impacted by the decline in air travel, as requirements for these products and services are based primarily upon aircraft usage. Although we have experienced modest increases in demand for spare products, paper, parts and repairs as flight hours have increased since the second quarter of fiscal 2021, it is unknown whether this will continue or increase, or at what pace.
The decline in demand for our aerospace products has had a material adverse impact on our revenues and results of operations, which we expect will continue until demand recovers.
While we have reduced and plan to continue to reduce our costs as much as we are prudently able to, our strategy and operational plans are to maintain sufficient capabilities and staffing to fully support our customers and meet the stringent quality requirements the market requires, and to be able to rapidly increase production as demand returns, the decline in revenue has adversely impacted our profitability.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
The following table presents the revenue of each of our segments, as well as the percentage of total revenue and change from the prior year.
Net revenue in fiscal 2021 was $116.0 million, a 13.0% decrease compared to net revenue of $133.4 million for fiscal 2020. Current year revenue through domestic channels was $70.9 million, a decline of 15.3% from prior year domestic revenue of $83.7 million. International revenue of $45.1 million for fiscal 2021 decreased 9.4% compared to prior year international revenue of $49.8 million. Fiscal 2021 international revenue reflects a favorable foreign exchange rate impact of $0.8 million, compared to an unfavorable impact of $1.4 million in fiscal 2020. International revenue declined primarily due to lower international sales of aerospace printers in Europe.
Hardware revenue in fiscal 2021 was $34.1 million, a $14.8 million, or 30.3%, decrease compared to fiscal 2020 hardware revenue of $49.0 million. The current year decrease in hardware revenue is primarily due to the decline in revenue in the T&M segment resulting from lower aerospace printer product lines sales as a result of the effects of the Boeing 737 MAX grounding and the impact of the sharp decline in air travel due to COVID-19.
T&M hardware revenue for the current year was also impacted by a decline in sales of data recorders. Also contributing to the overall decline in hardware revenue for the current year was a more modest the decline in sales in the PI segment of certain QuickLabel model printers which was entirely offset by sales related to printers in the TrojanLabel product group.
Revenue from supplies in fiscal 2021 was $71.8 million, which was consistent with the fiscal 2020 supplies revenue. The PI segment recognized an increase in current year supply revenue primarily due to increased demand for Trojan Label product supplies due to increased market penetration of these printers, offset somewhat by lower sales of QuickLabel supplies compared to a very strong prior year. This increase was offset to a large extent by a decline in sales supplies for the aerospace product group due to the declines in commercial aircraft flight hours within the T&M segment.
Service and other revenue in fiscal 2021 was $10.1 million, a 19.8% decrease compared to fiscal 2020 service and other revenue of $12.6 million. The current year decrease is due primarily to declines in repair and part revenue related to the aerospace printer product line in the T&M segment as the result of declines in commercial aircraft flight hours.
Gross profit was $41.4 million for fiscal 2021, reflecting a 15.2% decline compared to fiscal 2020 gross profit of $48.8 million. Our gross profit margin of 35.6% in fiscal 2021 reflects a decrease compared to fiscal 2020 gross profit margin of 36.5%. The lower gross profit for the current year compared to the prior year is primarily attributable to the adverse effects of the decline in revenue in the aerospace printer product line and related product mix, which were slightly offset by the favorable impact of reductions on our manufacturing and period costs.
Operating expenses for the current year were $38.9 million, representing a 16.0% decrease from the prior year’s operating expenses of $46.3 million. Specifically, selling and marketing expenses of $23.3 million in fiscal 2021 decreased 13.3% from the prior year amount of $26.9 million. The decrease in selling and marketing expenses for the current year is primarily due to decreased travel and entertainment, advertising trade shows and commission expenses. Selling and marketing expenses represent 20.1% of net revenue for both fiscal 2021 and
2020. Current year general and administrative (“G&A”) expenses of $9.4 million decreased by 17.1% from the prior year amount of $11.4 million, primarily as a result of decreased IT costs, a decline in employee fees and lower travel and entertainment expenses due to the impact of COVID-19.
G&A expenses represented 8.1% of net revenue for fiscal 2021, compared to 8.5% in fiscal 2020. The decline in G&A expenses in the current year is partially offset by an increase in expenses for outside services fees. Research & development (“R&D”) costs in fiscal 2021 of $6.2 million decreased 23.2% from $8.1 million in fiscal 2020, primarily due to a decrease in wages, benefits and outside services. The R&D spending level for fiscal 2021 represents 5.3% of net revenue, a decrease compared to the prior year level of 6.1%.
Other expense in fiscal 2021 was $0.3 million compared to $1.1 million in fiscal 2020. Current year other expense includes $1.0 million of interest expense on debt and revolving line of credit, offset by a net foreign exchange gain of $0.6 million and other income of $0.1 million. Other expense in fiscal 2020 includes interest expense on debt of $0.7 million and a foreign exchange loss of $0.5 million, which were partially offset by investment and other income of $0.1 million.
Net income for fiscal 2021 was $1.3 million, or $0.18 per diluted share, a decrease compared to $1.8 million, or $0.24 per diluted share in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021 we recognized a $0.9 million income tax expense, or a 41.1% effective tax rate compared to an income tax benefit of $0.4 million, or a 28.4% negative effective tax rate for fiscal 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate in 2021 from 2020 is primarily related to the change in mix of income between relevant jurisdictions in which we are subject to income taxes. Specific items increasing the fiscal 2021 effective tax rate include foreign rate differential, Denmark statutory audit adjustments, stock-based compensation, and Canada withholding taxes. This increase was offset by the foreign derived intangible income deduction, the release of a valuation allowance in China, and R&D tax credits expected to be utilized.
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2020 and January 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on April 10, 2020.
Segment Analysis
We report two segments consistent with our product revenue groups: PI and T&M. Segment performance is evaluated based on the operating segment’s profit (loss) before corporate and financial administration expenses. The following table summarizes selected financial information by segment.
Product Identification
Revenue from the PI segment increased 2.4% in fiscal 2021, with revenue of $90.3 million compared to revenue of $88.1 million in the prior year. The current year increase is primarily attributable to growth in demand for ink jet and media supplies for the Trojan Label product line and to a lesser degree, the increase in current year sales of QuickLabel’s electrophotographic printer supplies. Also contributing to the increase in revenue for the current year was an increase in hardware sales in the Trojan Label product group, including contributions from the launch of new products such as the T3-OPX
label press. PI current year segment operating profit was $12.9 million with a profit margin of 14.3%, compared to the prior year segment operating profit of $7.5 million and related profit margin of 8.5%. The increase in current year segment operating profit and margin is primarily due to increased revenue and lower operating and period costs.
Test & Measurement
Revenue from the T&M product group was $25.8 million for fiscal 2021, a 43.2% decrease compared to revenue of $45.3 million in the prior year. The decrease in revenue for the current year is primarily attributable to the decline in the aerospace printer product lines impacted by the Boeing 737 MAX grounding and the dramatic drop in air travel due to the impact of COVID-19.
To a lesser degree, the decrease in the current year revenue was also impacted by the declines in certain T&M’s data acquisition hardware sales, as well as a decline in supplies, service and other revenue in the aerospace product lines, due to Covid-19
induced declines in commercial airline flights. T&M current year segment operating loss was $1.0 million resulting in a negative 4.0% profit margin compared to the
prior year segment operating profit of $6.3 million and related operating margin of 13.9%. Despite lower manufacturing and period costs, the segment operating loss and related margin for the current year is primarily due to the decline in current year revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Historically, our primary sources of short-term liquidity have been cash generated from operating activities and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. These sources have also funded a portion of our capital expenditures and contractual contingent consideration obligations. We have typically funded acquisitions by borrowing under bank term loan facilities.
The onset of the COVID-19
pandemic and the decline in revenues in the T&M segment due to the decline in aerospace printer sales, combined with the period of COVID-19
pandemic induced credit risk avoidance in the capital markets, led to a period of liquidity concerns for us through the second quarter of fiscal 2021 despite our efforts to reduce expenses as rapidly as possible and preserve liquidity. As a result of the availability of the PPP loan during our fiscal second quarter of 2021discussed below, we were able, despite a pending default on our credit facility, to secure an amendment at the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2021 that provided additional liquidity. Those two sources of capital allowed us the time necessary to retain employment levels and focus on continuing efforts to reduce costs, and as those cost reductions took hold, to improve operating profit and cash flow. Based on improved conditions in the credit market and in recognition of the substantial cost and working capital reductions we accomplished, we were able to reduce our debt, and, subsequent to the end of fiscal year 2021, renegotiate the amendment to the credit agreement we had signed in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, which, together with our improved performance, restored us to a solid liquidity position.
On May 6, 2020, we entered into a loan agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with and executed a promissory note (the “Promissory Note”) in favor of Greenwood Credit Union (“Greenwood”) pursuant to which we borrowed $4.4 million (the “PPP Loan”) from Greenwood pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) administered by the United States Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) and authorized by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), enacted on March 27, 2020. The terms
of the PPP Loan were subsequently revised in accordance with the provisions of the Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of 2020 (the “PPP Flexibility Act”), which was enacted on June 5, 2020. We believe that our obtaining the PPP Loan and suspending the payment of dividends on our common stock were instrumental in our ability to successfully negotiate the A&R Credit Agreement, as defined below.
At the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2021, the deterioration of our financial condition and operating results due to the decline in 737 MAX-related
revenue and COVID-19
impacts caused us to violate the financial covenants in our Credit Agreement dated February 28, 2017 (the “Prior Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A. (the “Lender”). On June 22, 2020, we entered into a letter agreement with the Lender wherein it agreed to waive compliance with those financial covenants for the measurement period ended May 2, 2020.
On July 30, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “A&R Credit Agreement”) with the Lender, our wholly owned subsidiary ANI ApS, a Danish private limited liability company and ANI ApS’s wholly-owned subsidiary TrojanLabel ApS, a Danish private limited liability company (“TrojanLabel”). The A&R Credit Agreement amended and restated the Prior Credit Agreement. In connection with our entry into the A&R Credit Agreement, we entered into an Amended and Restated Security and Pledge Agreement and a mortgage in favor of the Lender with respect to our owned real property in West Warwick, Rhode Island. Under the A&R Credit Agreement, AstroNova, Inc. is the sole borrower, and, prior to the effectiveness of the Amendment (as defined below), its obligations were guaranteed by ANI ApS and TrojanLabel.
Immediately prior to the closing of the A&R Credit Agreement, we repaid $1.5 million in principal amount of term loans outstanding under the Prior Credit Agreement.
The A&R Credit Agreement provided for (i) a term loan in the principal amount of $15.2 million, which we used to refinance the outstanding term loans borrowed by us and ANI ApS under the Prior Credit Agreement and a portion of the outstanding revolving loans borrowed by us under the Prior Credit Agreement, and (ii) a $10.0 million revolving credit facility available to us for general corporate purposes. Revolving credit loans may be borrowed, at our option, in U.S. Dollars or, subject to certain conditions, Euros, British Pounds, Canadian Dollars or Danish Kroner.
At January 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $11.4 million. There was no outstanding balance on our revolving line of credit at January 31, 2021 and we had $10.0 million available for borrowing under the A&R Credit Agreement.
On March 24, 2021, subsequent to year end, we entered into a First Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”) to our A&R Credit Agreement (the “A&R Credit Agreement amended by the Amendment, the “Amended Credit Agreement”) with the Lender, ANI ApS and TrojanLabel. Immediately prior to the closing of the Amendment, we repaid $ 2.6 million in principal amount of the term loan outstanding under the A&R Credit Agreement, resulting in an outstanding balance of the term loan of $10.0 million and no amount drawn and outstanding under the revolving credit facility under the Amended Credit Agreement.
The Amended Credit Agreement expires on September 30, 2025, a significant extension of tenor. It also eliminated a minimum adjusted EBITDA covenant, an asset coverage covenant and a minimum liquidity covenant, and, subject to ongoing covenant compliance, significantly reduced limitations on restricted payments such as dividends, eliminated restrictions on capital expenditures and increased operating flexibility with respect to funding our global operations.
The Amended Credit Agreement provides for (i) a term loan in the principal amount of $10.0 million, and (ii) a $22.5 million revolving credit facility available for general corporate purposes. At the closing of the Amended Credit Agreement, we borrowed the entire $10.0 million term loan which was used to refinance in full the outstanding term loan under the A&R Credit Agreement. Under the Amended Credit Agreement, revolving credit loans may continue to be borrowed, at our option, in U.S. Dollars or, subject to certain conditions, Euros, British Pounds, Canadian Dollars or Danish Kroner.
While we expected that as a result of the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, some of our customers would experience liquidity pressure and be unable to pay us for products on a timely basis, in general our recent receivables collection experience has been consistent with our historical experience and a significant deterioration in receivables collection has not occurred through the end of fiscal year. We believe that this favorable result in T&M was due in part to the terms of the contractual relationships with our customers, and in part due to the critical nature of the nature of repairs and supplies relationships. In Product Identification it was due to the critical nature of our relationships with our customers and the general resilience of the markets we generally serve. For both segments, we have experienced improved collections efforts. During the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we experienced a limited number of cases in which certain of our aerospace customers failed to pay us on a timely basis and we increased our reserves for potential losses on those accounts. In the second quarter of fiscal 2021, two small airlines with whom we had small receivable balances for which we had previously fully reserved, entered bankruptcy, but in general, in the following quarters, the aerospace customer problems abated such that we did not increase our reserves. If the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic continues for a prolonged period or worsens, we may experience further adverse impacts of delayed aerospace receivable collections.
In response to the COVID-19
pandemic and related economic dislocation, we have implemented and will continue to implement a variety of expense reduction and cash preservation initiatives. On April 27, 2020, our board of directors suspended our quarterly cash dividend beginning with the second quarter of our fiscal year 2021.
We currently have $22.5 million available for borrowing under our Amended Credit Agreement and we believe that our available cash and credit facilities combined with our cash generated from operations will be sufficient to support our operating requirements, so long as the impact of COVID-19
does not worsen.
Indebtedness
Term Loan
The Amended Credit Agreement requires that the term loan be paid as follows: the principal amount of each quarterly installment required to be paid on the last day of each of our fiscal quarters ending on or about April 30, 2021 through January 31, 2022 is $187,500; the principal amount of each quarterly installment required to be paid on the last day of each of our fiscal quarters ending on or about April 30, 2022 through January 31, 2023 is $250,000; the principal amount of each quarterly installment required to be paid on the last day of each of our fiscal quarters ending on or about April 30, 2023 through January 31, 2025 is $312,500; the principal amount of each quarterly installment required to be paid on the last day of each of our fiscal quarters ending on or about April 30, 2025 and July 31, 2025 is $500,000; and the entire remaining principal balance of the term loan is required to be paid on September 30, 2025. We may voluntarily prepay the term loan, in whole or in part, from time to time without premium or penalty (other than customary breakage costs, if applicable). We may repay borrowings under the revolving credit facility at any time without premium or penalty (other than customary breakage costs, if applicable), but in any event no later than September 30, 2025, at which time any outstanding revolving loans will be due and payable in full, and the revolving credit facility will terminate. We may reduce or terminate the revolving line of credit at any time, subject to certain thresholds and conditions, without premium or penalty.
The Amended Credit Agreement includes an uncommitted accordion provision under which the term loan and/or revolving credit facility commitments may be increased in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $10,000,000, subject to obtaining the agreement of the Lender and the satisfaction of certain other conditions.
As under the A&R Credit Agreement, the loans under the Amended Credit Agreement are subject to certain mandatory prepayments, subject to various exceptions, from (a) net cash proceeds from certain dispositions of property, (b) net cash proceeds from certain issuances of equity, (c) net cash proceeds from certain issuances of additional debt and (d) net cash proceeds from certain extraordinary receipts.
Amounts repaid under the revolving credit facility may be reborrowed, subject to continued compliance with the Amended Credit Agreement. No amount of the term loan that is repaid may be reborrowed.
The interest rates under the A&R Credit Agreement were modified in the Amended Credit Agreement as follows: the term loan and revolving credit loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, either (a) the LIBOR Rate as defined in the A&R Credit Agreement (or in the case of revolving credit loans denominated in a currency other than U.S. Dollars, the applicable quoted rate), plus a margin that varies within a range of 1.60% to 2.30% based on our consolidated leverage ratio, or (b) a fluctuating reference rate equal to the highest of (i) the federal fund rate plus 0.50%, (ii) Bank of America’s publicly announced prime rate, (iii) the LIBOR Rate plus 1.00% or (iv) 0.50%, plus a margin that varies within a range of 0.60% to 1.30% based on our consolidated leverage ratio. In addition to certain other fees and expenses that we are required to pay to the Lender, we are required to pay a commitment fee on the undrawn portion of the revolving credit facility that varies within a range of 0.15% and 0.30% based on our consolidated leverage ratio.
We must comply with various customary financial and non-financial
covenants under the Amended Credit Agreement. The financial covenants under the Amended Credit Agreement consist of a maximum consolidated leverage ratio and a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio. The minimum EBITDA, minimum consolidated asset coverage ratio, minimum liquidity and maximum capital expenditures covenants with which we were required to comply under the A&R Credit Agreement were eliminated by the Amendment. The primary non-financial
covenants limit our and our subsidiaries’ ability to incur future indebtedness, to place liens on assets, to pay dividends or distributions on their capital stock, to repurchase or acquire their capital stock, to conduct mergers or acquisitions, to sell assets, to alter their capital structure, to make investments and loans, to change the nature of their business, and to prepay subordinated indebtedness, in each case subject to certain exceptions and thresholds as set forth in the Amended Credit Agreement, certain of which provisions were modified by the Amendment.
The Lender is entitled to accelerate repayment of the loans and to terminate its revolving credit commitment under the Amended Credit Agreement upon the occurrence of any of various customary events of default, which include, among other events, the following (which are subject, in some cases, to certain grace periods): failure to pay when due any principal, interest or other amounts in respect of the loans, breach of any of our covenants or representations under the loan documents, default under any other of our or our subsidiaries’ significant indebtedness agreements, a bankruptcy, insolvency or similar event with respect to us or any of our subsidiaries, a significant unsatisfied judgment against us or any of our subsidiaries, or a change of control.
Our obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement continue to be secured by substantially all of our personal property assets (including a pledge of the equity interests held by us in ANI ApS, in our wholly-owned German subsidiary AstroNova GmbH, and in our wholly-owned French subsidiary AstroNova SAS), subject to certain exceptions, and by a mortgage on our owned real property in West Warwick, Rhode Island. Pursuant to the Amendment, the guarantees of our obligations under the A&R Credit Agreement that were previously provided by ANI ApS and TrojanLabel were released.
PPP Loan
The PPP Loan, which will mature on May 6, 2022, is unsecured and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum, accruing from the loan date and is payable monthly. No payments are due on the PPP Loan at this time, but interest accrues during the deferral period. Interest accrued in the amount of $33,000 is included in other expense for the period ended January 31, 2021.
The PPP Loan may be prepaid at any time without penalty. The Loan Agreement and Promissory Note include customary provisions for a loan of this type, including prohibitions on our payment of dividends or repurchase of shares of our stock while the PPP Loan remains outstanding and events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults, breaches of the provisions of the Loan Agreement or the Promissory Note and cross-defaults on other loans.
Subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in the CARES Act, the PPP Flexibility Act and the regulations and guidance provided by the SBA with respect to the PPP, a portion of the PPP Loan may be forgiven in an amount up to the amount of the PPP Loan proceeds we spent on payroll, rent, utilities and interest on certain debt during the twenty-four week period following incurrence of the PPP Loan; interest accrued on the forgiven portion of the principal amount of the PPP Loan is also forgiven. The amount of the PPP Loan to be forgiven in respect of rent, utilities and interest on certain debt will be capped at 40% of the forgiven amount, with the remaining forgiven amount allocated to payroll costs. We fully utilized the PPP Loan proceeds for qualifying expenses and have applied for forgiveness of the PPP Loan (including all associated accrued interest) subsequent to year end. Whether our application for forgiveness will be granted and in what amount is subject to an application to, and approval by, the SBA and may also be subject to further requirements in any regulations and guidelines the SBA may adopt.
Cash Flow
The statements of cash flows for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are included on page 53 of this Form 10-K.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $15.5 million in fiscal 2021 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $3.2 million in the previous year. The increase in net cash provided by operations for the current year is primarily due to an increase in cash provided by working capital of $12.4 million from fiscal 2020. The changes in accounts receivable, inventory, income taxes, accounts payable and accrued expenses for the current year increased cash by $7.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to a decrease to cash of $5.0 million in the prior year.
The accounts receivable balance decreased to $17.4 million at January 31, 2021, compared to $19.8 at January 31, 2020. The $2.4 million decrease in the accounts receivable balance is directly related to lower full year revenues in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year. The days sales outstanding dropped to 51 days at year end compared to 55 days at the end of fiscal 2020 contributing to the lower receivables balance at January 31, 2021. The days sales outstanding decrease in the current year is due to customer mix, as aerospace receivables typically take longer to collect, and these revenues were down significantly in fiscal 2021.
The year-end
inventory balance decreased to $30.1 million at January 31, 2021 versus $33.9 million at January 31, 2020 and the days inventory on hand decreased to 147 days at the end of fiscal 2021 as compared to 151 days at the end of the fiscal 2020. The current period decrease in inventory is due to lower production demand, particularly in the Test & Measurement segment and the related days on hand decline is a reflection of improved procurement strategies and production scheduling.
Net cash used by investing activities for fiscal 2021 was $2.6 million for capital expenditures, consisting of $0.1 million for land and building improvements; $2.4 million for information technology; and $0.1 million for tools and dies.
Net cash used by financing activities for fiscal 2021 was $5.1 million, consisting primarily of $6.5 million net cash decrease on the revolving line of credit, $4.0 million of principal payments of long-term debt, $2.0 million payment on the guaranteed royalty obligation payment, and $0.5 million of dividends, offset by $4.4 million of proceeds received from the PPP loan and a net of $3.5 million of proceeds received in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 related to the refinance of long-term debt..
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
For a comparison of our cash flow for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2020 and January 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our annual report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on April 10, 2020.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
At January 31, 2021, our contractual obligations with initial remaining terms in excess of one year were as follows:
(1) Purchase obligations include undiscounted amounts committed under legally enforceable contracts or purchase orders for goods and services with defined terms as to price, quantity and delivery dates.
(2) Based on the term loan balance outstanding under the A&R Credit Agreement as of January 31, 2021.
(3) Interest rate on variable rate debt is based on the LIBOR Rate, plus a margin that varies within a range of 2.15% to 3.65% based on our consolidated leverage ratio for the outstanding loan under the A&R Credit Agreement as of January 31, 2021.
(4) We are subject to a guaranteed minimum royalty payment obligation over the next seven years pursuant to the Honeywell Asset Purchase and License Agreement. Refer to Note 11, “Royalty Obligation” in the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for further details.
(5) We are subject to excess royalty payments beyond the guaranteed minimum royalty obligation pursuant to the Honeywell Asset Purchase & License Agreement. Refer to Note 11, “Royalty Obligation,” in the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for further details.
We are also subject to contingencies, including legal proceedings and claims arising out of its businesses that cover a wide range of matters, such as: contract and employment claims; workers compensation claims; product liability claims; warranty claims; and claims related to modification, adjustment or replacement of component parts of units sold. While it is impossible to ascertain the ultimate legal and financial liability with respect to contingent liabilities, including lawsuits, we believe that the aggregate amount of such liabilities, if any, in excess of amounts provided, or covered by insurance, will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. It is possible, however, that results of operations for any future period could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or strategies related to these contingencies or changes out of our control.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of judgment in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We periodically evaluate the judgments and estimates used for our critical accounting policies to ensure that such judgments and estimates are reasonable for our interim and year-end
reporting requirements. These judgments and estimates are based on our historical experience, current trends and information available from other sources, as appropriate. If actual conditions differ from the assumptions used in our judgments, our financial results could be materially different from our estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies require significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
: We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-9, Revenue
from Contracts with Customers (also referred to as Topic 606). Under Topic 606, based on the nature of our contracts and consistent with prior practice, we recognize most of our revenue upon shipment, which is when the performance obligation has been satisfied.
Our accounting policies relating to the recognition of revenue under Topic 606 require management to make estimates, determinations and judgments based on historical experience and on various other assumptions, which include (i) the existence of a contract with the customer, (ii) the identification of the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) the value of any variable consideration in the contract, (iv) the stand alone selling price of multiple obligations in the contract, for the purpose of allocating the consideration in the contract, and (v) determining when a performance obligation has been met. Recognition of revenue based on incorrect judgments, including the identification of performance obligation arrangements as well as the pattern of delivery for those services, could result in inappropriate recognition of revenue, or incorrect timing of revenue recognition, which could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
We recognize revenue for non-recurring
engineering (NRE) fees, as necessary, for product modification orders upon completion of agreed-upon milestones. Revenue is deferred for any amounts received prior to completion of milestones. Certain of our NRE arrangements include formal customer acceptance provisions. In such cases, we determine whether we have obtained customer acceptance for the specific milestone before recognizing revenue.
Infrequently, we receive requests from customers to hold product being purchased from us for the customers’ convenience. We recognize revenue for such bill and hold arrangements in accordance with the guidance provided by Topic 606, which requires the transaction to meet the following criteria in order to determine that the customer has obtained control: (a) the reason for the bill and hold is substantive, (b) the product has separately been identified as belonging to the customer, (c) the product is currently ready for physical transfer to the customer, and (d) we do not have the ability to use the product or direct it to another customer.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts:
Accounts receivable consists primarily of receivables from our customers arising from the sale of our products. We actively monitor our exposure to credit risk through the use of credit approvals and credit limits. Accounts receivable is presented net of reserves for doubtful accounts.
We estimate the collectability of our receivables and establish allowances for accounts receivable that we estimate to be uncollectible. We base these allowances on our historical collection experience, the length of time our accounts receivable are outstanding and the financial condition of individual customers. In situations where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligation, such as in the case of a bankruptcy filing, we assess the need for a specific reserve for bad debts. We believe that our procedure for estimating such amounts is reasonable and historically have not resulted in material adjustments in subsequent periods. Bad debt expense was less than 1% of net sales in each of fiscal 2021 and 2020.
Warranty Claims:
We offer warranties on some of our products. We establish a reserve for estimated costs of warranties at the time the product revenue is recognized. This reserve requires us to make estimates regarding the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims using historical data on products sold as of the balance sheet date. The length of the warranty period, the product’s failure rates, and the customer’s usage affect estimated warranty cost. If actual warranty costs differ from our estimated amounts, future results of operations could be affected adversely. Warranty cost is recorded as cost of revenue, and the reserve balance recorded as an accrued expense. While we maintain product quality programs and processes, our warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates and the related corrective costs. If actual product failure rates and/or corrective costs differ from the estimates, we revise our estimated warranty liability accordingly.
Inventories:
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in,
first-out)
or net realizable value. The process for evaluating and recording obsolete and excess inventory provisions consists of analyzing the inventory supply on hand and estimating the net realizable value of the inventory based on historical experience, current business
conditions and anticipated future revenue. We believe that our procedures for estimating such amounts are reasonable and historically have not resulted in material adjustments in subsequent periods when the estimates are adjusted to actual experience.
Income Taxes:
A valuation allowance is established when it is “more-likely-than-not”
that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. A review of all available positive and negative evidence must be considered, including our performance, the market environment in which we operate, length of carryforward periods, existing revenue backlog and future revenue projections. If actual factors and conditions differ materially from the estimates made by management, the actual realization of the net deferred tax assets or liabilities could vary materially from the amounts previously recorded. At January 31, 2021, we had provided valuation allowances for future tax benefits resulting from certain domestic R&D tax credits and foreign tax credit carryforwards, both of which could expire unused.
The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. Although guidance on the accounting for uncertain income taxes prescribes the use of a recognition and measurement model, the determination of whether an uncertain tax position has met those thresholds will continue to require significant judgment by management. If the ultimate resolution of tax uncertainties is different from what we have estimated, our income tax expense could be materially impacted.
On December 22, 2017, the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”) was enacted into law in the U.S. and the new legislation contains several key tax provisions that affected us, including a one-time
mandatory transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings and a reduction of the corporate income tax rate to 21% effective January 1, 2018, among others. We are required to recognize the effect of the tax law changes in the period of enactment, such as determining the transition tax, remeasuring our U.S. deferred tax assets and liabilities as well as reassessing the net realizability of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. In December 2017, the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118, Income Tax Accounting Implications of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“SAB 118”), which allows us to record provisional amounts during a measurement period not to extend beyond one year of the enactment date. All accounting under SAB 118 was finalized during the quarter ending January 31, 2019 with no material changes from the provisional amounts previously recorded.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law. The legislation had sweeping effects including various types of economic relief for impacted businesses and industries. One such relief provision was the Paycheck Protection Program, which provided short-term cash flow assistance to finance employee payroll and qualified expenses. On May 6, 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with, and executed a promissory note in favor of Greenwood Credit Union (“Greenwood”) pursuant to which we borrowed $4.4 million (the “PPP Loan”). On December 27, 2020 the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, H.R. 133 was signed into law. The legislation permits the deductibility of expenses to the extent that the payment of such expenses results (or is expected to result) in the forgiveness of a loan (covered loan) guaranteed under the Paycheck Protection Program. We have fully utilized the PPP Loan proceeds for qualifying expenses and subsequent to year end have applied for forgiveness of the PPP Loan (including all associated accrued interest) in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act, as amended by the PPP Flexibility Act. Consistent with the legislation, we expect to deduct the full $4.4 million of qualified expenses on our 2020 federal tax return.
Intangible and Long-Lived Assets:
Long-lived assets, such as definite-lived intangible assets and property, plant and equipment, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the projected undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value, then an impairment charge would be recorded for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value, which is determined by the discounting of future cash flows.
Goodwill:
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit. A reporting unit is an operating segment or a business unit one level below an operating segment if discrete financial information for that business is prepared and regularly reviewed by segment management. However, components within an operating segment
are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. Management evaluates the recoverability of goodwill annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances, such as declines in revenue, earnings or cash flows, or material adverse changes in the business climate, indicate that the carrying value of an asset might be impaired. Goodwill is first qualitatively assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Factors that management considers in this assessment include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance (both current and projected), changes in management and strategy and changes in the composition or carrying amount of net assets. If this qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then a quantitative assessment is required for the reporting unit. The quantitative assessment compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying value. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using the income approach based upon a discounted cash flow model. We believe that this approach is appropriate because it provides a fair value estimate based upon the reporting unit’s expected long-term operating cash flow performance. In addition, we use the market approach, which compares the reporting unit to publicly traded companies and transactions involving similar business, to support the conclusions based upon the income approach. The income approach requires the use of many assumptions and estimates including future revenue, expenses, capital expenditures, and working capital, as well as discount factors and income tax rates. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets including goodwill assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit’s net assets including goodwill exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we record an impairment charge based on that difference.
Due to the consideration of the impact of the decline in the global economy due to the global COVID-19
pandemic, coupled with the grounding of the 737 MAX in March, 2019 and the 737 MAX production halt in January, 2020 which negatively impacted revenues and margins in fiscal 2020 and 2021, we elected to forgo the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test to determine whether the carrying values of the reporting units are greater than the fair values. We utilized a blended income and market approach. The income approach was based upon a discounted cash flow model which we believe provides a fair values estimate of the reporting unit’s expected long-term operating performance. The market approach compares the reporting units to similar publicly traded companies. Based on our quantitative impairment assessment as of January 31, 2021, we determined that the fair value of the reporting units were in excess of their carrying values and therefore, no goodwill impairment has occurred.
Self-Insurance Liability Accrual:
We maintain self-insured group medical and dental programs for qualifying employees in the United States and maintain stop-loss coverage from a third party which limits our exposure to large claims. We record a liability associated with these benefits that includes an estimate of both claims filed and losses incurred but not yet reported based on historical claims experience. In estimating this accrual, we utilize an independent third-party broker to estimate a range of expected losses, which are based on analyses of historical data. Our assumptions are closely monitored and adjusted when warranted by changing circumstances. Should claims occur or medical costs increase in greater amounts than we have expected, accruals may not be sufficient, and we may record additional expenses.
Share-Based Compensation:
Share-based compensation expense is measured based on the estimated fair value of the share-based award when granted and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant). We have estimated the fair value of each option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Our estimate of share-based compensation requires several complex and subjective assumptions including our stock price volatility, employee exercise patterns (expected life of the options), the risk-free interest rate and our dividend yield. The stock price volatility assumption is based on the historical weekly price data of our common stock over a period equivalent to the weighted-average expected life of our options. Management evaluated whether there were factors during that period which were unusual and would distort the volatility figure if used to estimate future volatility and concluded that there were no such factors. In determining the expected life of the option grants, we have observed the actual terms of prior grants with similar characteristics and the actual vesting schedule of the grants and assessed the expected risk tolerance of different option groups. The risk-free interest rate used in the model is based on the actual
U.S. Treasury zero coupon rates for bonds matching the expected term of the option as of the option grant date. The dividend assumption is based upon the prior year’s average dividend yield. No compensation expense is recognized for options that are forfeited for which the employee does not render the requisite service. Our accounting for share-based compensation for restricted stock awards (“RSAs”) and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) is also based on the fair value method. The fair value of the RSUs and RSAs is based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. Reductions in compensation expense associated with forfeited awards are estimated at the date of grant, and this estimated forfeiture rate is adjusted periodically based on actual forfeiture experience.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Reference is made to Note 1 of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.