Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels and liquidity sources, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to discovering and developing innovative, protein-based immunotherapies to treat cancer and autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Our approach includes a proprietary scientific platform that converts native immune system proteins into differentiated, multi-targeted therapeutics. We believe our strategies are capable of meaningfully modulating the human immune system and significantly improving outcomes in patients with serious diseases.
In June 2020, we entered into the AbbVie Agreement, which grants AbbVie an exclusive option to take an exclusive license to our clinical candidate ALPN-101, a dual ICOS and CD28 antagonist intended for the treatment of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Preclinical studies with ALPN-101 have demonstrated efficacy in models of SLE, SjS, arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes, uveitis, and GVHD. We have evaluated ALPN-101 in a Phase 1 healthy volunteer trial and plan to initiate an international Phase 2 study in adults with SLE. We have successfully received U.S. FDA IND clearance, and anticipate that the study will commence enrollment in mid-2021.
ALPN-303 is a dual B cell cytokine antagonist, being developed for the treatment of B cell mediated inflammation and autoimmune diseases. We are targeting completion of activities to support initiation of a Phase 1 healthy volunteer study with ALPN-303 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Our lead oncology program is ALPN-202, a conditional CD28 costimulator and dual checkpoint inhibitor intended for the treatment of cancer. Preclinical in vivo data have demonstrated monotherapy efficacy in tumor models superior to approved therapies. In addition, ALPN-202 has a unique immuno-modulatory profile and has demonstrated evidence of anti-tumor immunity in preclinical models. Based on ALPN-202’s efficacy in preclinical models and favorable nonclinical safety and development profile, in June 2020, we initiated NEON-1, a Phase 1 dose escalation and expansion study in patients with advanced malignancies and intend to continue enrolling patients throughout 2021. We also intend to initiate NEON-2, a Phase 1 combination study of ALPN-202 and a PD-1 inhibitor later this year.
Our scientific platform has also generated immune modulatory proteins with the potential of improving engineered cellular therapies, or ECT, such as chimeric antigen receptor T cells, or CAR-T, T cell receptor-engineered T cells, or TCR-T, and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, or TILs. In May 2019, we signed a collaboration and license agreement with Adaptimmune to develop next-generation SPEARTM T cell products which incorporate our secreted and transmembrane immunomodulatory protein (termed SIP™ and TIP™) technology. We intend to continue to leverage our existing pipeline and platform to actively explore and evaluate potential value-creating partnering opportunities.
Our goal is to discover and develop modern therapies to treat patients with serious conditions such as cancer and autoimmune/inflammatory diseases. To achieve our goals, we intend to:
•aggressively move our lead autoimmune/inflammatory program ALPN-101 through clinical development as part of our Option and License Agreement with AbbVie, including conducting a Phase 2 study for the treatment of SLE;
•aggressively move our second autoimmune/inflammatory program ALPN-303 through preclinical development and into clinical studies for the treatment of B cell mediated autoimmune/inflammatory diseases;
•aggressively move our lead oncology program ALPN-202 through clinical development for the treatment of cancer; and
•maximize the value of our pipeline and platform via potential partnering activities.
Our operations to date have been limited to business planning, raising capital, developing our platform technology, identifying potential immunotherapy candidates, clinical studies, and other research and development activities. To date, we
have financed operations primarily through private placements of common stock and convertible preferred stock, funds received from license and research agreements, debt financing and assets acquired upon the close of our merger with Nivalis Therapeutics Inc., or Nivalis. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any product sales. Since inception and through December 31, 2020, excluding amounts borrowed through debt financing, we have raised an aggregate of $242.4 million to fund operations, of which $79.9 million was from the sale of common stock and warrants, $49.2 million was from the sale of convertible preferred stock, $69.2 million was through our license and collaboration agreements, and $44.1 million in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities acquired through the merger with Nivalis. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and investments totaling $131.4 million.
Our net loss was $27.9 million, $41.9 million, and $36.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We expect to continue incurring significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next several years as we:
•initiate and complete nonclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates, including ALPN-101, ALPN-202, and ALPN-303;
•contract to manufacture and perform additional process development for our product candidates;
•continue research and development efforts to build our pipeline beyond the current product candidates;
•maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional clinical, quality control, scientific, and management personnel; and
•add operational and financial personnel to support our product development efforts and operational capabilities applicable to operating as a public company.
We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we successfully complete development of, obtain marketing approval for and commercialize our product candidates, either alone or in collaboration with third parties. We expect these activities will take a number of years and our success in these efforts is subject to significant uncertainty. Accordingly, we will need to raise additional capital prior to the regulatory approval and commercialization of any of our product candidates. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our operating activities through equity or debt financings, collaborations or licenses, capital lease transactions, or other available financing transactions. However, additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all, and if we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional equity or debt securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders and increased fixed payment obligations.
Financial Overview
Collaboration Revenue
We derive our collaboration revenue primarily from our collaboration and licensing agreements. We may generate revenue in the future from research support or milestone payments received pursuant to our collaboration and licensing agreement with Adaptimmune, or the Adaptimmune Agreement, or from the AbbVie Agreement, or from payments from future license or collaboration agreements, product sales, or government contracts and grants. We expect any revenue we generate, if any, will fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
We adopted Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers , as amended, or the new revenue standard or ASC 606, on January 1, 2018, resulting in a change to our accounting policy for revenue recognition. We used the modified retrospective method transition option and recognized the cumulative effect of adopting the new revenue standard as a $203,000 decrease to the opening accumulated deficit balance at January 1, 2018. See Note 11 for additional information.
AbbVie Ireland Unlimited Company
In June 2020, we entered into the AbbVie Agreement for the development of ALPN-101. The AbbVie Agreement grants AbbVie the exclusive option to purchase an exclusive worldwide license to ALPN-101, or the License Option. The License Option is exercisable by AbbVie at any time and will expire 90 days from the achievement of certain development milestones. If AbbVie exercises the License Option, AbbVie will take over the future development and commercialization. Prior to the exercise of the License Option, we will perform research and development services, including conducting a Phase 2 study in SLE, based on an agreed-upon development plan. We will be fully responsible for all costs incurred to conduct the activities under the development plan, provided that, AbbVie may be responsible for increased costs under the development plan in connection with certain material amendments proposed by AbbVie. We will also be solely responsible, at our sole cost
and expense, for manufacturing and regulatory filings for ALPN-101 necessary to complete activities under the development plan.
In June 2020, in connection with the execution of the AbbVie Agreement, AbbVie paid us a nonrefundable upfront payment of $60.0 million. Prior to the exercise of the License Option, AbbVie has agreed to make cash payments upon our achievement of certain predefined pre-option development milestones, or the Alpine Development Milestones, up to an aggregate amount of $75.0 million. If AbbVie exercises the License Option, they will pay a one-time cash payment of $75.0 million. Following the exercise of the License Option, AbbVie has also agreed to make aggregate cash payments of up to $205.0 million upon AbbVie’s achievement of certain development and commercial milestones and additional aggregate cash payments of up to $450.0 million upon AbbVie’s achievement of certain sales-based cash milestones, collectively referred to as the AbbVie Milestones. Subsequent to commercialization, we are also eligible to receive high single-digit to low double-digit percentage royalties on worldwide net sales of licensed products.
For revenue recognition purposes, we determined that our contractual promises in the AbbVie Agreement are not distinct and are interdependent with our performance obligation to provide research and development services under the development plan. Thus, all contractual promises related to the upfront payment and Alpine’s Development Milestones were combined into a single performance obligation. We determined the Alpine Development Milestone payments are probable of significant revenue reversal as the achievement is highly dependent on factors outside our control. Therefore, these milestone payments are fully constrained and were not included in the transaction price. We will re-evaluate the transaction price each reporting period and update as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur.
The License Option and the AbbVie Milestones were not determined to be performance obligations at the inception of the contract as they did not represent material rights. If exercised, the License Option and AbbVie Milestones will be accounted for as a separate contract and will be recognized as revenue if and when triggered. Any consideration related to sales-based royalties and profit-sharing payments will be recognized when the related sales occur.
We use a cost-based input method to measure progress toward completion of the performance obligation and to calculate the corresponding revenue to recognize each period. In applying the cost-based input, we use actual costs incurred relative to budgeted costs for the combined performance obligation. These costs consist primarily of internal personnel efforts and third-party contract costs relative to the level of patient enrollment in the study. Revenue will be recognized based on the level of costs incurred relative to the total budgeted costs for the performance obligation. A cost-based input method of revenue recognition requires management to make estimates of costs to complete our performance obligation. In making such estimates, significant judgment is required to evaluate assumptions related to cost estimates. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimated costs to complete our performance obligation will be recorded in the period in which changes are identified and amounts can be reasonably estimated. A significant change in these assumptions and estimates could have a material impact on the timing and amount of revenue recognized in future periods.
We recognized revenue from the AbbVie Agreement of $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020 the remaining balance of the transaction price is $53.0 million and is recorded as current and noncurrent deferred revenue on our accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. We expect to recognize the remaining deferred revenue over the remainder of our development plan, which began in June 2020 and ends upon the later of the exercise or expiration of the option.
Adaptimmune Therapeutics plc
In May 2019, we entered into the Adaptimmune Agreement with Adaptimmune, a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company primarily focused on providing novel cell therapies to patients, particularly for the treatment of solid tumors, to develop next-generation SPEAR T cell products which incorporate our secreted and transmembrane immunomodulatory protein (termed SIP™ and TIP™) technology. Under the Adaptimmune Agreement, we are to perform certain research services and grant Adaptimmune an exclusive license to programs from our SIP and TIP technologies. In June 2019, under the terms of the Adaptimmune Agreement, we received an upfront license payment of $2.0 million and through December 31, 2020 we have received an additional $1.6 million in research support payments to fund ongoing programs. These payments were recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt and were recognized as revenue based on employee hours contributed to each performance obligation. In the fourth quarter of 2020, based on the completion of our research and development efforts in connection with our performance obligations, we recognized the remaining balance in deferred revenue associated with Adaptimmune on our accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. Under the Adaptimmune Agreement, we have recognized revenue of $2.3 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, we are eligible for additional research support payments, one-time payments and downstream development and commercialization milestones of up to $288.0 million, if all pre-specified milestones for each program are achieved. We are also eligible to receive low-single digit royalties on worldwide net sales of the applicable products.
Kite Pharma, a Gilead company
In October 2015, we entered into the Kite Collaboration Agreement, providing Kite with access to two transmembrane immunomodulatory protein, or TIP, programs for use in Kite’s engineered cellular therapy programs. In May 2019, Kite provided us notice of termination of the Kite Collaboration Agreement following the expiration of the research term. Upon termination, the confidentiality and indemnity obligations of the parties survived and the licenses granted to Kite under the Kite Collaboration Agreement terminated. Pursuant to the terms of the Kite Collaboration Agreement, the termination was effective in June 2019, thirty days after the effectiveness of Kite’s notice. We recognized a total of $630,000 for the year ended December 31, 2018 and $5.6 million over the life of the Kite Collaboration Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
We focus our resources on research and development activities, including the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies and product development and expense such costs as they are incurred. Our research and development expenses consist of:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, taxes, travel, and stock-based compensation expense for personnel in research and development functions;
•expenses related to process development and production of product candidates paid to contract manufacturing organizations;
•costs associated with preclinical activities and regulatory operations, including the cost of acquiring, developing, and manufacturing research material;
•clinical trials and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates; and
•allocation of facilities, overhead, depreciation, and amortization of laboratory equipment and other expenses.
We incurred $27.2 million, $35.8 million, and $29.0 million in research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop our platform and product candidates.
The successful development of our platform and product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing, or costs of the efforts necessary to finish developing any of our product candidates or the period in which material net cash, if any, from these product candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing therapeutics, including the uncertainty of:
•the scope, rate of progress, expense, and results of clinical trials;
•the scope, rate of progress, and expense of process development and manufacturing;
•preclinical and other research activities; and
•the timing of regulatory approvals.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, business development, finance, and administrative functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include professional fees for accounting and legal services, expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents and other intellectual property, and allocation of facility and overhead costs.
We expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we expand infrastructure and continue to prosecute our patents and other intellectual property. Other increases could potentially include increased costs for director and officer liability insurance, costs related to the hiring of additional personnel, and increased fees for directors, outside consultants, lawyers, and accountants. We expect to incur significant costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls, and similar requirements applicable to public companies.
Loss on Sale of Intangible Asset
Loss on sale of intangible asset relates solely to the sale of the GSNOR asset to Laurel Venture Capital Ltd., or Laurel, in June 2018. For additional information regarding the sale of the GSNOR asset, please see Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest associated with our term loan with Silicon Valley Bank and the amortization of the related debt discount.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments.
Other Income
Other income consists primarily of research and development tax credits received by our wholly-owned Australian subsidiary and an employee retention tax credit related to COVID-19 relief legislation.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit for 2018 relates to the sale of our in-process research and development, or IPR&D.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Collaboration Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of $7.0 million recognized under the AbbVie Agreement and $2.3 million recognized under the Adaptimmune Agreement. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 consists of $1.3 million related to the Adaptimmune Agreement and $0.4 million related to the milestone payment from Laurel from the sale of our GSNOR assets.
Research and Development Expenses
The $8.7 million decrease in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to decreases of $5.7 million in contract manufacturing and process development of our product candidates and $4.1 million in other direct research activities. The decreases were partially offset by increases of $0.6 million in clinical trial activity and $0.5 million in stock-based compensation.
General and Administrative Expenses
The $1.4 million increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to increases of $0.8 million related to professional and legal services, $0.6 million in stock-based compensation and $0.4 million in insurance and facility costs to support the growth and expansion of our business. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.4 million related primarily to personnel expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates primarily to interest paid on our term loan with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, and the related non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of the debt discount. The $0.4 million increase in interest expense is due to additional interest related to the drawdown of the second tranche of our SVB loan in March 2020.
Interest Income
The $1.0 million decrease in interest income is due primarily to less interest earned on our investments as we maintained a lower average investment balance during the 2020 period.
Other Income
The $0.5 million increase in other income is attributable a $0.2 million increase in research and development tax credits received by our wholly-owned Australian subsidiary. Additionally, for the 2020 period, we recognized a $0.3 million employee retention tax credit related to COVID-19 relief legislation.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Collaboration Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 consists of $1.3 million related to the Adaptimmune Agreement and $0.4 million related to the milestone payment from Laurel from the sale of our GSNOR assets. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 relates primarily to revenue recognized under the Kite Collaboration Agreement as well as an additional $0.2 million related to the adoption of ASC 606, which resulted in higher revenue for the 2018 period, as compared to what would have been recorded under previous accounting guidance.
Research and Development Expenses
The $6.9 million increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $4.9 million in clinical trial activity, an increase of $0.3 million in direct research activities, an increase of $2.3 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of a growth in headcount to support ongoing discovery and development programs, an increase of $0.8 million in stock-based compensation, and an increase of $1.4 million in allocated overhead and facilities. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $2.8 million in contract manufacturing and process development of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
The $1.1 million increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to o a $0.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses related to an increase in administrative headcount, a $0.3 million increase in professional and legal services, and an increase of $0.1 million in facility costs to support the growth and expansion of our business.
Loss on Sale of Intangible Asset
Loss on sale of intangible asset relates solely to the sale of the GSNOR asset to Laurel in June 2018.
Interest Income
The $0.8 million increase in other income relates to income from the Australian tax credit from our wholly-owned Australian subsidiary.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and investments totaling $131.4 million. Excluding amounts borrowed through debt financing, we have raised an aggregate of $242.4 million to fund operations, of which $79.9 million was from the sale of common stock, $49.2 million was from the sale of convertible preferred stock, $69.2 million was through our license and collaboration agreements, and $44.1 million in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities acquired through the merger with Nivalis. In June 2017, August 2019, and March 2020, we drew down term loans from Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, as discussed below. In addition to our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, we are eligible to receive research and development funding and to earn milestone and other contingent payments for the achievement of defined collaboration objectives and certain development and regulatory milestones and royalty payments under our collaborations with Adaptimmune and AbbVie; however, our ability to earn these milestone and contingent payments and the timing of achieving these milestones is uncertain.
We have incurred operating losses since inception. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue our research and preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates; expand the scope of our current studies for our product candidates; initiate additional preclinical, clinical or other studies for our product candidates, including under any collaboration agreements; change or add additional manufacturers or suppliers; seek regulatory and marketing approvals for any of our product candidates that successfully complete clinical studies; seek to identify, evaluate and validate additional product candidates; acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; maintain, protect and expand our intellectual property portfolio; attract and retain skilled personnel; and experience any delays or encounter issues with any of the above.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenue, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity or debt financings and collaboration agreements. Except for any obligations of our collaborators to make milestone payments under our agreements with them, we do not have any committed external sources of capital. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or debt, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaboration agreements in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
•the number and characteristics of the future product candidates we pursue either from our internal research efforts or through acquiring or in-licensing other product candidates or technologies;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of independently researching and developing any of our future product candidates, including conducting preclinical research and clinical trials;
•whether our existing collaborations generate substantial milestone payments and, ultimately, royalties on future approved products for us;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for any future product candidates we develop independently;
•the cost of future commercialization activities, if any;
•the cost of manufacturing our future product candidates and products, if any;
•our ability to maintain our existing collaborations and to establish new collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such arrangements;
•the costs of preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patents, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, our current or future collaborators’ product candidates, and our future products, if any.
We have considered that our long-term operations anticipate continuing net losses and the need for potential equity or debt financing. We have also considered that new collaborations or selectively partnering our technology or programs may provide other sources of capital. However, there can be no assurances that additional funding or other sources of capital will be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all. Based on our current operating plan, we believe our available cash and cash equivalents and investments, will be sufficient to fund our planned level of operations for at least the next 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing drug candidates in preclinical and clinical studies is costly, and the timing of progress in these studies remains uncertain.
Financing Agreements
In July 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement, or the Securities Purchase Agreement, for a private placement with a select group of institutional investors, pursuant to which we sold 5,139,610 units, or the Common Units, and 790,710 units, or the Prefunded Warrant Units, for an aggregate purchase price of $60.0 million. Each Common Unit consists of one share of our common stock plus a warrant to purchase 0.3 shares of common stock, or the Common Stock Warrants, and each Prefunded Warrant Unit consists of one prefunded warrant to purchase one share of common stock, or the Prefunded Warrants, plus one Common Stock Warrant to purchase 0.3 shares of common stock. The Prefunded Warrant Units and the Common Units are collectively referred to as the Units and each Unit has a purchase price of $10.1175. The Common Stock Warrants have an exercise price of $12.74 and a term of 3.5 years. The Prefunded Warrants became fully exercisable upon the closing date and have an exercise price of $0.001 per share.
In January 2019, we entered into a securities purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with a limited number of accredited investors, pursuant to which we sold approximately 4.7 million units, or the 2019 Units, for an aggregate purchase price of $25.3 million in a private placement, which we refer to as the Private Placement. Each 2019 Unit has a purchase price of $5.37 and consists of one share of our common stock and a warrant to purchase 0.39 shares of common stock. Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, we issued approximately 4.7 million shares of common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of approximately 1.8 million shares of common stock. The warrants have an exercise price of $12.74 and have a term of five years.
In June 2018, we entered into an equity distribution agreement, or the Equity Distribution Agreement, with Piper Jaffray & Co., or Piper Jaffray, pursuant to which we may sell shares of our common stock through an “at the market” equity offering program for up to $50.0 million in gross cash proceeds. As of December 31, 2020, we have made no sales under the Equity Distribution Agreement. On March 17, 2021, we provided written notice to Piper Jaffray terminating the Equity Distribution Agreement effective as of March 17, 2021.
Long-Term Financing
In December 2016, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, or the Original Agreement, with SVB under which we borrowed $5.0 million. The Original Agreement accrued interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the lender’s prime rate minus 1.75%. The Original Agreement had an interest-only period through July 2018.
In August 2019, we entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with SVB, pursuant to which SVB agreed to extend term loans to us with an aggregate principal amount of up to $15.0 million, or the Term Loans. Borrowings under the Loan Agreement consist of up to three separate tranches. The initial tranche of $5.0 million was funded in August 2019, $3.0 million of which was used to repay amounts owing under our Original Agreement. In March 2020, the second tranche of $5.0 million was funded to us. We did not draw down the final tranche of $5.0 million, which expired on July 31, 2020. We intend to use the debt proceeds for working capital and other general corporate purposes, including the advancement of our development programs.
The Term Loans accrue interest at a floating per annum rate of 0.25% above the prime rate, subject to a floor of 5.75%, which interest is payable monthly commencing in September 2019. Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an event of default, a default interest rate will apply that is 4.0% above the otherwise applicable interest rate. The Term Loans were interest only until September 30, 2020, however, under the Loan Agreement our interest only period automatically extends to June 30, 2021 if we receive aggregate new capital of at least $40.0 million no later than June 30, 2020. We met this milestone in June 2020 in conjunction with the execution of the AbbVie agreement, discussed in detail in Note 11. As a result of the
interest only extension, the Term Loans will be payable in 25 equal monthly installments of principal plus interest, with the final installment due and payable on July 1, 2023.
We may prepay all, but not less than all, of the Term Loans subject to a prepayment fee equal to $75,000, which represents the deferred portion of the final payment due under the Original Agreement, plus the outstanding principal balance under the Term Loans at the time of such prepayment multiplied by a prepayment fee of 2.0% in the first year, 1.0% in the second year, and 0.0% in the third year and thereafter. Additionally a final payment in the amount of 5.5% of the funded Term Loans is payable to SVB on the date on which the Term Loans are prepaid, paid or become due and payable in full.. The final payment fees are recorded in long-term debt with an offsetting reduction to debt discount on our accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The Loan Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, events of default and affirmative and negative covenants, including, among others, covenants that limit or restrict our ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, merge or consolidate, make acquisitions, pay dividends or other distributions or repurchase equity, make investments, dispose of assets, engage in any new lines of business, and enter into certain transactions with affiliates, in each case subject to certain exceptions. Among other events, a failure to make a required loan payment, an uncured covenant breach or a material adverse change in our business, operations or condition (financial or otherwise) could lead to an event of default, and in such case, all amounts then outstanding may become due and payable immediately. We were in compliance with our covenants as of December 31, 2020. As security for its obligations under the Loan Agreement, we granted SVB a first priority security interest on substantially all of our assets, except intellectual property, and subject to certain other exceptions. As of December 31, 2020, we had $10.6 million in outstanding principal and final fees due under our term loan agreement. See Note 9 for further discussion of our Term Loans.
Operating Lease
In March 2019, we entered into a lease with ARE-Seattle No. 28, LLC, or the Landlord, for 27,164 square feet of office and laboratory space located at 188 East Blaine Street, Seattle, Washington. The term of the lease is 10.8 years with one option to extend the term by 5 years. The lease term commenced in June 2019. The “Rent Commencement Date” began in March 2020, nine months after the commencement date. We were not required to pay base rent from the Rent Commencement Date through November 2020, the last day of the ninth month following the Rent Commencement Date. The annual base rent under the lease is $1.7 million for the first year and will increase by 3.0% each year thereafter. We received a tenant improvement allowance of $5.4 million, which is included in our base rent, and a maximum additional tenant improvement allowance of $1.8 million, which will result in additional rent amortized over the term of the lease at an annual rate of 8.0%. The lease also requires us to pay additional amounts for operating and maintenance expenses. In March 2019, in connection with the lease, we provided a $254,000 letter of credit as a security deposit, which is recorded as restricted cash in our accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contingencies
Certain credits received related to our research and development expenditures and recorded within other income in our accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) are subject to review by foreign taxing authorities. It is reasonably possible we may incur losses upon the completion of these reviews of up to approximately $1.8 million, which we would be required to repay to certain tax authorities.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of our cash flows (in thousands):
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities was $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of our net loss of $27.9 million. This was offset by an increase of $52.9 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. This increase was primarily driven by the receipt of a $60.0 million upfront payment from AbbVie, which was recorded as current and noncurrent deferred revenue on our accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. Additionally, we had a $5.1 million increase in our net non-cash adjustments, which primarily relates to stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization.
Net cash used in operating activities was $35.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of our net loss of $41.9 million. This was offset by increases of $3.2 million in our net operating assets and liabilities and $3.3 million in our net non-cash adjustments, which primarily relates to stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization.
Net cash used in operating activities was $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and consisted primarily of our net loss of $36.5 million. This was offset by increases of $5.0 million in our net operating assets and liabilities and $3.1 million in our net non-cash adjustments, which primarily relates to the loss on the sale of our intangible asset, stock-based compensation, the write-off of our deferred tax liability, depreciation and amortization.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities:
Cash flows from investing activities primarily reflect cash used to purchase investments and proceeds from the maturities of investments, thus causing a shift between our cash and cash equivalents and investment balances. We manage our cash usage with respect to our total cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $72.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of the purchases and maturities of investments in U.S. Treasury securities, commercial paper, and corporate debt securities, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment, primarily lab equipment, to support our research and development efforts.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of the maturities, sales and purchases of investments in U.S. Treasury securities, commercial paper, and corporate debt securities, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment, primarily lab equipment, to support our research and development efforts.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $32.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 and consisted primarily of the maturities and purchases of short-term investments in U.S. Treasury securities, commercial paper, and corporate debt securities, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment, primarily lab equipment, to support our research and development efforts.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities was $61.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of the net proceeds of $56.3 million related to the sale of approximately 5.9 million Units under our July 2020 Securities Purchase Agreement, $5.0 million in proceeds received from the draw down of the second tranche of our Loan Agreement in March 2020, and $0.1 million related to the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $24.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of the net proceeds of $23.6 million related to the sale of approximately 4.7 million Units under our Purchase Agreement and $2.0 million in net proceeds from our debt refinancing, partially offset by $1.3 million in principal payments on our debt.
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and consisted of principal payments on our debt, partially offset by the proceeds from stock option exercises.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities
As a “smaller reporting company,” as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act, we are not required to provide additional information on our contractual obligations and contingent liabilities pursuant to Item 303 of Regulation S-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
JOBS Act
We ceased to be an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act effective December 31, 2020. However, for so long as we are not classified as an “accelerated filer” or “large accelerated filer” pursuant to SEC rules, we will continue to be exempt from the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of Sarbanes-Oxley.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Liabilities
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate accruals for professional services and research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and vendor agreements and communicating with applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf. We estimate the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We estimate accrued liabilities as of each balance sheet date based on known facts and circumstances.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not experienced any significant adjustments to our estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Our steps for recognizing revenue consist of; (1) identifying the contract, (2) identifying the performance obligations as either distinct or bundled goods and services, (3) determining the transaction price associated with each performance obligation for which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring such goods and services, (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognizing revenue upon satisfaction of performance obligations.
Our collaboration agreements principally contain multiple performance obligations, which may include (1) grants of, or options to obtain, intellectual property licenses; (2) research and development services; and/or (3) manufacturing or supply services. Payments typically received under these arrangements include one or more of the following: non-refundable upfront license fees, option exercise fees, payment for research and/or development efforts, amounts due upon the achievement of specified objectives, and/or royalties on future product sales. Our revenue is primarily derived from our collaboration agreements with AbbVie and Adaptimmune, as well as previously with Kite. See further discussion of our collaboration agreements in Note 11.
We allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative stand-alone selling price. We generally determine stand-alone selling prices at the inception of the contract based on our best estimate of what the selling price would be if the deliverable was regularly sold by us on a stand-alone basis. Payments received prior to satisfying the relevant revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets and recognized as revenue when the related revenue recognition criteria are met. We recognize revenue under our collaboration agreements based
on employee hours contributed to each performance obligation, or by using a cost-based input method to measure progress toward completion of the performance obligation and to calculate the corresponding revenue to recognize each period.
Our collaboration agreements provide for non-refundable milestone payments. We recognize revenue that is contingent upon the achievement of a substantive milestone in its entirety in the period in which the milestone is achieved. A milestone is considered substantive when the consideration payable to us for such milestone (1) is consistent with our performance necessary to achieve the milestone or the increase in value to the collaboration resulting from our performance; (2) relates solely to our past performance; and (3) is reasonable relative to all of the other deliverables and payments within the arrangement. In making this assessment, we consider all facts and circumstances relevant to the arrangement, including factors such as the scientific, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the milestone, the level of effort and investment required to achieve the milestone and whether any portion of the milestone consideration is related to future performance or deliverables.
We review the contributed employee hours and progress towards completion for each performance obligation under our collaboration agreements and adjust the revenue recognized to reflect changes in assumptions relating to the estimated satisfaction of the performance obligation. We could accelerate revenue recognition in the event of early termination of programs or if our expectations change. Alternatively, we could decelerate revenue recognition if programs are extended or delayed. While such changes to our estimates have no impact on our reported cash flows, the timing of revenue recorded in future periods could be materially impacted.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is recognized for all share-based payments based on the estimated fair value as of the date of grant. The fair value of our stock options is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires us to apply our judgment regarding certain key assumptions including risk-free interest rate, expected term, and volatility. For risk-free interest rate, we use the zero-coupon U.S. Treasury instruments security rate with a term equal to the expected life of the option. We use the “simplified method” for options to determine the expected term of stock option granted to employees. Under this approach, the weighted-average expected life is presumed to be the average of the vesting term and the contractual term of the option. For volatility, we analyzed the stock price volatility of companies at a similar stage of development to estimate expected volatility of our stock price. Our assumed dividend yield is zero as we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period of the awards, usually the vesting period, on a straight-line basis. For performance-based awards where the vesting of the options may be accelerated upon the achievement of certain milestones, vesting and the related stock-based compensation is recognized as an expense when it is probable the milestone will be met. We recognize forfeiture of awards as they occur rather than estimating the expected forfeiture rate.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense in future periods, or if we decide to use a different valuation model, the stock-based compensation expense we recognize in future periods may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period and could materially affect our financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, issued Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The objective of the standard is to improve areas of GAAP by removing certain exceptions permitted by ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, and clarifying existing guidance to facilitate consistent application. The standard will become effective for us beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently evaluating the new standard, but do not expect it to have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and financial statement disclosures.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-18, Collaborative Arrangements: Clarifying the Interaction between Topic 808 and Topic 606. This ASU clarifies that certain transactions between collaborative arrangement participants should be accounted for as revenue when the collaborative arrangement participant is a customer in the context of a unit of account and precludes recognizing as revenue consideration received from a collaborative arrangement participant if the participant is not a customer. We adopted this ASU effective January 1, 2020 and it did not have a material impact on our financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement. ASU 2018-13 modifies the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements by removing, modifying, or adding certain disclosures. We adopted this ASU effective January 1, 2020 and it did not have a material impact on our financial statements or related disclosures.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments: Credit Losses, as clarified in ASU 2019-04 and ASU 2019-05. The objective of the standard is to provide information about expected credit losses on financial instruments at each reporting date and to change how other-than-temporary impairments on investment securities are recorded. We adopted this ASU effective January 1, 2020 and it did not have a material impact on our financial statements and related disclosures.We will continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on expected credit losses.