ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
There are statements in this Report that are not historical facts. These "forward-looking statements" can be identified by use of terminology such as "believe," "hope," "may," "anticipate," "should," "intend," "plan," "will," "expect," "estimate," "project," "positioned," "strategy" and similar expressions. You should be aware that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that are beyond our control. For a discussion of these risks, you should read this entire Report carefully, especially the risks discussed under "Risk Factors." Although management believes that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements included in this Report are reasonable, they do not guarantee our future performance, and actual results could differ from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements. The assumptions used for purposes of the forward-looking statements specified in the following information represent estimates of future events and are subject to uncertainty as to possible changes in economic, legislative, industry, and other circumstances. As a result, the identification and interpretation of data and other information and their use in developing and selecting assumptions from and among reasonable alternatives require the exercise of judgment. To the extent that the assumed events do not occur, the outcome may vary substantially from anticipated or projected results, and, accordingly, no opinion is expressed on the achievability of those forward-looking statements. In the light of these risks and uncertainties, there can be no assurance that the results and events contemplated by the forward-looking statements contained in this Report will in fact transpire. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of their dates. We expressly disclaim any obligation or intention to update or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview and Highlights
Company Background
Alpine 4 Holdings, Inc. ("we" or the "Company"), was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware on April 22, 2014. We are a publicly traded conglomerate that is acquiring businesses that fit into its disruptive DSF business model of Drivers, Stabilizers, and Facilitators. At Alpine 4, we understand the nature of how technology and innovation can accentuate a business. Our focus is on how the adaptation of new technologies even in brick and mortar businesses can drive innovation. We also believe that our holdings should benefit synergistically from each other and that the ability to have collaboration across varying industries can spawn new ideas and create fertile ground for competitive advantages. This unique perspective has culminated in the development of our Blockchain-enabled Enterprise Business Operating System called SPECTRUMebos.
As of the date this Report was filed, the Company was a holding company that owned nine operating subsidiaries: ALTIA, LLC; Quality Circuit Assembly, Inc.; Morris Sheet Metal, Corp; JTD Spiral, Inc.; Deluxe Sheet Metal, Inc,; Excel Construction Services, LLC; SPECTRUMebos, Inc.; Impossible Aerospace, Inc.; and Vayu (US), Inc. In March 2020, the Company announced that Deluxe Sheet Metal’s operations were merging with and into Morris Sheet Metal Corp. In the first quarter of 2020, we also created three additional subsidiaries to act as silo holding companies, organized by industries. These silo subsidiaries are A4 Construction Services, Inc. (“A4 Construction”), A4 Manufacturing, Inc. (“A4 Manufacturing”), and A4 Technologies, Inc. (“A4 Technologies”). ”). In the first quarter of 2021, we formed additional silo subsidiaries: A4 Defense Systems, Inc. (“A4 Defense”); and A4 Aerospace Corporation. All of these companies are Delaware corporations. Each is authorized to issue 1,500 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.01 per share, and the Company is the sole shareholder of each of these three subsidiaries.
Business Strategy
What We Do:
Alexander Hamilton in his “Federalist paper #11”, said that our adventurous spirit distinguishes the commercial character of America. Hamilton knew that our freedom to be creative gave American businesses a competitive advantage over the rest of the world. We believe that Alpine 4 also exemplifies this spirit in our subsidiaries and that our greatest competitive advantage is our highly diverse business structure combined with a culture of collaboration.
It is our mandate to grow Alpine 4 into a leading, multi-faceted holding company with diverse subsidiary holdings with products and services that not only benefit from one another as a whole, but also have the benefit of
independence. This type of corporate structure is about having our subsidiaries prosper through strong onsite leadership while working synergistically with other Alpine 4 holdings. The essence of our business model is based around acquiring B2B companies in a broad spectrum of industries via our acquisition strategy of DSF (Drivers, Stabilizer, Facilitator). Our DSF business model (which is discussed more below) offers our shareholders an opportunity to own small-cap businesses that hold defensible positions in their individual market space. Further, Alpine 4’s greatest opportunity for growth exists in the smaller to middle-market operating companies with revenues between $5 to $150 million annually. In this target-rich environment, businesses generally sell at more reasonable multiples, presenting greater opportunities for operational and strategic improvements that have greater potential to enhance profit.
Driver, Stabilizer, Facilitator (DSF)
Driver: A Driver is a company that is in an emerging market or technology, that has enormous upside potential for revenue and profits, with a significant market opportunity to access. These types of acquisitions are typically small, brand new companies that need a structure to support their growth.
Stabilizer: Stabilizers are companies that have sticky customers, consistent revenue and provide solid net profit returns to Alpine 4.
Facilitators: Facilitators are our “secret sauce”. Facilitators are companies that provide a product or service that an Alpine 4 sister company can use as leverage to create a competitive advantage.
When you blend these categories into a longer-term view of the business landscape, you can then begin to see the value-driving force that makes this a truly purposeful and powerful business model. As stated earlier, our greatest competitive advantage is our highly diversified business structure combined with a collaborative business culture, that helps drive out competition in our markets by bringing; resources, planning, technology and capacity that our competitors simply don’t have. DSF reshapes the environment each subsidiary operates in by sharing and exploiting the resources each company has, thus giving them a competitive advantage that their peers don’t have.
How We Do It:
Optimization vs. Asset Producing
The process to purchase a perspective company can be long and arduous. During our due diligence period, we are validating and determining three major points, not just the historical record of the company we are buying. Those three major points are what we call the “What is, What Should Be and What Will Be”.
•
“The What Is” (TWI). TWI is the defining point of where a company is holistically in a myriad of metrics; Sales, Finance, Ease of Operations, Ownership and Customer Relations to name a few. Subsequently, this is usually the point where most acquirers stop in their due diligence. We look to define this position not just from a number’s standpoint, but also how does this perspective map out to a larger picture of culture and business environment.
•
“The What Should Be” (TWSB). TWSB is the validation point of inflection where we use many data inputs to assess if TWI is out of the norm with competitors, and does that data show the potential for improvement.
•
“The What Will Be” (TWWB). TWWB is how we seek to identify the net results or what we call Kinetic Profit (KP) between the TWI and TWSB. The keywords are Kinetic Profit. KP is the profit waiting to be achieved by some form of action or as we call it, the Optimization Phase of acquiring a new company.
Optimization: During the Optimization Phase, we seek to root up employees with in-depth training on various topics. Usually, these training sessions include; Profit and Expense Control, Production Planning, Breakeven Analysis and Profit Engineering to name a few. But the end game is to guide these companies to: become net profitable with the new debt burden placed on them post-acquisition, mitigate the loss of sales due to acquisition attrition (we typically plan on 10% of our customers leaving simply due to old ownership not being involved in the company any longer), potential replacement of employees that no longer wish to be employed post-acquisition and other ancillary issues that may arise. The Optimization Phase usually takes 12-18 months post-acquisition and a company can fall back into Optimization if it is stagnant or regresses in its training.
Asset Producing: Asset Producing is the ideal point where we want our subsidiaries to be. To become Asset Producing, subsidiary management must have completed prescribed training formats, proven they understand the key performance indicators that run their respective departments and finally, the subsidiaries they manage must have posted a net profit for 3 consecutive months.
Results of Operations
The following are the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $5,302,825 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, the increase in revenue related to $5,755,762 for Deluxe (acquired in November 2019); $3,042,264 for Excel (acquired in February 2020); and $1,062,729 for QCA; offset by a decrease of $2,402,511 for Morris; $2,390,735 for APF; and $173,327 relating to the 6th Sense Auto and Brake Active services of ALTIA. The increase in revenue was driven by the acquisitions of Deluxe and Excel. We expect our revenue to continue to grow during 2021.
Cost of revenue
Our cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $5,581,676 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, the increase in our cost of revenue related to $5,705,399 for Deluxe; $2,641,231 for Excel; $602,124 for QCA; offset by a decrease of $1,829,774 for Morris; $1,838,903 for APF; and $114,132 relating to the 6th Sense Auto and Brake Active services of ALTIA. The increase in cost of revenue among all the different segments was the result of the increase in revenues as described above. We expect our cost of revenue to increase over the next year as our revenue increases.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $3,135,287 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is a result of the impairment loss of $1,561,600 related to the customer list and goodwill for APF and the customer list for Deluxe and also due to the cost of operating the additional operations with the acquisitions of Deluxe and Excel, offset by a reduction in expenses due to cross sharing of resources between corporate and our subsidiaries.
Other expenses
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $911,282 as compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the change in derivative liability, the change in fair value of contingent consideration, and the gain on extinguishment of debt.
Discontinued operations
In December 2018, we decided to shut down the operations of our VWES subsidiary. In February 2019, VWES filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.
VWES has been presented as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2019, VWES’ bankruptcy was completed, and the Company removed all the assets and liabilities of VWES, resulting in a gain on the disposition of discontinued operations of $2,515,028.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations since inception from the sale of common stock, capital contributions from stockholders, and from the issuance of notes payable and convertible notes payable. We expect to continue to finance our operations from our current operating cash flow and by the selling shares of our common stock and or debt instruments. In the first quarter of 2021, we raised approximately $55,000,000 through the sale of our common stock.
In April and May 2020, we received seven loans under the Paycheck Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act totaling $3,896,107. The loans have terms of 24 months and accrue interest at 1% per annum. We expect some or all of these loans to be forgiven as provided by in the CARES Act.
Management expects to have sufficient working capital for continuing operations from either the sale of its products or through the raising of additional capital through private offerings of our securities. Additionally, the Company is monitoring additional businesses to acquire which management hopes will provide additional operating revenues to the Company. There can be no guarantee that the planned acquisitions will close, or that they will produce the anticipated revenues on the schedule anticipated by management.
Liquidity Outlook
As noted above, the Company’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP applicable to a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business within one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board, or the FASB, Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40), our management evaluates whether there are conditions or events, considered in aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
The Company has experienced significant operating losses over the past 4 years (2014 through December 31, 2020) with cumulative losses of approximately $39,352,000 and negative cashflows from operations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company disclosed the substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern
The Company has experienced significant operating losses over the past 7 years (2014 through December 31, 2020) with cumulative losses of approximately $39,352,000 and negative cashflows from operations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company disclosed the substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern
The Company received a total of approximately $6.2 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, through several transactions, including the following:
•The Company raised approximately $1.5 million through the sale of convertible notes;
•The Company raised approximately $674,000 in proceeds from the sale of shares of the Company’s stock; and
•The Company received approximately $4.0 million in PPP funds.
The Company also received a total of approximately $55 million in February in the following two transactions:
•The Company raised approximately $46.0 million in connection with a registered direct offering of stock, as disclosed above under the heading “Recent Developments;” and
•The Company raised approximately $9.0 in through puts to an investor in connection with an equity line of credit financing arrangement.
As such, as of the date of this Report, the Company had approximately $35.0 million of cash (after paying down significant debt of the Company) which management believes will be sufficient to satisfy the Company’s estimated liquidity needs for the 12 months from the issuance of our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
However, there is no assurance that management’s plan will be successful due to the current economic climate in the United States and globally. At the time of issuance of our consolidated financial statements, management believed that the previously reported going concern has been alleviated based on the reasons set forth above, and management no longer had substantial doubt of the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The financial statements included in this Report do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event that the Company cannot continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates and in other instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. This applies in particular to useful lives of non-current assets and valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving our judgments and estimates.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are carried at cost less depreciation. Depreciation and amortization are provided principally on the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from ten years to 39 years as follows:
The Company has not changed its estimate for the useful lives of its property and equipment, but would expect that a decrease in the estimated useful lives of property and equipment by 20% would result in an annual increase to depreciation expense of approximately $460,000, and an increase in the estimated useful lives of property and equipment by 20% would result in an annual decrease to depreciation expense of approximately $310,000.
Intangible Assets
The Company amortizes intangible assets with finite lives over their estimated useful lives, which range between five and fifteen years as follows:
The intangible assets with finite useful lives are reviewed for impairment when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ carrying amounts. In that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the long-lived assets. The Company has not changed its estimate for the useful lives of its intangible assets, but would expect that a decrease in the estimated useful lives of intangible assets by 20% would result in an annual increase to amortization expense of approximately $141,000, and an increase in the estimated useful lives of intangible assets by 20% would result in an annual decrease to amortization expense of approximately $94,000.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, Income Taxes. ASC 740 requires a company to use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences, and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment. The Company has not changed it methodology for estimating the valuation allowance. A change in valuation allowance affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made and could be significant due to the large valuation allowance currently established.
Under ASC 740, a tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. The Company has no material uncertain tax positions for any of the reporting periods presented.
For a summary of our critical accounting policies, refer to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 - Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.