Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes to the financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
General Industry Trends
We believe that, in the United States, the primary market for senior living services is focused towards individuals age 80 and older. As a result of medical advances, adults are living longer and expanding their options as to where they choose to reside as they age. Due to these demographic trends, in the last ten years the senior living industry evolved to serve the growing number of older adults and we expect the demand for senior living services to increase in future years. We have searched for innovative ways to overcome the industry's challenges, including workforce shortages and low employee retention, occupancy pressures, challenges related to new technology and higher service level expectations. More recently, the senior living industry has been materially adversely impacted by the Pandemic and resulting economic recession.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Pandemic has significantly disrupted and likely will continue to significantly disrupt the United States economy, our business and the senior living industry as a whole. The WHO declared COVID-19 a pandemic in March of 2020. From March 2020 through February 20, 2021, there have been approximately 28.7 million reported cases of COVID-19 in the United States and 510,000 related deaths, which have disproportionately impacted older adults like our customers. In response to the Pandemic, most states and municipalities closed non-essential businesses and implemented restrictions on others to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in March and April of 2020. Although states and municipalities have partially reopened their economies and eased certain restrictions in recent months and economic data has indicated that the United States economy has improved since the lowest periods experienced in March and April 2020, the United States gross domestic product remains below pre-Pandemic levels. Recently, following the holiday season, the reopening of economies and the easing of restrictions, the United States has experienced peak numbers of COVID-19 infections and deaths. In some cases, certain states have again required the closure of certain business activities and imposed certain other restrictions.
Vaccinations. On December 11 and December 18, 2020, the FDA issued EUAs to Pfizer Inc. / BioNTech SE and Moderna, Inc., respectively, for vaccines for the prevention of COVID-19. The CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices placed long-term care facility residents and healthcare personnel in "Phase 1a," the highest priority group to receive COVID-19 vaccines, which included residents and team members at our SNFs, memory care units and assisted living communities. States have subsequently prioritized all categories of older adults, which include our independent living facilities. In order to protect the health and safety of our residents, team members and clients, we scheduled multiple vaccination clinics as soon as possible after the EUAs for our SNF, memory care and assisted living residents and team members at no cost to those individuals. As of February 20, 2021, 87.2% of our residents and 42.5% of our team members at our senior living communities had received their initial dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and 52.7% of our residents and 26.9% of our team members had received their second dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. As of February 20, 2021, 249 senior living communities have held a vaccination clinic for the initial dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and 183 senior living communities have also held a vaccination clinic for the second dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. We expect that widespread vaccination for COVID-19 amongst our residents and team members will decrease the incidence of COVID-19 in our senior living communities, eventually end restrictions on the admission of more new residents in our senior living communities and decrease our costs for PPE and COVID-19 testing.
Protective Measures for Residents and Team Members. Our residents and clients are part of a population that has been disproportionately affected by the Pandemic. Older adults also tend to have more chronic medical conditions than the general population. Those with pre-existing medical conditions are at a higher risk of serious illness or death, or both, if they contract COVID-19. In addition, our team members who work in our communities may be at a higher risk of contracting or spreading COVID-19 due to the nature of their work environment when caring for our residents and clients. Our highest priority is maintaining the health and well-being of our residents, clients and team members. As a result, we continue to monitor, evaluate and adjust our plans to address the impact to our business. We have, among other steps:
•facilitated multiple COVID-19 vaccination clinics for residents and team members at our senior living communities and Ageility clinics, and encouraged our residents and team members at our senior living communities and Ageility clinics to receive a COVID-19 vaccination as soon as it became available at their community;
•restricted access to our senior living communities to essential visitors and team members, and only reopened communities when it was determined safe to do so in accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations and guidelines, and our internal criteria;
•reopened our rehabilitation and wellness services clinics for in-person services when it was determined safe to do so and in accordance with federal, state and local regulations and guidelines;
•reopened our corporate office, when it was safe to do so, at a reduced capacity in accordance with federal, state and local regulations and guidelines;
•enhanced infectious disease prevention and control policies, procedures and protocols at all properties;
•created a cross-functional team to implement proactive protection for residents in our senior living communities and clients in our rehabilitation and wellness services clinics as well as team members;
•provided additional and enhanced training to team members at all levels of the organization;
•worked with vendors to provide adequate supplies and PPE to our senior living communities and rehabilitation and wellness services clinics;
•identified residents needs for higher level of care and worked with them and their family members to ensure their safety during the Pandemic; and
•effectively transitioned to virtual sales and marketing activities and thoughtfully proceeded with resident move-ins, when appropriate.
In addition, we have taken actions to safeguard and support our team members, residents, clients and senior living communities including:
•provided meals to team members to limit their outside exposure during shifts;
•provided COVID-19 emergency leave to team members, including paid leave to team members if they were exposed to, or tested positive for, COVID-19 and offered flexible work schedules;
•as of February 20, 2021, conducted over 290,000 resident and team member tests, and also performed health screenings for visitors to our senior living communities;
•recognized and rewarded team members with bonuses in addition to our total rewards package;
•provided corporate team members with appropriate information technology, including laptop computers, smart phones, computer applications, information technology security applications and technical support, to work remotely during mandatory work-from-home orders directed by local and state governments;
•promoted access to mental health services and other benefits to support residents' and team members' mental and physical well-being as well as complementary counseling and support services for residents;
•hosted virtual all-hands meetings to communicate our policies, procedures and guidelines related to COVID-19 response, vaccination safety and availability and re-opening efforts and to ensure team members are supported with assistance and guidance;
•implemented new virtual group activities for residents that allow for engagement while maintaining social distancing;
•expanded effective communication channels to residents, their families and team members;
•provided devices and connectivity options for residents' interactions with family members, virtual programming opportunities and distance learning; and
•focused on learning and development opportunities for team members.
We have also been impacted by mandatory work from home orders directed by local and state governments in the jurisdictions in which we operate. However, essential work exemptions permit certain of our team members to work on site to meet the needs of our residents and clients at our senior living communities and rehabilitation and wellness services clinics. Effective as of July 13, 2020, our corporate office was re-opened in compliance with state and local guidelines and restrictions and most corporate team members returned to the corporate office at a reduced capacity. We continue to monitor regulations and guidance from federal, state and local governments and agencies and will adapt and update our policies and procedures to continue to prioritize the health and safety of our residents, clients and team members. Our team members at our corporate office have been able to support the needs of the business while working remotely or in the corporate office. At our corporate office, we continue to provide enhanced cleaning protocols and abide by social distancing guidelines to reduce the possibility of our team members gathering in groups and in close proximity to each other, for the purpose of mitigating the potential for the spread of COVID-19 infections. Included among these protocols and measures are focusing on sanitizing high touch points in common areas and restrooms, shutting down certain building amenities, limiting staff interactions and reducing non-essential building services.
Occupancy. As a result of the Pandemic, we experienced declines in occupancy at our owned and leased senior living communities from 82.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 76.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Consistent with occupancy declines experienced within our owned and leased portfolio, the senior living communities we manage on behalf of DHC also experienced occupancy declines from 85.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 77.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, in accordance with certain federal, state and local regulatory requirements, in conjunction with our own policies and procedures, we ceased or limited admissions to and tours of certain of our senior living communities as a precautionary measure and only have reopened communities to resident admissions and in-person tours when it was determined safe to do so. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, the number of new residents moving into our senior living communities was slightly higher compared to the three months ended September 30, 2020, reducing the rate of decline in occupancy rates compared to the preceding quarter. At December 31, 2020, 89% of our senior living communities were accepting new residents in at least one service line of business (independent living, assisted living, skilled nursing or memory care). Following the EUA, our residents and team members began receiving COVID-19 vaccines in December of 2020. As of February 20, 2021, 87.2% of our residents and 42.5% of our team members at our senior living communities had received their initial dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and 52.7% of our residents and 26.9% of our team members had received their second dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. As of February 20, 2021, 249 senior living communities have held a vaccination
clinic for the initial dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and 183 senior living communities have also held a vaccination clinic for the second dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. We expect that widespread vaccination for COVID-19 among our residents and team members will decrease the incidence of COVID-19 in our senior living communities and eventually ease restrictions at our senior living communities, which impact new admissions and resident programming. Despite the continued distribution of the COVID-19 vaccine, as a result of the ongoing effects of the Pandemic, we expect continued occupancy declines in the near term, due to current residents leaving our senior living communities, restrictions on new residents moving into and/or touring our senior living communities and the possibility that older adults will forego or delay moving into senior living communities because of perceived safety issues associated with the Pandemic. Our revenues are largely dependent on occupancy at our senior living communities and any decline in occupancy adversely impacts our revenues, unless we are able to offset those lost revenues with increased rates we charge our residents and clients or other sources of increased revenues.
Expenses. We have also incurred and will continue to incur significant costs to address the Pandemic, which principally include costs associated with PPE, testing supplies, professional services costs, agreements with laboratories to provide COVID-19 testing to our residents and team members that were not otherwise covered by government payer or third-party insurance sources and disposable food supplies as well as increased sanitation and janitorial supplies and increased labor costs. We have, for example, entered into temporary staffing agreements with staffing agencies in order to supply additional workers in the event that our team members contract COVID-19. Our labor costs have also increased as a result of rising health insurance costs caused by the Pandemic. Although COVID-19 vaccinations have been made available to residents and team members at our senior living communities, and we expect that widespread vaccination at our senior living communities will decrease the incidence of COVID-19, we expect the increased costs associated with the Pandemic to continue throughout the first half of 2021 and for the reasonably foreseeable future thereafter. We incur these costs for our owned and leased senior living communities, rehabilitation and wellness services clinics and corporate and regional operations. Although DHC is responsible for these costs at the senior living communities we manage for DHC, increases in these costs would reduce EBITDA realized at these communities and, hence, negatively impact our ability to earn, and the amount of, any incentive fees, as well as possibly impact other aspects of our management arrangements. The Pandemic has also disrupted the global supply chain, including many of our medical and technological suppliers, due to factory closures and reduced manufacturing output. We believe that our current supplies and supplies we currently have on order should be sufficient to support our needs for the reasonably foreseeable future. We have undertaken efforts to mitigate potential future impacts on the supply chain by increasing our stock of critical materials to meet our expected increased needs for the reasonably foreseeable future and by identifying and engaging alternative suppliers. We continue to be alert to the potential for disruptions that could arise from the Pandemic and remain in close contact with our suppliers.
Results of Operations. We have experienced negative impacts on our results of operations, cash flows and financial condition as a result of the Pandemic and we expect those negative impacts to continue at least through the first half of 2021. We expect that widespread vaccination at our senior living communities will decrease the incidence of COVID-19 at those communities and will eventually decrease our costs and the negative impacts on our results of operations that are associated with the Pandemic. Despite the approval and increasing availability of COVID-19 vaccines, going forward, the amounts and type of revenue, expense and cash flow impacts resulting from the Pandemic will be dependent on a number of additional factors, including: the speed, depth, geographic reach and duration of the spread of the disease; the distribution, availability and effectiveness of therapeutic treatments and testing for COVID-19 to our residents, clients and team members; the legal, regulatory and administrative developments that occur, including the availability of governmental financial and regulatory relief to businesses; our infectious disease control and prevention efforts; the duration and severity of the economic downturn in response to the Pandemic; and the demand for our communities and services.
Additionally, we expect that the continuation or deepening of the current economic downturn, other direct and indirect impacts of the Pandemic, softness in the U.S. housing market, higher unemployment, lower levels of consumer confidence, stock market volatility and/or changes in demographics will adversely affect the ability of older adults and their families to afford our services.
Senior Living Development. For the past few years prior to the Pandemic, increased access to capital and continued low-interest rates appear to have encouraged increased senior living development, particularly in areas where existing senior living communities have historically experienced high occupancy. This has resulted in a significant increase in new senior living community inventory entering the market in recent years, increasing competitive pressures on us, particularly in certain of our geographic markets. Although new development had been slowing prior to the onset of the Pandemic, and the impact of the Pandemic and the economic slowdown may further impact new development, we expect that new inventory will hit the market in the near term due to the increased development of senior living communities in the past several years, and that increase will continue to have a competitive effect on our business for at least the next few years, and that the related challenges may be intensified as a result of the Pandemic and the associated economic downturn.
Labor Market. Prior to the onset of the Pandemic, low unemployment, the competitive labor market and, in certain jurisdictions, increased minimum wages, caused employment costs to increase, including for salaries, wages and benefits, such as health care benefit coverage, for our team members, which increased our operating expenses and negatively impacted our financial results. The U.S. labor market may return to such levels as the impact of the Pandemic subsides. As noted above, in connection with the Pandemic, we incurred increased labor costs as a result of increased overtime pay for team members, increased costs associated with team member engagement and retention programs, such as meals for certain of our team members and bonuses to team members at our senior living communities and rehabilitation and wellness clinics, and increased health insurance and workers' compensation costs. We also increased staffing needs, for which we have entered into temporary staffing agreements with staffing agencies to accommodate staffing shortages due to quarantine protocols of our current staff that may have contracted or been potentially exposed to COVID-19, and we experienced increased costs associated with PPE and testing requirements due to the Pandemic.
2020 Operations
We primarily earn revenue by providing housing and services to residents of our senior living communities that we own or lease, in addition to managing senior living communities for the account of DHC, and by providing our residents, clients and others with rehabilitation and wellness services at our senior living communities, as well as at outpatient clinics located separately from our senior living communities. Effective January 1, 2020, due to the Transaction Agreement, 166 of our formerly leased senior living communities from DHC were converted to managed communities. This resulted in a significant decrease in senior living revenues and corresponding expenses, an increase in management fees and an increase in costs incurred for managed communities and the reimbursement of those costs in our financial statements. We bill all private pay residents in advance for the housing and services to be provided in the following month.
Our expenses primarily were:
•senior living wages and benefits, including wages and wage-related expenses, such as health insurance, workers’ compensation insurance and other benefits for our team members working at our owned and leased senior living communities;
•other senior living operating expenses, including utilities, housekeeping, dietary, maintenance, insurance and community-level administrative costs at our owned and leased senior living communities;
•rehabilitation and wellness services expenses, including wages and wage-related expenses, such as health insurance and other benefits for our team members working at our rehabilitation and wellness services clinics, as well as other operating expenses such as insurance, supplies and other administrative costs;
•costs incurred on behalf of managed senior living communities, including wages and benefits for staff and other operating expenses related to the senior living communities that we manage for the account of DHC, which are reimbursed to us by DHC, including from revenues we receive from the applicable managed communities, pursuant to our New Management Agreements with DHC. For more information about our management arrangements with DHC, see “Properties-Our Leases and Management Agreements with DHC” in Part I, Item 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K;
•general and administrative expenses, principally comprised of wages and wage-related expenses for headquarters and regional staff as well as investments in technology used in supporting our senior living community operations and ancillary business lines and professional service fees and other administrative costs;
•rent expense attributable to the 4 senior living communities we leased from PEAK. Effective January 1, 2020, all of our then existing leases with DHC were terminated and we entered into the New Management Agreements. For more information about our management arrangements with DHC, see “Properties-Our Leases and Management Agreements with DHC” in Part I, Item 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K;
•depreciation and amortization expense as we incur depreciation expense on buildings and furniture and equipment that we own and amortization expense on our finance lease right-of-use assets; and
•interest and other expense, primarily including interest on outstanding debt and amortization of deferred financing costs.
Expansion Activities
In April 2019, we began managing for the account of DHC a senior living community DHC owns located in Oregon with 318 living units.
In December 2019, we began managing for the account of DHC an active adult community DHC owns located in Texas with 167 units.
During 2020 and 2019, we opened 23 and 65 new rehabilitation and wellness services outpatient clinics, respectively.
We currently expect that our expansion activities will be focused on entering into additional long-term management agreements for senior living communities and growing the ancillary services that we provide, including through our Ageility clinics, rather than from the acquisition or leasing of additional senior living communities, although we may from time to time acquire or lease additional senior living communities.
Investment Activities
Historically, when we made capital improvements to the senior living communities that we leased from DHC, we generally would sell such improvements to DHC and our annual rent payments would increase pursuant to the terms of our then existing leases with DHC. On April 1, 2019, DHC purchased from us approximately $50.0 million of unencumbered Qualifying PP&E (as defined in the Transaction Agreement) related to DHC’s senior living communities leased and operated by us, which was subsequently reduced to $49.2 million due to the exclusion of certain fixed assets in accordance with the Transaction Agreement. In addition, subsequent to entering into and in accordance with the Transaction Agreement, DHC pre-funded estimated capital expenditures for the DHC senior living communities that we operated on a monthly basis during the remainder of 2019. In the following month, adjustments were made based on the actual amounts incurred in the prior month. As of December 31, 2019, $1.8 million due to DHC related to this prefunding was included in due to related persons on our consolidated balance sheets. On January 1, 2020, in accordance with the Transaction Agreement, we sold to DHC $2.7 million of the remaining qualified capital improvements at the senior living communities we previously leased from DHC at net book value. DHC funds capital improvements at the senior living communities we manage for the account of DHC pursuant to the New Management Agreements.
During 2020 and 2019, we received gross proceeds of $10.4 million and $5.2 million, respectively, in connection with the sale of equity and debt investments through our offshore captive insurance company, and recorded net realized gains of $0.4 million and $0.2 million, respectively.
During 2020 and 2019, we purchased certain debt and equity investments through our offshore captive insurance company for $5.8 million and $3.0 million, respectively.
Restructuring Transactions with DHC
On April 1, 2019, we entered into the Transaction Agreement with DHC to restructure our business arrangements with DHC, pursuant to which, effective as of January 1, 2020:
•our five then existing master leases with DHC as well as our then existing management and pooling agreements with DHC were terminated and replaced with the New Management Agreements;
•we effected the Share Issuances pursuant to which we issued 10,268,158 of our common shares to DHC and an aggregate of 16,118,849 of our common shares to DHC’s shareholders of record as of December 13, 2019; and
•as consideration for the Share Issuances, DHC provided to us $75.0 million by assuming certain of our working capital liabilities and through cash payments.
For more information regarding the Transaction Agreement, our leases and management agreements and other transactions with DHC, see Notes 1, 10 and 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Credit Facilities
We have a $65.0 million secured revolving credit facility with a syndicate of lenders that is available for us to use for general business purposes, of which $42.1 million is available for borrowing as of December 31, 2020.
For more information regarding our credit facility and our irrevocable standby letters of credit, see Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Disposition Activities
In 2019, we and DHC sold to third parties 18 SNFs located in California, Kansas, Iowa and Nebraska that DHC owned and leased to us for an aggregate sales price of approximately $29.5 million, excluding closing costs. As a result of these sales, the annual minimum rent payable to DHC by us under our then existing master leases with DHC was reduced in accordance with the Transaction Agreement.
In 2020, DHC sold nine senior living communities that we previously managed located in California, Mississippi, Nebraska and Wisconsin. Upon completion of these sales, our management agreements with DHC for these communities were terminated. In addition, DHC in November 2020 closed seven senior living communities and one building in one senior living community that we previously managed. While these closed communities are no longer being used as senior living communities, we continue to manage their back-office operations and monitor the empty facilities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $2.7 million of management fees related to the sold and closed communities.
During 2020 and 2019, we permanently closed six and four rehabilitation and wellness services outpatient clinics, respectively, primarily as a result of being located in senior living communities that were operated in communities we managed on behalf of DHC that were sold or closed.
Results of Operations
We operate in two reportable segments: (1) senior living and (2) rehabilitation and wellness services. In the senior living segment, we manage for the account of others and operate for our own account, respectively, independent living communities, assisted living communities, CCRCs, SNFs and an active adult community that are subject to centralized oversight and provide housing and services to older adults. Included in the results of the assisted living communities and CCRCs are memory care living units specializing in the care of those with Alzheimer's. In the rehabilitation and wellness services reporting segment, we provide a comprehensive suite of rehabilitation and wellness services, including physical, occupational, speech and other specialized therapy services, in inpatient and outpatient clinics as well as home health services.
All of our operations and assets are located in the United States, except for the operations of our Cayman Islands organized captive insurance company subsidiary, which participates in our workers’ compensation, professional and general liability and certain automobile insurance programs.
Key Statistical Data For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following tables present a summary of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands, except RevPAR):
_______________________________________
n/m - not meaningful
(1) Includes only living units categorized as in service. As a result, the number of living units may change from period to period for reasons other than the acquisition or disposition of senior living communities.
(2) RevPAR is defined by us as resident fee revenues for the corresponding portfolio for the period divided by the average number of available units for the period, divided by the number of months in the period. Amounts for the year ended December 31, 2020 exclude income received by senior living communities under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act and other governmental grants.
Comparable Communities and Clinics
Comparable communities (senior living communities and rehabilitation and wellness services clinics that we have continuously owned, continuously leased or continuously managed since January 1, 2019) results, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, are listed below. The number of comparable communities represent a minority of the senior living communities we operated since January 1, 2019 as a result of the changes to our business arrangements with DHC pursuant to the Restructuring Transaction for senior living communities that we manage on behalf of DHC (dollars in thousands, except RevPAR):
_______________________________________
n/m - not meaningful
(1) Includes only living units categorized as in service. As a result, the number of living units may change from period to period for reasons other than the acquisition or disposition of senior living communities.
(2) RevPAR is defined by us as resident fee revenues for the corresponding portfolio for the period divided by the average number of available units for the period, divided by the number of months in the period. Amounts for the year ended December 31, 2020 exclude income received by senior living communities under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act and other governmental grants.
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following is a discussion of our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Senior living revenues. The decrease in senior living revenues is primarily due to the conversion of 166 senior living communities formerly leased from DHC to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement, effective January 1, 2020. The decrease in senior living revenues at our comparable senior living communities was primarily due to the decrease in average occupancy from 81.4% to 76.4% caused by the Pandemic as move-out rates exceeded move-in rates, resulting from the impact of state and company-wide policies that restricted admissions at those communities with a confirmed case of COVID-19, the decline in demand due to the increased scrutiny of COVID-19 spread amongst residents and staff within senior living communities, and marketplace reluctance to relocate to other senior living communities during the Pandemic. The decrease in senior living revenues was partially offset by the receipt and recognition of $1.7 million under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act and other governmental grants more fully described under Other Operating Income below.
Management fees. The increase in management fees is primarily due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement. Management fees and construction management fees increased $40.8 million and $1.6 million, respectively, due to the increase in senior living communities we manage for the account of DHC from 78 to 228. The remaining increase is primarily due to the terms of the New Management Agreements, under which we receive a management fee equal to 5% of the gross revenues realized at senior living communities managed and 3% of the costs of construction projects we manage for the account of DHC. Prior to the Transaction Agreement, our management fee for 46 of the 78 previously managed senior living communities was equal to 3% of the gross revenues realized at those senior living communities and 3% of the costs of construction projects we managed for the account of DHC. These increases were partially offset by declines in gross revenues at the senior living communities we managed primarily caused by the impact of the Pandemic. The increase in management fees at our comparable senior living communities was primarily due to the impact of the standardization of our management fee rate across all DHC communities in conjunction with the execution of the New Management Agreements and the construction management fee that we began earning on construction projects we manage effective January 1, 2020, partially offset by a decline in gross revenues at the senior living communities we manage caused by the Pandemic.
Rehabilitation and wellness services. The increase in rehabilitation and wellness services revenues is primarily due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement and growth of our business, including opening new outpatient clinics. Rehabilitation and wellness services revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 excluded $24.0 million related to inpatient clinics at senior living communities we previously leased from DHC. Prior to the effective date of the Transaction Agreement, this revenue was eliminated in consolidation pursuant to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The remaining increase was primarily due to 17 net new outpatient clinics opened during the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the full year impact of 61 net new outpatient clinics opened during the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases were partially offset by temporary closures of outpatient clinics during the second quarter of 2020 as a result of the Pandemic as clinics suspended certain outpatient services and limited services were provided to residents, which significantly reduced the number of clients we treated on a daily basis. In addition, as we reopened, we saw a reduction of visits at certain of our clinics, however most of our clinics by the third quarter of 2020 were open and operating at or near pre-Pandemic levels. The decrease which occurred during the period in which the outpatient clinics were closed was partially covered by the receipt of $1.7 million under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act more fully described under Other Operating Income below. The increase in rehabilitation and wellness services revenues at our comparable clinics was due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement and the change in how those revenues are accounted for as a result, partially offset by a decline in gross revenues caused by the Pandemic.
Reimbursed community-level costs incurred on behalf of managed communities. The increase in reimbursed community-level costs incurred on behalf of managed communities was primarily due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement, resulting in the increase in senior living communities managed for the account of DHC. This was partially offset by a decline in costs incurred at the senior living communities we manage resulting from continued occupancy declines as a result of the effects of the Pandemic. The decrease in reimbursed community-level costs incurred on behalf of managed communities at our comparable communities was due to lower community-level costs, including other operating expenses such as marketing expenses, travel and entertainment, professional service fees and other costs that were impacted by occupancy declines due to the Pandemic, including wages, dietary costs and repairs and maintenance.
Other reimbursed expenses. Other reimbursed expenses represent reimbursements that arise from certain centralized services we provide pursuant to the New Management Agreements.
Other operating income. Other operating income represents funds received and recognized under the Provider Relief Fund of the CARES Act General Fund Distribution as well as certain other governmental grants.
Senior living wages and benefits. The decrease in senior living wages and benefits is primarily due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement. Senior living wages and benefits related to senior living communities previously leased from DHC are reimbursed community-level costs incurred on behalf of managed communities effective January 1, 2020, pursuant to the New Management Agreements. The increase in senior living wages and benefits at our comparable communities is primarily due to increased medical insurance costs related to the Pandemic and certain rewards programs to front line team members directly supporting our residents during the Pandemic.
Other senior living operating expenses. Other senior living operating expenses are comprised of utilities, housekeeping, dietary, repairs and maintenance, insurance and other community-level costs. The decrease in other senior living operating expenses is primarily due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities effective January 1, 2020 pursuant to the Transaction Agreement, partially offset by increased legal costs related to a settlement of a lawsuit, increased self-insurance obligations and increased costs related to COVID-19 testing supplies, disposable food supplies, infectious disease prevention cleaning, sanitation and labor as a result of the Pandemic. The increase in other senior living operating expenses at our comparable communities is primarily due to costs associated with our self-insurance obligations, increased legal costs related to the settlement of a lawsuit as well as increases in costs related to COVID-19 testing supplies, disposable food supplies, infectious disease prevention cleaning, sanitation and labor as a result of the Pandemic, partially offset by lower repairs and maintenance, reduction in consulting and other purchased service expenses associated with our 2019 strategic sourcing investment program
Rehabilitation and wellness services expenses. The increase in rehabilitation and wellness services expenses is primarily due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities, effective January 1, 2020, pursuant to the Transaction Agreement and growth of our business. Rehabilitation and wellness services expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 excluded $24.0 million related to inpatient clinics at senior living communities we previously leased from DHC. Prior to the effective date of the Restructuring Transactions, these expenses were eliminated in consolidation pursuant to GAAP. The remaining increase was primarily due to 17 net new outpatient clinics opened during the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the full year impact of 61 net new outpatient clinics opened during the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases were partially offset by a reduction of labor costs due to reduced visits and temporary closures of outpatient clinics as a result of the Pandemic. The increase in rehabilitation and wellness services expenses at our comparable communities was due to the conversion of our formerly leased senior living communities to managed communities pursuant to the Transaction Agreement and the change for how those revenues are accounted for as a result, partially offset by a reduction of labor costs due to reduced visits and temporary closures of outpatient clinics as a result of the Pandemic.
General and administrative. The slight decrease in general and administrative expenses is primarily due to a decrease of $10.4 million in transaction costs incurred in connection with the Restructuring Transactions, mostly offset by increased salaries and benefits, which include costs for certain centralized services we provide pursuant to the New Management Agreements.
Rent. The decrease in rent expense is due to the termination of our master leases for the senior living communities that we previously leased from DHC, which were replaced with the New Management Agreements, pursuant to the Transaction Agreement. Rent for comparable communities increased primarily due to increases in rent at certain of our rehabilitation and wellness services clinics.
Depreciation and amortization. The decrease in depreciation and amortization is primarily due to the sale of approximately $110.0 million of fixed assets and improvements to DHC during 2019.
Loss on sale of senior living communities. A loss on sale of senior living communities of $0.9 million was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 in connection with the disposition of 18 SNFs to third parties during 2019 by DHC and us.
Long-lived asset impairment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a long-lived asset impairment of $3.3 million to reduce the carrying value of certain of our long-lived assets related to our senior living segment to their estimated fair values.
Interest, dividend and other income. The decrease in interest, dividend and other income is primarily due to decreased amounts of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and dividends received from our investments in equity securities due to declines in interest rates and dividends paid during 2020.
Interest and other expense. The decrease in interest and other expense is primarily due to decreased amounts of interest incurred on borrowings under our credit facility compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We did not borrow any funds under our credit facility during the year ended December 31, 2020; however we did incur unused line fees recorded as other expense.
Unrealized gain on equity investments. Unrealized gain on equity investments represents adjustments made to our investments in equity securities to record amounts at fair value.
Realized gain on sale of debt and equity investments. Realized gain on sale of debt and equity investments represents our realized gain on investments generally held related to our captive insurance company.
Loss on termination of leases. Loss on termination of leases represents the excess of the fair value of the Share Issuances of $97.9 million compared to the consideration of $75.0 million paid by DHC.
Provision for income taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized a provision for income taxes of $0.7 million and $0.1 million, respectively. The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents state income taxes, including current period expenses and the addition of a state valuation allowance, partially offset by a federal benefit for alternative minimum tax, or AMT, credits. The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 represents state income taxes, including current period expenses, net of intra-period tax allocation, partially offset by a federal benefit for AMT credits and intra-period tax allocation. For additional information regarding our taxes, see Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Equity in earnings of an investee. Equity in earnings of an investee represents our proportionate share of earnings from our former investment in Affiliates Insurance Company, or AIC, which was dissolved on February 13, 2020.
Concentration of Risk - Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, 28.3% of our management and operating revenues was management fee revenue from our senior living communities managed for the account of DHC. DHC is the sole source of our management fee revenue. Effective as of January 1, 2020, all of our then existing leases and management and pooling agreements with DHC were terminated and replaced with the New Management Agreements, but prior to such date a substantial majority of our senior living revenue was derived from senior living communities leased from DHC. We expect to continue to be dependent on revenues from the management of senior living communities owned by DHC for the foreseeable future. Failure of DHC to continue to own these senior living communities in the future, or DHC's termination of a significant number of the New Management Agreements, could significantly impact our business. For additional information about our management arrangements with DHC, see "Restructuring Transactions with DHC“ included in Part I, Item I, Properties-Our Leases and Management Agreements with DHC” included in Part I, Item 2, and “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Related Person Transactions” included in Part II, Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Notes 1 and 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Medicare and Medicaid programs provide operating revenues at some of our senior living communities (principally our SNFs) and for our rehabilitation and wellness services clinics. As a result of the completion of the Restructuring Transactions, our revenues from Medicare and Medicaid have declined; however, we earn management fees on Medicare and Medicaid revenue generated at the senior living communities we manage and for rehabilitation and wellness services we provide. From time to time, in the senior living communities we own or lease and operate, we may receive Medicaid revenue.
We cannot currently predict the type or magnitude of the potential Medicare and Medicaid policy changes, rate reductions or other changes and the impact on us or our customer, DHC, of the possible failure of these programs to increase rates to match increasing expenses, but they may be adverse and material to our operations and to our future financial results of operations as well as those of DHC. Similarly, we are unable to predict the impact on us of the insurance changes, payment changes and healthcare delivery systems changes contained in and to be developed pursuant to the ACA. If the changes implemented under the ACA result in reduced payments for our services, or the failure of Medicare, Medicaid or insurance payment rates to cover our costs or the costs borne by our client, DHC, of providing required services to residents, our future financial results could be materially and adversely affected. Finally, to the extent the ACA is repealed, replaced or modified,
additional regulatory risks may arise. Depending upon what aspects of the ACA are repealed, replaced or modified, our future financial results could be adversely and materially affected.
For more information regarding government regulation and its possible impact on us and our business, revenues and operations, see “Business-Government Regulation and Reimbursement” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We require cash to fund our operating expenses, to make capital expenditure and to service our debt obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we had $84.4 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, our restricted cash and cash equivalents included $21.6 million of bank term deposits in our captive insurance company.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had current assets of $262.3 million and $143.4 million, respectively, and current liabilities of $177.9 million and $164.3 million, respectively.
On January 1, 2020, in connection with the Restructuring Transactions, we issued 10,268,158 of our common shares to DHC and an aggregate of 16,118,849 of our common shares to DHC’s shareholders of record as of December 13, 2019. As consideration for the Share Issuances, DHC provided to us $75.0 million by assuming certain of our working capital liabilities and through cash payments.
The following table presents selected data on our continuing operations from our condensed consolidated statement of cash flows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
_______________________________________
n/m - not meaningful
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities is net income adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities. The increase in cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019 is primarily due to the Restructuring Transactions, including the receipt of $23.5 million of cash from DHC, and the deferral of payroll taxes of $27.6 million as permitted by the CARES Act, of which $22.2 million will be reimbursed from DHC, as well as a decrease in net loss for the year which included $3.4 million received and recognized under the CARES Act as other operating income, offset by changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
The decrease in cash flows provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019 is primarily due to a decrease in proceeds from the sale of property and equipment to DHC of $107.3 million and the decrease in the distributions in excess of earnings of AIC of $8.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in the acquisition of property and equipment of $52.1 million.
Financing Activities
Financing cash flows consist primarily of issuance and repayment of short-term and long-term debt, and proceeds from the sale of shares of common share grants through our equity compensation plan. The decrease in net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019 is primarily due to the net repayment of our outstanding borrowings on the revolving credit facility during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Capital Expenditures
During 2019, we completed an intensive review of our community-level capital expenditure needs with a focus on ensuring that our senior living communities are in appropriate physical condition to support our long-term strategy. During this review, we determined what additional investments are needed to protect the value of our senior living community portfolio and began in 2020 with implementing this long-term strategy. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we invested $5.2 million in our 20 owned and four communities leased from PEAK as well as our rehabilitation and wellness services clinics, and we invested and sold at cost $50.7 million in the communities we then leased and subsequently manage on behalf of DHC. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we invested $4.5 million in our 24 owned and leased senior living communities and rehabilitation and wellness services clinics. DHC funds the capital expenditures at the senior living communities we manage for the account of DHC pursuant to the New Management Agreements.
During 2020, we entered into an equipment finance lease and, as of December 31, 2020, we had a finance right-of-use asset of $4.5 million and a related finance lease liability of $4.7 million. The majority of the equipment leased is for the use of DHC, and we expect to receive reimbursement for a majority of the finance lease liability from DHC over the lease term.
Pandemic Liquidity Impact
Our liquidity and capital funding requirements depend on numerous factors, including our operating results, our capital expenditures to the extent not funded by DHC pursuant to the New Management Agreements, general economic conditions and the cost of capital. Shortfalls in cash flows from operating results or other principal sources of liquidity may have an adverse impact on our ability to execute on our strategy or to maintain capital spending levels. We believe we have adequate financial resources from our existing cash flows from operations, together with unrestricted cash on hand and amounts available under our credit facility to support our business for at least the next twelve months.
We are closely monitoring the effect of the Pandemic on our liquidity. We currently expect to use cash on hand and cash flows from operations as well as our revolving credit facility to fund our future operations and capital expenditures, to the extent not funded or reimbursed by DHC pursuant to the New Management Agreements, and fixed debt obligations, as well as investments in diversifying our service offerings to diversify our revenue streams. DHC funds the operating and capital expenses for the senior living communities we manage for DHC. We intend to conduct our business in a manner that will afford us reasonable access to capital for investment and financing activities, but we cannot be certain that we will be able to successfully carry out this intention, particularly because of the uncertainty surrounding the duration and severity of the current economic impact resulting from the Pandemic. A long, protracted and extensive economic recession may cause a decline in financing availability and increased costs for financings. Further, such conditions could also disrupt capital markets and limit our access to financing from public sources.
Insurance
Increases over time in the cost of insurance, especially professional and general liability insurance, workers’ compensation and employee health insurance, have had an adverse impact upon our results of operations. We self-insure a large portion of these costs. We also self-insure for auto insurance. Our costs have increased as a result of the higher costs that we incur to settle claims and to purchase insurance for claims in excess of the self-insured amounts, some of which related to the senior living communities we manage on behalf of DHC and are reimbursed to us by DHC pursuant to the New Management Agreements. Further, our health insurance and workers compensation costs have increased as a result of the Pandemic. These increased costs may continue in the future. We previously participated with other companies to which RMR LLC provides management services in a combined property insurance program through AIC. The policies under that program expired on June 30, 2019, and the other AIC shareholders and we elected not to renew the AIC property insurance program; we instead have purchased property insurance coverage under DHC's policy with unrelated third party insurance providers.
For more information about our existing insurance see “Business-Insurance” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Notes 2 and 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For more information about our purchased property insurance coverage under DHC's policy, see Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had seven irrevocable standby letters of credit outstanding, totaling $29.3 million. One of these letters of credit in the amount of $26.9 million, which secures our workers' compensation insurance program, is collateralized by approximately $21.6 million of cash equivalents and $7.5 million of debt and equity investments. This letter of credit expires in June 2021 and is automatically extended for one-year terms unless notice of nonrenewal is provided prior to the end of the applicable term. At December 31, 2020, the cash equivalents collateralizing this letter of credit were classified as short-term restricted cash and cash equivalents in our consolidated balance sheets, and the debt and equity investments collateralizing this letter of credit are classified as short-term restricted debt and equity investments in our consolidated balance sheets. The remaining six irrevocable standby letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2020, totaling $2.4 million, which are issued under the credit facility, secure certain of our other obligations. As of February 25, 2021, these letters of credit are scheduled to mature between June 2021 and October 2021 and are required to be renewed annually.
Debt Financings and Covenants
We have a $65.0 million secured revolving credit facility that is available for general business purposes. Our credit facility matures in June 2021, and, subject to our payment of an extension fee and other conditions, we have the option to extend the stated maturity date of our credit facility for a one-year period. We are required to pay interest on borrowings under our credit facility at a rate of LIBOR plus a premium of 250 basis points per annum; or at a base rate, as defined in the credit agreement, plus 150 basis points per annum. The annual interest rate options as of December 31, 2020 were 2.64% and 4.75%, respectively. We are also required to pay a quarterly commitment fee of 0.35% per annum on the unused portion of the available capacity under our credit facility. No principal repayment is due until maturity.
Our credit facility is secured by 11 senior living communities with a combined 1,235 living units owned by certain of our subsidiaries that guarantee our obligations under our credit facility. Our credit facility is also secured by these senior living communities’ accounts receivable and related collateral. The amount of available borrowings under our credit facility is subject to our having qualified collateral, which is primarily based on the value and operating performance of the communities securing our obligations under our credit facility. Our credit facility provides for acceleration of payment of all amounts outstanding under our credit facility upon the occurrence and continuation of certain events of default, including a change of control of us, as defined in our credit agreement. Our credit agreement contains financial and other covenants, including those that restrict our ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to our shareholders in certain circumstances.
At December 31, 2020, we had seven irrevocable standby letters of credit outstanding, totaling $29.3 million, as more fully described above under the heading “-Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.”
We also have a mortgage note as of December 31, 2020, that we assumed in connection with a previous acquisition of a senior living community. Payments of principal and interest are due monthly under this mortgage debt until maturity in September 2032. The annual interest rate on this mortgage debt was 6.20% as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings outstanding under our credit facility and $2.4 million in letters of credit issued under our credit facility, and $42.1 million available for borrowing under our credit facility, and $7.4 million outstanding on the mortgage note. As of December 31, 2020, we believe we were in compliance with all applicable covenants under our debt agreements.
For more information regarding our debt financings and covenants, see Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Related Person Transactions
We have relationships and historical and continuing transactions with DHC, RMR LLC, ABP Trust and others related to them. For further information about these and other such relationships and related person transactions, see Notes 10, 13 and 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which are incorporated herein by reference and our other filings with the SEC, including our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, or our definitive Proxy Statement, to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. For further information about the risks that may arise as a result of these and other related person transactions and relationships, see elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements”, Part I, Item 1, “Business” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” We may engage in additional transactions with related persons, including businesses to which RMR LLC or its subsidiaries provide management services.
Seasonality
Revenues derived from our senior living and managed communities are subject to modest effects of seasonality, which we experience in certain regions more than others, due to weather patterns, geography and higher incidence and severity of flu and other illnesses during winter months. We do not expect these seasonal differences to cause material fluctuations in our revenues or operating cash flows. It is uncertain what the long-term survival, recurrence and resurgence of COVID-19 will be, including whether it will weaken, transform or otherwise become a common seasonal virus, which may change or amplify seasonal aspects and effects on our business.
Debt Investments
We routinely evaluate our available for sale debt investments to determine if they have been impaired. If the fair value of a debt investment is less than its book or carrying value, and we expect that situation to continue for more than a temporary period, we will record an “other than temporary impairment” loss in our consolidated statements of operations. We evaluate the fair value of our available for sale debt investments by reviewing each debt investment’s current market price, the ratings of the investment, the financial condition of the issuer, and our intent and ability to retain the investment during temporary market price fluctuations or until maturity. In evaluating the factors described above, we presume a decline in value to be an “other than temporary impairment” if the quoted market price of the investment is below the investment’s cost basis for an extended period, which we typically define as greater than twelve months. However, this presumption may be overcome if there is persuasive evidence indicating the value decline is temporary in nature, such as when the operating performance of the obligor is strong or if the market price of the investment is historically volatile. Additionally, there may be instances in which impairment losses are recognized even if the decline in value does not meet the criteria described above, such as if we plan to sell the investment in the near term and the fair value is below our cost basis. When we believe that a change in fair value of a debt investment is temporary, we record a corresponding credit or charge to other comprehensive income for any unrealized gains and losses. When we determine that impairment in the fair value of a debt investment is an “other than temporary impairment”, we record a charge to earnings. We did not record an impairment charge for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019 for our debt investments.
Compliance and Litigation Matters
As a result of our routine monitoring protocols that are a part of our compliance program related to our Medicare billing practices, we discovered potentially inadequate documentation at a SNF that we manage on behalf of DHC. This monitoring was not initiated in response to any specific complaint or allegation, but was monitoring of the type that we periodically undertake to test compliance with applicable Medicare billing rules. As a result of this discovery, we, along with DHC, made a voluntary disclosure of deficiencies to the OIG pursuant to the OIG’s Provider Self-Disclosure Protocol. We and DHC entered into a settlement agreement with the OIG effective January 5, 2021 and the settlement was paid by DHC. We and DHC did not admit any liability pursuant to this settlement. We recognized $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a reduction in management fees from DHC for the management fees that were previously paid to us with respect to the historical Medicare payments DHC received that it repaid pursuant to the settlement.
For information regarding other litigation matters, see Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements, entitled "Commitments and Contingencies," to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies concern revenue recognition, including contractual allowances, the allowance for doubtful accounts, self-insurance reserves and our judgments and estimates concerning our provision for income taxes or valuation allowance related to deferred tax assets.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenue recognition policies involve judgments about Medicare and Medicaid rate calculations. These judgments are based principally upon our experience with these programs and our knowledge of current rules and regulations applicable to these programs. Our principal sources of revenue are senior living revenues, management fees, rehabilitation and wellness services revenue and reimbursed costs incurred pursuant to our management and pooling agreements.
We recognize revenues when services are provided, and these amounts are reported at their estimated net realizable amounts. Some Medicare and Medicaid revenues are subject to audit and retroactive adjustment and sometimes retroactive legislative changes. See “Revenue Recognition” in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item
15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a detailed discussion of our revenue recognition policies and our contractual arrangements.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. Our policies for valuing accounts receivable, including the allowance for doubtful accounts, involve significant judgments based upon our experience, including consideration of the age of the receivables, the terms of the agreements with our residents, their third party payers or other obligors, the residents’ or payers’ stated intent to pay, the residents’ or payers’ financial capacity and other factors which may include litigation or rate and payment appeal proceedings. We periodically review and revise these estimates based on new information and these revisions may be material.
Determining reserves for Medicare repayment obligations and related costs, including penalties, and the casualty, liability, workers’ compensation and healthcare losses and costs that we have incurred as of the end of a reporting period involves significant judgments based upon our experience and our expectations of future events, including projected settlements for pending claims, known incidents which we expect may result in claims, estimates of incurred but not yet reported claims, expected changes in premiums for insurance provided by insurers whose policies provide for retroactive adjustments, estimated litigation costs and other factors. Since these reserves are based on estimates, the actual expenses we incur may differ from the amount reserved. We regularly adjust these estimates to reflect changes in the foregoing factors, our actual claims experience, recommendations from our professional consultants, changes in market conditions and other factors; it is possible that such adjustments may be material.
Taxes. Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, if any, reflect our assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the United States. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining our income tax expense and the realization of our deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results adjusted for the results of discontinued operations and incorporate assumptions about the amount of future state and federal pretax operating income adjusted for items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying business. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative operating income or loss.
We established a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets that we have determined to be not realizable. The decision to establish the valuation allowance includes our assessment of the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to realize the existing deferred tax assets. An important aspect of objective negative evidence evaluated includes the losses incurred by us in recent years. This objective negative evidence is difficult to overcome and would require a substantial amount of objectively verifiable positive evidence of future income to support the realization of our deferred tax assets. For these reasons, we have recorded a valuation allowance against the majority of our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Judgments and Estimates. Some of our judgments and estimates are based upon published industry statistics and, in some cases, third-party professionals. Any misjudgments or incorrect estimates affecting our critical accounting policies could have a material effect on our financial statements.
In the future, we may need to revise the judgments, estimates and assessments we use to formulate our critical accounting policies to incorporate information which is not now known. We cannot predict the effect changes to the premises underlying our critical accounting policies may have on our future results of operations, although such changes could be material and adverse.
For further information on our critical accounting estimates and policies and a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our Consolidated Financial Statements, see Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies", to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 of Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of Climate Change
Concerns about climate change have resulted in various treaties, laws, and regulations intended to limit carbon emissions and address other environmental concerns. These and other laws may cause energy or other costs at our senior living communities to increase. In the long-term, we believe any such increased costs will be passed through and paid by our residents and other customers in higher charges for our services. However, in the short-term, these increased costs, if material in amount, could materially and adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Some observers believe severe weather in different parts of the world over the last few years is evidence of global climate change. Severe weather has had and may continue to have an adverse effect on certain senior living communities we operate. Flooding caused by rising sea levels and severe weather events, including hurricanes, tornadoes and widespread fires may have an adverse effect on the senior living communities we operate. We mitigate these risks by procuring insurance coverage we believe adequate to protect us from material damages and losses resulting from the consequences of losses caused by climate change. However, we cannot be sure that our mitigation efforts will be sufficient or that future storms, rising sea levels or other changes that may occur due to future climate change could not have a material adverse effect on our financial results. For more information on the impact of climate change, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.