ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the “Selected Financial Data” and our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including but not limited to those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a diversified financial services company headquartered in Grand Forks, North Dakota. Through our subsidiary, Alerus Financial, National Association, we provide innovative and comprehensive financial solutions to businesses and consumers through four distinct business lines-banking, retirement and benefit services, wealth management and mortgage. These solutions are delivered through a relationship-oriented primary point of contact along with responsive and client-friendly technology.
Our primary banking market areas are the states of North Dakota, Minnesota, specifically, the Twin Cities MSA, and Arizona, specifically, the Phoenix MSA. In addition to our offices located in our banking markets, our retirement and benefit services business administers plans in all 50 states through offices located in Michigan, Minnesota and Colorado.
Our business model produces strong financial performance and a diversified revenue stream, which has helped us establish a brand and culture yielding both a loyal client base and passionate and dedicated employees. We believe our client-first and advice-based philosophy, diversified business model and history of high performance and growth distinguishes us from other financial service providers. We generate a majority of our overall revenue from noninterest income, which is driven primarily by our retirement and benefit services, wealth management and mortgage business lines. The remainder of our revenue consists of net interest income, which we derive from offering our traditional banking products and services.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $3.0 billion of total assets, $2.0 billion of total loans, $2.6 billion of total deposits, $330.2 million of stockholders’ equity, $34.2 billion of AUA/AUM in our retirement and benefit services segment, and $3.3 billion of AUA/AUM in our wealth management segment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had $1.8 billion of mortgage originations.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
The progression of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States has not had an adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the year ending December 31, 2020, but it is expected to have a complex and significant impact on the economy, the banking industry and our Company in future fiscal periods, all subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
Effects on Our Market Areas. Our primary banking market areas are the states of North Dakota, Minnesota, and Arizona. Our retirement and benefit services segment serves clients in all 50 states. We offer retirement and benefit services at all of our banking offices located in our three primary market areas. In addition, we operate two retirement and benefits services offices in Minnesota, one in Michigan and one in Colorado.
In Minnesota, at the start of the pandemic, the Governor ordered individuals to stay at home and non-essential businesses to cease all activities, in each case subject to limited exceptions. This order went into effect on March 2, 2020, and was in effect until May 18, 2020. The state has now implemented a four phase stay safe plan to reopen businesses in the area. Similarly, in Arizona, the Governor ordered individuals to stay at home and non-essential businesses to cease all activities, in each case subject to limited exceptions. This order went into effect on March 31, 2020, and expired on May 15, 2020, and the Governor announced new guidance for protecting businesses and their customers as they reopen. The state has implemented a four phase reopening plan that requires benchmarks be met for a certain period of time before transitioning from one phase to another. In North Dakota, the Governor did not issue an order requiring individuals to stay at home, but placed certain restrictions on bars, restaurants and gyms. These orders have been lifted and North Dakota is now working toward a “Smart Restart” program to encourage businesses to open safely and take precautions to slow the spread of COVID-19. In response to these orders, the Bank has been serving its customers through its drive-up windows at various branch locations and through online and mobile banking. The Bank is also permitting certain visits to its branches on a limited basis and by appointment only. In Minnesota and Arizona, the Bank is offering appointments to clients to meet with safeguards in place that materially comply with the CDC guidance. In North Dakota, offices have re-opened for business with safeguards in place that materially comply with CDC guidance.
Each state experienced a dramatic and sudden increase in unemployment levels as a result of the curtailment of business activities. According to data released by the U.S. Department of Labor, initial claims for unemployment insurance initially spiked in each of the states in our banking markets. We expect claims for unemployment insurance to remain at elevated levels for the foreseeable future until restrictions are lifted and the pandemic’s effects have subsided.
Policy and Regulatory Developments. Federal, state and local governments and regulatory authorities have enacted and issued a range of policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● The Federal Reserve decreased the range for the Federal Funds Target Rate by 0.50% on March 3, 2020, and by another 1.00% on March 16, 2020, reaching a current range of 0.00-0.25%.
● On March 27. 2020, President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, which established a $2.0 trillion economic stimulus package, including cash payments to individuals, supplemental unemployment insurance benefits and a $349 billion loan program administered through the U.S. Small Business Administration, or SBA, referred to as the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP. On April 24, 2020, an additional $310 billion in funding for PPP loans was authorized, with such funds available for PPP loans beginning on April 27, 2020. In addition, the CARES Act, as extended by the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021 (a part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021), provides financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. See “Note 6 Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion regarding TDRs.
● On April 7, 2020, federal banking regulators issued a revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions, which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19, and stated that institutions generally do not need to categorize COVID-19-related modifications as TDRs and that the agencies will not direct supervised institutions to automatically categorize all COVID-19 related loan modifications as TDRs. See “Note 6 Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion regarding TDRs.
● On April 9, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced additional measures aimed at supporting small and midsized businesses, as well as state and local governments impacted by COVID-19. The Federal Reserve announced the Main Street Business Lending Program, which established two new loan facilities intended to facilitate lending to small and midsized businesses: (1) the Main Street New Loan Facility, or MSNLF, and (2) the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility, or MSELF. MSNLF loans are unsecured term loans originated on or after April 8, 2020, while MSELF loans are provided as upsized tranches of existing loans originated before April 8, 2020. The combined size of the program is $600 billion.
● On August 3, 2020, the FFIEC issued a joint statement on Additional Loan Accommodations Related to COVID-19, which among other things, encouraged financial institutions to consider prudent additional loan accommodation options when borrowers are unable to meet their obligations due to continuing financial challenges. Accommodation options should be based on prudent risk management and consumer protection principles.
● On December 27, 2020, President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, a $900.0 billion COVID-19 relief package that includes an additional $284.0 billion in PPP funding.
● In addition to the policy responses described above, the federal bank regulatory agencies, along with their state counterparts, have issued a stream of guidance in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and have taken a number of unprecedented steps to help banks navigate the pandemic and mitigate its impact. These include without limitation: requiring banks to focus on business continuity and pandemic planning; adding pandemic scenarios to stress testing; encouraging bank use of capital buffers and reserves in lending programs; permitting certain regulatory reporting extensions; reducing margin requirements on swaps; permitting certain otherwise prohibited investments in investment funds; issuing guidance to encourage banks to work with customers affected by the pandemic and encourage loan workouts; and providing credit under the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, for certain pandemic-related loans, investments and public service. Moreover, because of the need for social distancing measures the agencies have revamped the manner in which they conduct periodic examinations of their regulated institutions, including making greater use of off-site reviews. The Federal Reserve also issued guidance encouraging banking institutions to utilize their discount window for loans and intraday credit extended by their Reserve Banks to help households and businesses impacted by the pandemic and announced numerous funding facilities. The FDIC has also acted to mitigate the deposit insurance assessment effects of participating in the PPP and the PPPL Facility and Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility.
Effect on our Business. We currently expect that the COVID-19 pandemic and the specific developments referred to above will continue to have a significant impact on our business. In particular, we anticipate that a significant portion of the Bank’s borrowers in the retail, restaurant, and hospitality industries will continue to endure significant economic distress, which could cause them to draw on their existing lines of credit and could adversely affect their ability and willingness to repay existing indebtedness, and is expected to adversely impact of the value of collateral. These developments, together with economic conditions generally, are also expected to impact our commercial real estate portfolio, particularly with respect to real estate with exposure to the retail, office and hospitality industries, our consumer loan business and loan portfolio, and the value of certain collateral securing our loans. In addition, we expect to see decreases in our total AUA/AUM and a decrease in mortgage loan originations. As a result, we anticipate that our financial condition, capital levels and results of operations will be significantly and adversely affected, as described in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Our Response. We took numerous steps in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● First and foremost, we have prioritized the safety, health and well-being of our employees, clients and communities. We have implemented a work from home policy and certain of our offices remain closed. We continue to effectively serve our clients in all markets; virtually, digitally, via drive-thru and in-person as conditions allow. Our work place strategy includes various phases of expanding service to clients, reopening offices, and determining long-term work arrangements for employees. This approach allows us
to incrementally expand in-person services to clients and provides flexibility between markets based on local conditions, guidelines, and restrictions.
● We offered payment deferrals and interest only payment options for consumer, small business, and commercial customers for initial terms of up to 90 days. We offered payment extensions for mortgage customers for initial terms of up to 90 days. As of December 31, 2020, we had entered into principal and interest deferrals on 577 loans, representing $153.6 million in principal balances. Of those loans, 18 loans with a total outstanding principal balance of $8.4 million have been granted second deferrals, 21 loans with a total outstanding principal balance of $3.7 million remain on the first deferral and the remaining loans have been returned to normal payment status.
● The Business Continuity Planning COVID-19 Response team and Alerus leadership team meet regularly to manage the Company’s response to the pandemic and the effect on our business. In addition, a cross functional task force team meets regularly to address specific issues such as employee and client communications, facilities, reopening offices, and long-term work arrangements. The Risk Committee of the Board meets regularly with management to receive updates on the Company’s response and discuss the effect on our business.
● We participated as a lender in the SBA’s PPP. We have assisted 1,632 borrowers receive approval for funding of $363.6 million in PPP loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had submitted, to the SBA, 711 forgiveness applications totaling $179.9 million and have received approval and forgiveness on 432 applications totaling $84.1 million.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income represents interest income less interest expense. We generate interest income on interest-earning assets, primarily loans and available-for-sale securities. We incur interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, primarily interest-bearing deposits and borrowings. To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor: (i) yields on loans, available-for-sale securities and other interest-earning assets; (ii) the costs of deposits and other funding sources; (iii) the rates incurred on borrowings and other interest-bearing liabilities; and (iv) the regulatory risk weighting associated with the assets. Interest income is primarily impacted by loan growth and loan repayments, along with changes in interest rates on the loans. Interest expense is primarily impacted by changes in deposit balances along with the volume and type of interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is primarily impacted by changes in market interest rates, the slope of the yield curve, and interest we earn on interest-earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income primarily consists of the following:
● Our retirement and benefit services business, which includes retirement plan administration, retirement plan investment advisory, HSA, ESOP, payroll and other benefit services, is our Company’s largest source of noninterest income. Over half of our retirement and benefit services fees are transaction or participant based fees and are impacted by the number of plans and participants. The remainder of noninterest income is based on the market value of the related AUA and AUM and impacted by the level of contributions, withdrawals, new business, lost business and fluctuation in market values.
● Wealth management includes personal trust, investment and brokerage services. Our Company earns trust, investment, and IRA fees from managing assets, including corporate trusts, personal trusts, and separately managed accounts. Trust and investment management fees are primarily based on a tiered scale relative to the market value of the AUM. Trust and investment management fees are primarily impacted by rates charged and increases and decreases in AUM. AUM is primarily impacted by opening and closing of client advisory and trust accounts, contributions and withdrawals, and the fluctuation in market values.
● Mortgage noninterest income consists of gains on originating and selling mortgages and origination fees. Mortgage gains are primarily impacted by the level of originations, amount of loans sold, the type of loans sold and market conditions.
● Service charges on deposit accounts are comprised of income generated through deposit account related service charges such as: electronic transfer fees, treasury management fees, bill pay fees, and other banking fees. Banking fees are primarily impacted by the level of business activities and cash movement activities of our clients.
● Other noninterest income consists of debit card interchange income, income earned on the growth of the cash surrender value of life insurance policies we hold on certain key employees, loan servicing income net of the related amortization, and any other income which does not fit within one of the specific noninterest income lines described above. Other noninterest income is generally impacted by business activities and level of transactions.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense is comprised primarily of the following:
● Compensation and employee taxes and benefits-include all forms of personnel related expenses including salary, commissions, incentive compensation, payroll related taxes, stock-based compensation, benefit plans, health insurance, 401(k) plan match costs, ESOP and other benefit related expenses. Compensation and employee benefit costs are primarily impacted by changes in headcount and fluctuations in benefits costs.
● Occupancy and equipment-costs related to owning and leasing our office space, depreciation charges for the furniture, fixtures and equipment, amortization of leasehold improvements, utilities and other occupancy-related expenses. Occupancy and equipment costs are primarily impacted by the number and size of the locations we occupy.
● Business services, software and technology-costs related to contracts with core system and third-party data processing providers, software and information technology services to support office activities and internal networks. We believe our technology spending enhances the efficiency of our employees and enables us to provide outstanding service to our clients. Technology and information system costs are primarily impacted by the number of locations we occupy, the number of employees, clients and volume of transactions we have and the level of service we require from our third-party technology vendors.
● Intangible amortization expense is the result of acquisitions of fee income and banking companies. Identified intangible assets with definite lives consist of client relationship intangibles and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the period representing the estimated remaining lives of the assets. The amount of expense is impacted by the timing of acquisitions and the estimated remaining lives of the assets.
● Professional fees and assessments-costs related to legal, accounting, tax, consulting, personnel recruiting, directors fees, insurance and other outsourcing arrangements. Professional services costs are primarily impacted by corporate activities requiring specialized services. FDIC insurance expense is also included in this line and represents the assessments that we pay to the FDIC for deposit insurance.
● Other operational expenses-includes costs related to marketing, donations, promotions, and expenses associated with office supplies, postage, travel expenses, meals and entertainment, dues and memberships, costs to maintain or prepare other real estate owned, or OREO, for sale, and other general corporate expenses that do not fit within one of the specific noninterest expense lines described above. Other operational expenses are generally impacted by our business activities and needs.
Operating Segments
We measure the overall profitability of business operations based on income before income tax. We allocate costs to our segments, which consist primarily of compensation and overhead expense directly attributable to the products and services within banking, retirement and benefit services, wealth management, and mortgage. We measure the profitability of each segment based on the direct allocations of expense as we believe it better approximates the contribution generated by our reportable operating segments. All indirect overhead allocations and income tax expense is allocated to corporate administration. A description of each segment is provided in Note 22 (Segment Reporting) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Critical Accounting Policies
As a result of the complex and dynamic nature of our business, management must exercise judgment in selecting and applying the most appropriate accounting policies for its various areas of operations. The policy decision process not only ensures compliance with current GAAP, but also reflects management’s discretion with regard to choosing the most suitable methodology for reporting our financial performance. It is management’s opinion that the accounting estimates covering certain aspects of the business have more significance than others due to the relative importance of those areas to overall performance, or the level of subjectivity in the selection process. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as disclosures of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates. The most critical of the accounting policies are discussed below.
Investment securities-Investment securities can be classified as trading, available-for-sale, and equity. The appropriate classification is based partially on our ability to hold the securities to maturity and largely on management’s intentions with respect to either holding or selling the securities. The classification of investment securities is significant since it directly impacts the accounting for unrealized gains and losses on securities. Unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income or loss, as a separate component of stockholders’ equity, and do not affect earnings until realized. The fair values of investment securities are generally determined by reference to quoted market prices, where available. If quoted market prices are not available, fair values are based on quoted market prices of comparable instruments, or a discounted cash flow model using market estimates of interest rates and volatility. Investment securities with significant declines in fair value are evaluated to determine whether they should be considered other-than-temporarily impaired. An unrealized loss is generally deemed to be other-than-temporary and a credit loss is deemed to exist if the present value of the expected future cash flows is less than the amortized cost basis of the debt security. The credit loss component of an other-than-temporary impairment write-down is recorded in current earnings, while the remaining portion of the impairment loss is recognized in other comprehensive income (loss), provided we do not intend to sell the underlying debt security, and it is not likely that we will be required to sell the debt security prior to recovery of the full value of its amortized cost basis.
Allowance for loan losses-The allowance for loan losses reflects management’s best estimate of probable loan losses in our loan portfolio. Determination of the allowance for loan losses is inherently subjective. It requires significant estimates, including the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows on impaired loans, appraisal values of underlying collateral for collateralized loans, and the amount of estimated losses on pools of homogeneous loans which is based on historical loss experience, expected duration and consideration of current economic trends, all of which may be susceptible to significant change.
Intangible assets-As a result of acquisitions, we carry goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. Goodwill represents the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net assets at the acquisition date. Goodwill is evaluated at least annually or when business conditions suggest impairment may have occurred. Should impairment occur, goodwill will be reduced to its revised carrying value through a charge to earnings. Core deposits and other identifiable intangible assets are amortized to expense over their estimated useful lives. The determination of whether or not impairment exists is based upon discounted cash flow modeling techniques that require management to make estimates regarding the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. It also requires them to select a discount rate that reflects the current return requirements of the market in relation to present risk-free interest rates, required equity market premiums, and company-specific performance and risk metrics, all of which are susceptible to change based on changes in economic and market conditions and other factors. Future events or changes in the estimates used to
determine the carrying value of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets could have a material impact on our results of operations.
Income taxes-Income tax expense or benefit is the total of the current year income tax due or refundable and the change in deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are the expected future tax amounts for the temporary differences between carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities, computed using enacted tax rates. A valuation allowance, if needed, reduces deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. A tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. Interest and penalties related to income tax matters are recognized in income tax expense.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S government enacted Public Law 115-97, commonly known as, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, a comprehensive tax legislation, which reduced the federal income tax rate for C corporations from 35% to 21%, effective January 1, 2018. As a result of the reduction in the U.S corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, we re-measured our deferred tax assets and recognized $4.8 million of tax expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income for the year ended December 31, 2017. See Note 21 (Income Taxes) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Fair value measurements-Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset, or paid to transfer a liability, in the principal or most advantageous market for an asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices, or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are traded actively and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgement may be necessary to estimate fair value. In developing our fair value measurements, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
Financial assets that are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis include investment securities and derivative financial instruments. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $605.7 million or 20.1% and $314.8 million or 13.4%, respectively, of our total assets consisted of financial assets recorded at fair value on a recurring basis and most of these financial assets consisted of available-for-sale investment securities. The fair value of financial assets on a recurring basis are classified in either Levels 1 or 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Financial liabilities that are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis are comprised of derivative financial instruments. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $2.9 million and $109 thousand, respectively represented less than 1% of our total liabilities in those years and were classified as Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy. We have no fair value assets or liabilities classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
A further discussion regarding the fair value of assets and liabilities, and the classification of Level 1, 2, and 3 hierarchies, is disclosed in Note 27 (Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
A summary of the accounting policies used by management is disclosed in Note 1 (Significant Accounting Policies) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Selected Financial Data
The following consolidated selected financial data is derived from the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the five years ended December 31, 2020.
The consolidated selected financial data presented below contains financial measures that are not presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and have not been audited. See “Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliations and Calculation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
(1) Excluding a one-time $4.8 million expense related to the revaluation of our deferred tax assets in 2017, our net income, ROAA, ROAE, and ROATCE would have been $19.8 million, 0.99%, 11.21%, and 18.04%, respectively. These adjusted metrics represent non-GAAP financial measures. See “Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliations and Calculation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
(2) Represents a Non-GAAP financial measure. See “Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliations and Calculation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
(3) Excludes loans held for branch sale at 2018.
(4) Excludes deposits held for sale at 2018.
(5) Includes ESOP-owned shares.
Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliations and Calculation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to the results presented in accordance with GAAP, we routinely supplement our evaluation with an analysis of certain non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures include the ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets, tangible common equity per share, return on average tangible common equity, net interest margin (tax-equivalent), and the efficiency ratio. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in its analysis of its performance, and believes financial analysts and others frequently use these measures, and other similar measures, to evaluate capital adequacy. Management calculates: (i) tangible common equity as total common stockholders’ equity, less goodwill and other intangible assets; (ii) tangible common equity per share as tangible common equity divided by shares of common stock outstanding; (iii) tangible assets as total assets, less goodwill and other intangible assets; (iv) return on average tangible common equity as net income adjusted for intangible amortization net of tax, divided by average tangible common equity; (v) net interest margin (tax-equivalent) as net interest income plus a tax-equivalent adjustment, divided by average earning assets; and (vi) efficiency ratio as noninterest expense less intangible amortization expense, divided by net interest income plus noninterest income plus a tax-equivalent adjustment.
The following tables present these non-GAAP financial measures along with the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP for the periods indicated.
Results of Operations
The following discussion describes the consolidated operations and financial condition of the Company and the Bank. Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 are compared to the results for the year ended December 31, 2019, and the consolidated financial condition of the Company as of December 31, 2020 is compared to December 31, 2019. Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to results for the year ended December 31, 2018, can be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company’s 2019 annual report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 26, 2020.
Summary
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.7 million, an increase of $15.1 million, or 51.2%, compared to $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Diluted earnings per common share were $2.52 in 2020, compared to $1.91 for 2019. Return on average total assets was 1.61% in 2020, compared to 1.34% for 2019. The
increase in net income was primarily due to an increase of $35.2 million in noninterest income and an increase of $9.3 million in net interest income. The increase in noninterest income was primarily driven by an increase in mortgage banking revenue and the increase in net interest income was primarily due to a $6.5 million decrease in interest expense along with a $2.4 million increase in interest income from investment securities. These improvements were partially offset by a $21.3 million, or 14.9%, increase in noninterest expense driven by a $15.2 million increase in compensation expense, $2.7 million in business services, software and technology expense, and $2.2 million in mortgage and lending expenses. The increases in compensation and mortgage and lending expenses were directly correlated to the increase in mortgage banking revenue as mortgage originations totaled $1.8 billion for the year. The provision for loan losses increased $3.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019, as concerns regarding an economic slowdown related to COVID-19 increased qualitative factors.
Net Interest Income-With Nontaxable Income Converted to Fully Taxable Equivalent, or FTE
Net interest income totaled $83.8 million in 2020, an increase of $9.3 million, or 12.5%, from 2019. Net interest margin decreased 43 basis points to 3.22%, in 2020, from the 3.65% reported in 2019. The decrease in net interest margin was primarily a result of an 87 basis point decrease in the average yield on interest earning assets which was partially offset by a corresponding decrease of 60 basis points in the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. These decreases were largely driven by a historically low interest rate environment as the Federal Open Market Committee decreased the target fed funds rate 150 basis points in reaction to the economic impact related to COVID-19. Also contributing to the decrease in net interest margin was a shift in balance sheet mix with a higher percentage of average balances in lower yielding deposits with banks and investment securities. The increase in these balances was due to an influx of liquidity from PPP loans, government stimulus and market uncertainty.
The following table sets forth information related to our average balance sheet, average yields on assets, and average rates of liabilities for the periods indicated. We derived these yields by dividing income or expense by the average balance of the corresponding assets or liabilities. We derived average balances from the daily balances throughout the periods indicated. Average loan balances include loans that have been placed on nonaccrual, while
interest previously accrued on these loans is reversed against interest income. In these tables, adjustments are made to the yields on tax-exempt assets in order to present tax-exempt income and fully taxable income on a comparable basis.
(1) Includes loans held for branch sale at 2018.
(2) Includes deposits held for sale at 2018.
(3) Fully tax-equivalent adjustment was calculated utilizing a marginal income tax rate of 21.0% .
Rate/Volume Analysis
The table below presents the effect of volume and rate changes on interest income and expense for the periods indicated. Changes in volume are changes in the average balance multiplied by the previous year’s average rate. Changes in rate are changes in the average rate multiplied by the average balance from the previous year. The net changes attributable to the combined impact of both rate and volume have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
(1) Includes loans held for branch sale at 2018.
(2) Includes deposits held for sale at 2018.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses was $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in provision for loan losses in 2020 was primarily due to increased qualitative factors related to the economic uncertainty resulting from COVID-19, partially offset by $1.9 million less provision for specific reserves on impaired loans and $717 thousand less provision related to the decrease in criticized loan balances.
The provision for loan losses on off-balance sheet items, a component of “other expense” in our Consolidated Statements of Income, reflects management’s assessment of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses on lending-related commitments. See “Financial Condition-Allowance for Loan Losses.”
Noninterest Income
The following table presents noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Total noninterest income increased by $35.2 million, or 30.8%, to $149.4 million in 2020, from $114.2 for 2019. The increase in noninterest income was primarily due to a $35.8 million increase in mortgage banking revenue. The increase in mortgage banking revenue was due to historically high mortgage originations. Mortgage originations for 2020 were $1.8 billion, an $832.5 million, or 88.0% increase from 2019. Also contributing to the increase in mortgage banking revenue, was a $7.1 million increase in the change in fair value of derivatives and a 50 basis point increase in the gain on sale margin. Wealth management revenue increased $1.9 million due to an increase of $235.5 million in wealth management assets under administration/management. We also realized a $2.4 million increase in gains on the sale of investment securities. These increases were offset by a $2.9 decrease in retirement and benefit services revenue and a $1.8 million decrease in other noninterest income. The decrease in retirement and benefit services revenue was primarily due to expected plan attrition exceeding new business generation and a transition away from revenue sharing. The decrease in other noninterest income was primarily due to the gain on branch sale recognized in 2019.
Noninterest income as a percent of total operating revenue, which consists of net interest income plus noninterest income, was 64.1% in 2020, up from 60.5% the prior year. The increase in 2020 was due to a 30.8% increase in noninterest income while net interest income increased by 12.5%.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Total noninterest expense increased $21.3 million, or 14.9%, to $163.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $142.5 million for 2019. The increase in noninterest expense was primarily due to increases of $15.2 million in compensation expense, $2.7 million in business services, software and technology expense, $2.2 million in mortgage and lending expenses, $1.7 million in other noninterest expense and $594 thousand in employee taxes and benefits. The increases in compensation expense, mortgage and lending expenses and employee taxes and benefits were a direct result of the increase in mortgage originations. Business services, software and technology increased due to purchases of computer equipment, supplies and allowances for home office equipment as the Company shifted more of its employees
to a remote work model in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in other noninterest expense was primarily driven by a $1.1 million increase in the provision for unfunded commitments as line of credit utilization decreased 38.6%. These increases were partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in travel expense as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a $553 thousand decrease in supplies and postage as we transitioned many of our clients to electronic statements.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized income tax expense of $13.8 million on $58.5 million of pre-tax income resulting in an effective tax rate of 23.7%, compared to the same period in 2019, in which we recognized an income tax expense of $9.4 million on $38.9 million of pre-tax income, resulting in an effective tax rate of 24.1%. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to an increase in tax exempt interest income, additional deductions from stock-based compensation, and reduced add backs from a reduction in entertainment and meal expense due to a curtailed travel budget stemming from COVID-19.
Segment Reporting
We determine reportable segments based on the significance of the services offered, the significance of those services to our financial condition and operating results, and our regular review of the operating results of those services. We have four operating segments-banking, retirement and benefit services, wealth management, and mortgage. These segments are components for which financial information is prepared and evaluated regularly by management in deciding how to allocate resources and assess performance.
The selected financial information presented for each segment sets forth net interest income, provision for loan losses, noninterest income, and direct noninterest expense before indirect overhead allocations. Corporate administration includes the indirect overhead and is set forth in the table below along with income tax expense and the consolidated net income. The segment net income before taxes represents direct revenue and expense before indirect allocations and income taxes. Certain reclassification adjustments have been made between corporate administration and the various lines of business for consistency in presentation.
For additional financial information on our segments see Note 22 (Segment Reporting) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Banking
The banking segment offers a complete line of loan, deposit, cash management, and treasury services through 14 offices in North Dakota, Minnesota, and Arizona. These products and services are supported through various digital applications. The majority of our assets and liabilities are on the banking segment balance sheet.
The banking segment reported net income before taxes and indirect allocations of $37.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.0 million compared to 2019. The increase was driven primarily by increases of $8.3 million in net interest income and $3.0 million in noninterest income offset by increases of $3.7 million in noninterest expense and $3.6 million in provision for loan losses.
Retirement and Benefit Services
Retirement and benefit services provides the following services nationally: recordkeeping and administration services to qualified retirement plans; ESOP trustee, recordkeeping and administration; investment fiduciary services to retirement plans; HSA, flex spending account, and government health insurance program recordkeeping and administration services to employers; payroll and human resource information system services for employers. The division services approximately 7,500 retirement plans and more than 373,100 plan participants. In addition, the division employs nearly 300 professionals, and operates within our banking markets as well as Lansing, Michigan, Littleton, Colorado.
The retirement and benefit services segment reported net income before taxes and indirect allocations of $25.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.7 million from the $28.4 million for 2019. Revenue of $61.0 million, comprised of $25.6 million in asset based revenue and $35.4 million in participant and transaction revenues, decreased $2.9 million or 4.5% primarily due to expected plan attrition exceeding new business generation and a 3 basis point reduction in yield.
The following table presents changes in the combined AUA and AUM for our retirement and benefit services segment for the periods presented.
(1) Inflows include new account assets, contributions, dividends and interest.
(2) Outflows include closed account assets, withdrawals and client fees.
(3) Market impact reflects gains and losses on portfolio investments.
(4) Retirement and benefit services noninterest income divided by simple average ending balances.
AUA and AUM for the retirement and benefit services segment were $34.2 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.3 billion compared to the total at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $3.0 billion related to the market impact and $1.3 billion in acquired assets from the 2020 acquisition of Retirement Planning Services, Inc., offset by outflows outpacing inflows.
Wealth Management
The wealth management division provides advisory and planning services, investment management, and trust and fiduciary services to clients across our Company’s footprint.
Wealth management reported net income before taxes and indirect allocations of $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $848 thousand, or 10.2% from 2019. Noninterest income increased $1.9 million, or 12.6%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in combined AUA and AUM, partially offset by a 4 basis points reduction in yield. Wealth management noninterest expense of $8.3 million increased $1.1 million or 15.3% from 2019 primarily due to an increase in direct allocation expenses.
The following table presents changes in the wealth management combined AUA and AUM, disaggregated by product, for the periods presented.
(1) Inflows include new account assets, contributions, dividends and interest.
(2) Outflows include closed account assets, withdrawals and client fees.
(3) Market impact reflects gains and losses on portfolio investments.
(4) Wealth management noninterest income divided by simple average ending balances.
(5) Total wealth management does not include brokerage assets of $760.5 million, $690.0 million, and $775.0 million for the years ending December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(6) Yield does not include brokerage revenue of $2.7 million, $2.1 million, and $2.4 million for the years ending December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
AUA and AUM for the wealth management segment was $2.6 billion, excluding $760.5 million of brokerage assets, at December 31, 2020, an increase of $162.0 million, or 6.7%, compared to the total at December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by an increase of $310.0 million related to the market impact, offset by outflows out pacing inflows by $148.0 million.
Mortgage
The mortgage division offers first and second mortgage loans through a centralized mortgage unit in Minneapolis, Minnesota as well as through the banking office locations.
Mortgage reported net income before taxes and indirect allocations of $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $22.2 million from the $5.2 million reported in 2019. Mortgage noninterest income for 2020 of $61.6 million increased $35.8 million, or 138.9%, from the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in mortgage originations which totaled $1.8 billion, for the year ended December 31, 2020, an $832.5 million increase from 2019. In addition, mortgage recognized a $7.1 million increase in the change in fair value of secondary market derivatives as well as a 50 basis point increase in the gain on sale margin. The increase in noninterest income was offset by an increase of $14.4 million in noninterest expense, primarily due to increased incentive compensation directly related to the increase in mortgage originations.
Financial Condition
Overview
Total assets were $3.0 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $656.9 million compared to $2.4 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in total assets was primarily due to increases of $282.0 million in available-for-sale investment securities, $247.8 million in net loans, $75.6 million in loans held for sale, $29.0 million in cash and cash equivalents and $14.2 million in other assets. The increase in loans held for sale was due to increased mortgage loan originations and our decision to hold loans longer to utilize liquidity and provide for an increase in earning asset yield compared to alternative short-term investments. The increase in loans was primarily driven by $268.4 million of PPP loans. The increase in securities available-for-sale was a result of management’s decision to utilize liquidity and provide for an increase in earning asset yield compared to alternative short-term investments.
Investment Securities
The following table presents the fair value of our investment securities portfolio for the periods indicated:
The composition of our investment securities portfolio reflects our investment strategy of maintaining an appropriate level of liquidity for normal operations while providing an additional source of revenue. The investment portfolio also provides a balance to interest rate risk and credit risk in other categories of the balance sheet, while providing a vehicle for the investment of available funds, furnishing liquidity, and supplying securities to pledge as collateral.
At December 31, 2020 total investment securities were $592.3 million compared to $313.2 million at December 31, 2019. Investment securities as a percentage of total assets were 19.7% and 13.3%, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The decision to increase investment securities was strategically done to utilize excess liquidity and provide for an increase in earning asset yield compared to alternative short-term investments. Securities with a carrying value of $160.8 million were pledged at December 31, 2020, to secure public deposits and for other purposes required or permitted by law.
The net pre-tax unrealized market value gain on the available-for-sale investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 was $14.2 million, as compared to $2.6 million as of December 31, 2019. This increase is indicative of the interest rate environment and changes in the size and composition of the portfolio.
The investment portfolio is principally composed of U.S. Treasury debentures, U.S. Agency mortgage-backed pass-throughs, U.S. Agency, Commercial Mortgage Obligations, or CMOs, and municipal bonds. The portfolio does not include any private label mortgage-backed securities or private label collateralized mortgage obligations.
As of December 31, 2020, the Bank held 112 tax-exempt state and local municipal securities totaling $50.1 million. As of December 31, 2019, the Bank held 114 tax-exempt state and local municipal securities totaling $49.6 million. Other than the aforementioned investments, at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no holdings of securities of any one issuer, other than the U.S. Government and its agencies, in an amount greater than 10% of stockholders’ equity.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, all of the available-for-sale debt securities in an unrealized loss position were investment grade. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we evaluated all of our debt securities for credit impairment and determined there were no credit losses evident and we did not record any other-than-temporary impairment. Furthermore, we do not intend to sell and it is more likely than not that we will not be required to sell these debt securities before the anticipated recovery of the amortized cost basis.
Periodic reviews are conducted to identify and evaluate each investment that has an unrealized loss for other-than-temporary impairment. An unrealized loss exists when the current estimated fair value of an individual security is less than its amortized cost basis. Unrealized losses that are determined to be temporary in nature are recorded, net of tax, in accumulated other comprehensive income for available-for-sale securities.
The securities available-for-sale presented in the following table are reported at fair value and by contractual maturity as of December 31, 2020. Actual timing may differ from contractual maturities if borrowers have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties. Additionally, the mortgage backed securities receive monthly principal payments, which are not reflected below. The yields below are calculated on a tax equivalent basis.
Loans
The loan portfolio represents a broad range of borrowers comprised of commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, residential real estate, and consumer financing loans.
Commercial and industrial loans include financing for commercial purposes in various lines of businesses, including manufacturing, service industry and professional service areas. Commercial and industrial loans are generally secured with the assets of the company and/or the personal guarantee of the business owners.
Commercial real estate loans consist of term loans secured by a mortgage lien on the real property, such as office and industrial buildings, retail shopping centers and apartment buildings, as well as commercial real estate construction loans that are offered to builders and developers.
Residential real estate loans represent loans to consumers for the purchase or refinance of a residence. These loans are generally financed over a 15- to 30-year term and, in most cases, are extended to borrowers to finance their primary residence with both fixed-rate and adjustable-rate terms. Real estate construction loans are also offered to consumers who wish to build their own homes and are often structured to be converted to permanent loans at the end of
the construction phase, which is typically twelve months. Residential real estate loans also include home equity loans and lines of credit that are secured by a first- or second-lien on the borrower’s residence. Home equity lines of credit consist mainly of revolving lines of credit secured by residential real estate.
Consumer loans include loans made to individuals not secured by real estate, including loans secured by automobiles or watercraft, and personal unsecured loans.
Loans outstanding, by type, as of the dates presented are as follows:
(1) Includes PPP loans of $268.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
Total loans outstanding of $2.0 billion as of December 31, 2020, increased $258.1 million, or 15.0%, from December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases of $212.7 million in commercial and industrial loans and $68.3 million in our commercial real estate loan portfolio, partially offset by $41.0 million decrease in our consumer loan portfolio. The increase in commercial and industrial loans was due to an increase of $268.4 million in net PPP loans offset by a decrease in commercial lines of credit due to low line utilization. The decrease in our consumer portfolio was primarily due to a decrease in residential real estate junior liens due to a large number of refinances as a result of the historically low interest rates.
Our loan portfolio is highly diversified. The long-term goal of the overall portfolio mix is to retain balance with approximately one third of the portfolio in each of the commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, and residential real estate categories. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 35.0% of loans outstanding were commercial and industrial, while 28.5% of loans outstanding were commercial real estate, and 30.6% of loans outstanding were residential real estate. The commercial lending portfolio is also broadly diversified by industry type as demonstrated by the following distributions at December 31, 2020: real estate (32%), retail trade (12%), healthcare (7%), finance & insurance (6%),wholesale trade (6%), construction (6%), professional services (6%), manufacturing (5%), transportation (3%), agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting (3%), restaurant & lodging (2%), accommodation and food services (2%) management of companies (2%), educational services (1%), and administrative and support (1%). A variety of other industries with less than a 1% share of the total portfolio comprise the remaining 6%. The loan portfolio is also diversified by market distribution with 48.4% of the portfolio in the Twin Cities MSA, 39.8% in the eastern North Dakota cities of Grand Forks and Fargo, 9.7% in the Phoenix MSA and 2.1% in our national market, as of December 31, 2020.
We originate both fixed and adjustable rate residential real estate loans conforming to the underwriting guidelines of the Federal National Mortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, as well as home equity loans and lines of credit that are secured by first or junior liens. Most of our fixed rate residential loans, along with some of our adjustable rate mortgages are sold to other financial institutions with which we have established a correspondent lending relationship.
Our consumer mortgage loans have minimal direct exposure to subprime mortgages as the loans are underwritten to conform to secondary market standards. Volume in this portion of the loan portfolio has been strong over the last few years due to low long-term interest rates and comparatively stable real estate valuations in our primary markets. As of December 31, 2020, our consumer mortgage portfolio was $606.8 million which was a slight decline from $634.5 million as of December 31, 2019. Consumer mortgages had slightly decreased in 2019. Market interest rates, expected duration, and our overall interest rate sensitivity profile continue to be the most significant factors in determining whether we choose to retain versus sell portions of new consumer mortgage originations.
The combined total of general-purpose business lending to commercial, industrial, non-profit and municipal customers, mortgages on commercial property and dealer floor plan financing is characterized as commercial lending activity. As of December 31, 2020, the commercial loan portfolio was $1.3 billion, an increase of $299.1 million, or 29.9%, from $1.0 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to $268.4 million in PPP loans. Highly competitive conditions continue to prevail in the small and middle market commercial segments in which we primarily operate. We maintain a commitment to generating growth in our business portfolio in a manner that adheres to our twin goals of maintaining strong asset quality and producing profitable margins. We continue to invest in additional personnel, technology, and business development resources to further strengthen our capabilities in this important product category.
Consistent with regulatory guidance urging banks to work with borrowers during this unprecedented situation, the Company offered a payment deferral program for its lending clients that have been adversely affected by COVID-19. These deferrals were generally no more than 90 days in duration. During 2020, the Company had entered into principal and interest deferrals on 577 loans, representing $153.6 million in principal balances. Of those loans, 18 loans with a total outstanding principal balance of $8.4 million have been granted second deferrals, 21 loans with a total outstanding principal balance of $3.7 million remain on the first deferral and the remaining loans have been returned to normal payment status. In accordance with the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions as issued on April 7, 2020, these short-term deferrals were not considered TDRs. See “Note 6 Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding TDRs.
We anticipate that loan demand will be under pressure in the future for our commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, residential real estate, and consumer loan portfolios as a result of COVID-19 and the related decline in economic conditions in our market areas.
The following table shows the maturities and type of interest rates for the loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
As of December 31, 2020, 61.8% of the loan portfolio bears interest at fixed rates and 38.2% at floating rates. The expected life of our loan portfolio will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to curtail or prepay their loans with or without penalties. Consequently, the table above includes information limited to contractual maturities of the underlying loans.
Asset Quality
Our strategy for credit risk management includes well-defined, centralized credit policies; uniform underwriting criteria; and ongoing risk monitoring and review processes for all commercial and consumer credit exposures. The strategy also emphasizes diversification on a geographic, industry, and client level; regular credit examinations; and management reviews of loans experiencing deterioration of credit quality. We strive to identify potential problem loans early, take necessary charge-offs promptly, and maintain adequate reserve levels for probable loan losses inherent in the portfolio. Management performs ongoing, internal reviews of any problem credits and continually assesses the adequacy of the allowance. We utilize an internal lending division, Special Credit Services, to develop and implement strategies for the management of individual nonperforming loans.
Nonperforming assets consist of loans 90 days or more past due, nonaccrual loans, foreclosed assets and other real estate owned. We do not consider performing troubled debt restructurings, or TDRs, to be nonperforming assets, but they are included as part of impaired assets. The level of nonaccrual loans is an important element in assessing asset quality. Loans are classified as nonaccrual when principal or interest is in default for 90 days or more, unless in the opinion of management, the loan is well secured and in the process of collection. Exclusive of any delinquency, a loan will be placed in nonaccrual when there is deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower and full payment of principal and interest is not expected.
A loan is categorized as a TDR if a concession is granted, such as to provide for the reduction of either interest or principal due to deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower. Typical concessions include reduction of the interest rate on the loan to a rate considered lower than market and other modification of terms including forgiveness of a portion of the loan balance, extension of the maturity date, and/or modifications from principal and interest payments to interest-only payments for a certain period. Loans are not classified as TDRs when the modification is short-term or results in only an insignificant delay or shortfall in the payments to be received. See “Note 6 Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding TDRs.
Credit Quality Indicators
Loans are categorized into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt such as: current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information, and current economic trends, among other factors. A risk rating is assigned to all commercial loans, except pools of homogeneous loans. We periodically perform detailed internal and external reviews of risk rated loans over a certain threshold to identify credit risks and to assess the overall collectability of the portfolio. During the internal reviews, management monitors and analyzes the financial condition of borrowers and guarantors, trends in the industries in which the borrowers operate, and the estimated fair values of collateral securing the loans. These credit quality indicators are used to assign a risk rating to each individual loan. The following definitions are used for risk ratings:
Pass. Higher quality loans that do not fit any of the other categories described below. This category includes loans risk rated with the following ratings: minimal credit risk, modest credit risk, average credit risk, acceptable credit risk, acceptable with risk and management attention.
Special Mention. Loans classified as special mention have a potential weakness that deserves management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the loan or of the institution’s credit position.
Substandard. Loans classified as substandard are inadequately protected by the current net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Loans so classified have a well-defined weakness or
weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the institution will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected.
Doubtful. Loans classified as doubtful have all the weaknesses inherent in those classified as substandard, with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable.
Criticized loans represent loans that are categorized as special mention, substandard, and doubtful. The following table presents criticized loans by type as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming assets as of the dates presented:
(1) Nonaccrual loans included nonperforming TDRs of $0.0 million, $0.0 million, $0.2 million, $0.7 million, and $1.5 million at the respective dates indicated above.
Interest income lost on nonaccrual loans approximated $0.5 million, $0.4 million, and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. There was no interest income included in net income related to nonaccrual loans for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level management believes is sufficient to absorb incurred losses in the loan portfolio given the conditions at the time. Management determines the adequacy of the allowance based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio and other factors. These evaluations are inherently subjective as they require management to make material estimates, all of which may be susceptible to significant change. The allowance is increased by provisions charged to expense and decreased by actual charge-offs, net of recoveries.
The allowance for loan losses represents management’s assessment of probable credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses consists of specific components, based on individual evaluation of certain loans, and general components for homogeneous pools of loans with similar risk characteristics.
Impaired loans include loans placed on nonaccrual status and TDRs. Loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that all amounts due, in accordance with the original contractual terms of the loan agreement, will not be collected. When determining if all amounts due in accordance with the original contractual terms of the loan agreement will be collected, the borrower’s overall financial condition, resources and payment record, support from guarantors, and the realizable value of any collateral, are taken into consideration. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
All impaired loans are individually evaluated for impairment. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance is allocated so that the loan is reported, net, at the discounted expected future cash flows or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is collateral dependent.
The allowance for non-impaired loans is based on historical losses adjusted for current qualitative factors. The historical loss experience is determined by portfolio segment and is based on the actual loss history over the most recent five years. This actual loss experience is adjusted for economic factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These economic factors include consideration of the following: levels of and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans; levels of and trends in charge-offs and recoveries; trends in volume and terms of loans; effects of any changes in risk selection and underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures, and practices; experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentrations. These factors are inherently subjective and are driven by the repayment risk associated with each portfolio segment. These portfolio segments include commercial and industrial, real estate construction, commercial real estate, residential real estate first mortgage, residential real estate junior liens, and other revolving and installment.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into commitments to extend credit, including commitments under credit arrangements, commercial letters of credit, and standby letters of credit. Such financial instruments are recorded when they are funded. A reserve for unfunded commitments is established using historical loss data and utilization assumptions. This reserve is located under accrued expenses and other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The provision for unfunded commitments was an expense of $800 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a reversal of $308 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table presents, by loan type, the changes in the allowance for loan losses for the periods presented.
The allowance for loan losses was $34.2 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $23.9 million at December 31, 2019. The $10.3 million increase in the allowance for loan losses was due to additional provision for loan losses of $10.9 million due to additional qualitative factors related to borrowers impacted by COVID-19, offset by net loan charge-offs of $578 thousand. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans at December 31, 2020 was 0.26%, compared to 0.45% at December 31, 2019. If PPP loans were excluded, the ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans was at December 31, 2020 would have been 0.30%. The allowance for loan losses to total loans was 1.73% at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.39% at December 31, 2019. If PPP loans were excluded, the allowance for loan losses to total loans would have been 2.00% at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the allocation of the allowance for loan losses as of the dates presented.
Deposits
Total deposits were $2.57 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $600.7 million, or 30.5%, from December 31, 2019. Interest-bearing deposits increased $423.7 million while noninterest-bearing deposits increased $177.0 million. Key drivers of the increase in deposits included strong deposit production of deposits from new and existing PPP loan clients, synergistic deposit growth, inflows from government stimulus programs and higher depositor balances due to the uncertain economic environment and financial markets. The increase in interest-bearing deposits included a $184.0 million increase in synergistic deposits including HSA deposits from our retirement and benefit services and wealth management segments, bringing our total deposits sourced outside of our branch footprint to $595.6 million. Commercial transaction deposits increased $289.5 million, or 35.5%, while consumer transaction deposits increased $108.1 million, or 20.2%, since December 31, 2019. Noninterest-bearing deposits as a percentage of total deposits were 29.3% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Interest-bearing deposit costs were 0.53% and 1.03% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in interest-bearing deposit costs resulted from the low interest rate environment due to the Federal Reserve’s response to COVID-19.
We compete for local deposits by offering products with competitive rates and rely on the deposit portfolio to fund loans and other asset growth. Management understands the importance of core deposits as a stable source of funding and may periodically implement various deposit promotion strategies to encourage core deposit growth. For periods of rising interest rates, management has modeled the aggregate yields for non-maturity deposits and time deposits to increase at a slower pace than the increase in underlying market rates, which results in net interest margin expansion and projections of an increase in net interest income. The mix of average deposits has been changing throughout the last several years. The weighting of core funds (noninterest checking, interest checking, savings, and money market accounts) has increased, while time deposits’ weighting has decreased. This change in deposit mix reflects our focus on expanding core account relationships and customers’ preference for unrestricted accounts in the low interest rate environment.
The following table details the average balance and rate of our deposit portfolio by category for the periods indicated.
(1) Includes deposits held for sale at 2018.
The following table shows the contractual maturity of time deposits, including certificate of deposit account registry services, or CDARS, and IRA deposits of $100 thousand and over, that were outstanding as of the date presented.
Borrowings and Subordinated Debt
We utilize both short-term and long-term borrowings as part of our asset/liability management and funding strategies. Short-term borrowings consists of FHLB advances and federal funds purchased. We had no short-term borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
FHLB advances were secured by specific investment securities and real estate loans with a carrying amount of approximately $943.5 million and $881.2 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Long-term debt is utilized to fund longer term assets and as a source of regulatory capital. At December 31, 2020, we had $50.0 million of outstanding 5.75% Fixed to Floating Rate Subordinated Notes due 2025, or Subordinated Notes. The Subordinated Notes currently bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.75% per year, payable semi-annually through December 30, 2020, and then convert automatically to floating rate notes that reset quarterly to an interest rate equal to the three-month LIBOR plus 412 basis points. The Subordinated Notes mature on December 30, 2025, and we have the option to redeem or prepay any or all of the Subordinated Notes without premium or penalty any time after December 30, 2020 or at any time in the event of certain changes that affect the deductibility of interest for tax purposes or the treatment of the notes as Tier 2 Capital.
On December 29, 2020, we gave notice pursuant to Section 4(b) of the Subordinated Notes, that the entire aggregate $50.0 million outstanding principal amount of the Subordinated Notes is being called for redemption on Friday, January 29, 2021, the Redemption Date. On the Redemption Date, holders of record of the Subordinated Notes were paid 100 % of the outstanding principal amount of each Subordinated Note plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but excluding, the Redemption Date. See Note 32 (Subsequent Events) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Junior subordinated debentures issued to capital trusts that issued trust preferred securities were $8.6 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $8.5 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was due to purchase accounting amortization on the junior subordinated notes assumed in the Beacon Bank acquisition. See Note 14 (Long-Term Debt) of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Selected financial information pertaining to the components of our borrowings and subordinated debt as of the dates indicated is as follows:
Capital Resources
The following table summarizes the changes in our stockholders’ equity for the periods indicated.
Total stockholders’ equity was $330.2 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $285.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to $44.7 million of net income and $8.7 million in accumulated other comprehensive income and partially offset by $10.4 million in common stock dividends.
We strive to maintain an adequate capital base to support our activities in a safe and sound manner while at the same time attempting to maximize stockholder value. Capital adequacy is assessed against the risk inherent in our balance sheet, recognizing that unexpected loss is the common denominator of risk and that common equity has the greatest capacity to absorb unexpected loss.
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements both at the Company and at the Bank level. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements could result in certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have an adverse material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, specific capital guidelines must be met that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting policies. We have consistently maintained regulatory capital ratios at or above the well-capitalized standards.
During the first quarter of 2015, regulations implementing the Basel III regulatory capital framework and the Dodd-Frank Act became effective, which include requirements that were subject to a multi-year phase-in period. These rules modified the calculation of the various capital ratios, added a new ratio, the Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio, and revised the adequately and well capitalized thresholds. As of January 1, 2019, the rules require us to maintain a capital conservation buffer of common equity capital that exceeds by more than 2.50% the minimum risk weighted asset ratios. The capital conservation buffer requirement was 2.50%, 2.50%, and 1.875% as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, which is not reflected in the table below.
At December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we met all the capital adequacy requirements to which we were subject.
The table below sets forth the capital ratios for the Company and the Bank as of the dates indicated. See Note 26 (Regulatory Matters) for additional disclosures.
(1) Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. See “Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliations and Calculation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions to meet the financing needs of clients, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in the consolidated balance sheets. These transactions include commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit, and commercial letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. Most of these commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon. All off-balance sheet commitments are included in the determination of the amount of risk-based capital that the Company and the Bank are required to hold.
Our exposure to credit loss in the event of non-performance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit, and commercial letters of credit is represented by the contractual or notional amount of those instruments. We decrease our exposure to losses under these commitments by subjecting them to credit approval and monitoring procedures. We assess the credit risk associated with certain commitments to extend credit and establishes a liability for probable credit losses.
Further information related to financial instruments can be found in Note 16 (Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk) in the notes to the consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this report.
Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. The following table presents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity
Liquidity management is the process by which we manage the flow of funds necessary to meet our financial commitments on a timely basis and at a reasonable cost and to take advantage of earnings enhancement opportunities. These financial commitments include withdrawals by depositors, credit commitments to borrowers, expenses of our operations, and capital expenditures. Liquidity is monitored and closely managed by our asset and liability committee, or ALCO, a group of senior officers from the finance, enterprise risk management, deposit, investment, treasury, and lending areas. It is ALCO’s responsibility to ensure we have the necessary level of funds available for normal operations as well as maintain a contingency funding policy to ensure that potential liquidity stress events are planned for, quickly identified, and management has plans in place to respond. ALCO has created policies which establish limits and require measurements to monitor liquidity trends, including modeling and management reporting that identifies the amounts and costs of all available funding sources.
At December 31, 2020, we had on balance sheet liquidity of $511.1 million, compared to $250.7 million at December 31, 2019 and $152.1 million at December 31, 2018. On balance sheet liquidity includes total due from banks, federal funds sold, interest-bearing deposits with banks, unencumbered securities available-for-sale and over collateralized securities pledging position.
The Bank is a member of the FHLB, which provides short- and long-term funding to its members through advances collateralized by real estate-related assets and other select collateral, most typically in the form of debt securities. The actual borrowing capacity is contingent on the amount of collateral available to be pledged to the FHLB. As of December 31, 2020 we had $943.5 million of collateral pledged to the FHLB. Based on this collateral we are eligible to borrow up to $631.7 million and had $631.7 million available capacity as of December 31, 2020. In addition, we can borrow up to $102.0 million through unsecured lines of credit we have established with four other banks.
In addition, because the Bank is “well capitalized,” we can accept wholesale deposits up to 20.0% of total assets based on current policy limits. Management believed that we had adequate resources to fund all of our commitments as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Our primary sources of liquidity include liquid assets, as well as unencumbered securities that can be used to collateralize additional funding. At December 31, 2020, we had $173.0 million of cash and cash equivalents of which $143.3 million were interest-earning deposits held at the Federal Reserve, FHLB and other correspondent banks.
Though remote, the possibility of a funding crisis exists at all financial institutions. The economic impact of COVID-19 could place increased demand on our liquidity if we experience significant credit deterioration and as we meet borrower’s needs. Accordingly, management has addressed this issue by formulating a liquidity contingency plan, which has been reviewed and approved by both the Bank’s board of directors and the ALCO. The plan addresses the actions that we would take in response to both a short-term and long-term funding crisis.
A short-term funding crisis would most likely result from a shock to the financial system, either internal or external, which disrupts orderly short-term funding operations. Such a crisis would likely be temporary in nature and would not involve a change in credit ratings. A long-term funding crisis would most likely be the result of both external and internal factors and would most likely result in drastic credit deterioration. Management believes that both potential circumstances have been fully addressed through detailed action plans and the establishment of trigger points for monitoring such events.