Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, include forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage immuno-oncology company focused on helping patients fight cancer by developing therapies that block the CD47 checkpoint pathway and bridge the innate and adaptive immune system. Cancer cells leverage CD47, a cell surface protein, as a “don’t eat me” signal to evade detection by the immune system. Our company is developing a next-generation checkpoint inhibitor designed to have a high affinity for CD47 and to avoid the limitations caused by hematologic toxicities inherent in other CD47 blocking approaches. We believe our lead product candidate, ALX148, will have a wide therapeutic window to block the “don’t eat me” signal on cancer cells, and to leverage the immune activation of broadly used anti-cancer agents through combination strategies. As of December 31, 2020, we have dosed over 170 subjects with ALX148 across a range of hematologic and solid malignancies in combination with a number of leading anti-cancer agents. We plan to initiate additional studies in combination with leading anti-cancer agents. In hematologic malignancies, we have dosed the first subjects for the treatment of MDS and intend to advance ALX148 into clinical development for the treatment of AML in the second half of 2021. In solid tumors, we intend to initiate randomized Phase 2 trials of ALX148 for the treatment of first-line head and neck cancer, second line gastric/GEJ cancer and a Phase 1 trial for the treatment of breast cancer in 2021. Based on our clinical results to date in multiple oncology indications showing encouraging anti-tumor activity and tolerability and our clinical development plans, our strategy is to pursue ALX148 as a potentially critical component for future combination treatments in oncology.
Our predecessor company, ALX Oncology Limited, an Irish private company limited by shares, was initially incorporated in Ireland on March 13, 2015 under the name Alexo Therapeutics Limited and changed its name to ALX Oncology Limited on October 11, 2018. We were then incorporated in Delaware on April 1, 2020 under the name ALX Oncology Holdings Inc. and completed an internal reorganization effective as of the same date whereby ALX Oncology Limited became our wholly-owned subsidiary and all of the stockholders, warrant holders and option holders of ALX Oncology Limited became our stockholders, warrant holders and option holders, holding the same number of corresponding shares, warrants and/or options in us as they did in ALX Oncology Limited immediately prior to the internal reorganization. The information included herein are presented as that of ALX Oncology Holdings Inc., unless such information refers to a date prior to April 1, 2020, in which case it will reflect that of our predecessor company.
Since our founding, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to identifying and developing ALX148, advancing preclinical programs, scaling up manufacturing, conducting clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We have no products approved for marketing and we have never received any revenue from drug product sales.
In July 2020, we consummated our initial public offering, raising net proceeds of $169.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $13.0 million and offering-related expenses of $3.2 million. In December 2020, we consummated a follow-on public offering, raising net proceeds of $194.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.5 million and offering-related expenses of $0.7 million. From inception through December 31, 2020, we have raised an aggregate of $545.3 million to fund our operations, of which $175.1 million were net proceeds from sales of our convertible preferred stock, $5.8 million were net proceeds from borrowings under a term loan, $169.5 million were net proceeds from our initial public offering and $194.9 million were net proceeds from our follow-on public offering.
We have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $45.7 million, $19.2 million and $13.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $118.5 million. Substantially all of our operating losses are a result of expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs, primarily ALX148, and from general and administrative expenses associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses over at least the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•
advance ALX148 through multiple clinical trials in multiple indications;
•
pursue regulatory approval of ALX148 in hematological malignancies and solid tumors;
•
continue our discovery and preclinical and clinical development efforts;
•
obtain and maintain patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•
manufacture supplies for our preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•
continue to add operational, financial and management information systems to support ongoing operations as a public company.
Components of Results of Operations
Related-Party Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales, licenses or collaborations and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. We recognized related-party revenue related to research and development services to Tallac Therapeutics, which ceased as of July 1, 2020, as further described in “-License and Collaboration Agreements-Related-Party Agreement” below. If our clinical development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue from future product sales. If we enter into license or collaboration agreements for any of our product candidates or intellectual property, we may generate revenue in the future from payments as a result of such license or collaboration agreements. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates including ALX148. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our lead product candidate, ALX148, which include:
•
expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development, including expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs;
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
expenses related to production of clinical materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs;
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•
facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are then expensed as the related goods are delivered or as services are performed. We record accruals for estimated costs of research, preclinical studies and clinical trials and manufacturing development, which are a significant component of research and development expenses. We determine the estimated costs through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fees to be paid for such services.
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with the development of our lead product candidate ALX148 and include external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, central laboratories, contractors, CMOs and CROs in connection with our preclinical and clinical development activities. We allocate expenses, such as employee salaries, benefits, facilities, travel and other miscellaneous expenses, based on an estimated percentage of time worked on each program.
Almost all of our research and development expenses to date related to the clinical development of our lead product candidate, ALX148. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities related to developing our product candidates, as our product candidates advance into later stages of development and as we begin to conduct larger clinical trials. The process of conducting the necessary clinical trials to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates. In addition, we will incur expenses related to the preclinical research services that we contract from Tallac Therapeutics, as further described in “-License and Collaboration Agreements-Related-Party Agreement” below.
The successful development of our current and future product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
•
successful completion of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
delays in regulators or institutional review boards authorizing us or our investigators to commence our clinical trials or in our ability to negotiate agreements with clinical trial sites or CROs;
•
the number and location of clinical sites included in the trials;
•
raising additional funds necessary to complete clinical development of our product candidates;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•
contracting with third-party manufacturers for clinical supplies of our product candidates;
•
protecting and enforcing our rights in our intellectual property portfolio, including, if necessary, litigation; and
•
maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates may significantly impact the costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. In addition, future regulatory factors beyond our control may impact the success, cost or timing of our clinical development programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, business development expenses, facilities expenses, depreciation and amortization expenses and professional services expenses, including legal, human resources, audit, accounting and tax-related services, and directors and officers liability insurance premiums. Personnel and related costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Facilities costs consist of rent and maintenance of facilities.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase as a result of increased headcount, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting, legal, tax and regulatory-related services associated with maintaining compliance with stock exchange listing and SEC requirements, audit and investor relations costs, director and officer insurance premiums and other costs associated with being a public company.
Cost of Services for Related-Party Revenue
We incur costs associated with related-party contract research services including direct labor and associated employee benefits, laboratory supplies and other expenses. These costs are recorded in cost of services for related-party transactions as a component of total operating expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense consists primarily of interest expense on the term loan and amortization of deferred debt issuance costs.
Other Expense, Net
Our other expense, net, consists of interest income on cash balances, changes in the fair value of our convertible preferred stock warrant liability and compound derivative liability, gain on assignment of lease, and foreign currency re-measurement and transaction gains and losses. Prior to our initial public offering, the underlying shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock warrants were contingently redeemable, and we accounted for these warrants as a liability at fair value and re-measured the fair value at each balance sheet date. As a result of the completion of our initial public offering, the Series B convertible preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to stockholders’ equity and re-measurement was no longer required. The compound derivative liability was extinguished upon the extinguishment of the host instrument in December 2020.
Loss on Early Debt Extinguishment
In December 2020, we used approximately $6.5 million of the net proceeds from our follow-on public offering to repay the outstanding principal amount of $6.0 million and early extinguish the outstanding Term Loan with SVB and WestRiver. As a result of the early repayment, we recognized a $0.6 million loss on early debt extinguishment, representing the difference between the reacquisition price of debt and the net carrying amount of the loan as of the date of the payoff.
Results of Operations and Net Loss
Comparisons of the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
Related-Party Revenue
Related-party revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $1.2 million, $4.8 million and $2.1 million, respectively, which was generated solely from payments received for reimbursement of research and development expenses pursuant to the Research and Development Services Agreement with Tallac Therapeutics, or the Tollnine Agreement, as further described in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The decrease of $3.6 million from 2019 to 2020 relates to decreased fee-for-service hours provided to Tallac Therapeutics as a result of winding down the Tollnine Agreement, which was terminated on July 1, 2020. The increase of $2.7 million from 2018 to 2019 relates to increased fee-for-service hours provided to Tallac Therapeutics during 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $29.0 million, compared to $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $12.7 million was primarily attributable to an increase of $7.7 million in clinical and development costs due to higher expenses associated with increased pre-clinical, clinical and other research costs in advancement of our current lead product candidate, ALX148, as well as an increase of $2.4 million in stock-based compensation expense primarily resulting from additional stock option awards granted in 2020 at higher fair values and the modification of stock option awards for former employees who transferred to Tallac Therapeutics, which increased stock-based compensation expense by $1.3 million. In addition, we incurred increased personnel-related costs of $2.4 million due to higher headcount.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $16.3 million, compared to $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $5.0 million was primarily due to increases in external research and development expenses related to our lead product candidate, as we significantly increased trial recruitment for our Phase 1 clinical trials for ALX 148 in the year ended December 31,2019. In addition, in the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred increased costs for additional preclinical studies and CMC manufacturing.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $14.8 million, compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $11.5 million was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel-related costs of $4.1 million due to higher headcount, an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $2.9 million, which consists of $0.4 million related to the modification of stock option awards for former employees as well as additional stock option awards granted in 2020 at higher fair values, and an increase in other general and administrative costs of $4.6 million, which includes higher professional service fees of $2.8 million associated with increased accounting, legal and recruiting activities, as well as $1.0 million of directors and officers liability insurance premium.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $3.3 million, compared to $2.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase of $0.7 million was due to increased administrative costs supporting the increased activities in connection with our Phase 1 clinical trials for ALX 148, resulting in increased other general and administrative expenses of $0.6 million, which included increases in business development activities, legal, accounting and audit services, as well as increased personnel-related costs of $0.1 million.
Cost of Services for Related-Party Revenue
Cost of services for related-party revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $1.1 million, $4.4 million and $1.9 million, respectively. The decrease of $3.3 million from 2019 to 2020 was attributable to decreased fee-for-service hours provided to Tallac Therapeutics as a result of winding down the Tollnine Agreement, which was terminated on July 1, 2020. The increase of $2.5 million from 2018 to 2019 was attributable to an increase in services rendered to Tallac Therapeutics.
Loss on Early Debt Extinguishment
For the year-ended December 31, 2020 we recognized a $0.6 million loss on early debt extinguishment, representing the difference between the reacquisition price of debt and the net carrying amount of the loan as of the date of the payoff.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Plan of Operations
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and have not generated any product revenue. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if at all, subject to marketing approval of any of our product candidates. To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from the sales of shares of our common stock and convertible preferred stock and borrowings under our term loan. Through December 31, 2020, we have received net proceeds from sales of our convertible preferred stock, borrowings under our term loan, our initial public offering and our follow-on public offering of $175.1 million, $5.8 million, $169.5 million and $194.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $434.2 million.
Debt Extinguishment
In December 2020, we used approximately $6.5 million of the net proceeds from our follow-on public offering to repay the outstanding principal amount of $6.0 million and early extinguish the outstanding Term Loan with SVB and WestRiver. As a result, we recognized a $0.6 million loss on early debt extinguishment, representing the difference between the reacquisition price of debt and the net carrying amount of the loan as of the date of the payoff.
Funding Requirements
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $118.5 million. We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials for our product candidates in development. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Management recognizes the need to raise additional capital to fully implement its business plan. The timing and amount of such future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
•
the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
•
successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•
the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
our ability to establish agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and, if any of our product candidates are approved, commercial manufacturing;
•
addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
•
our efforts to enhance operational, financial and information management systems, and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates;
•
the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•
the legal patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims;
•
the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any milestone and royalty payments thereunder; and
•
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may exacerbate the magnitude of the factors discussed above.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds. Our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or drug candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
In July 2020, we completed our initial public offering pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1. In the initial public offering, we issued and sold an aggregate of 9,775,000 shares of common stock, including the underwriters’ exercise in full of their overallotment option, under the registration statement at a public offering price of $19.00 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $169.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $13.0 million and offering-related expenses of $3.2 million.
In December 2020, we completed our follow-on public offering pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1. In the follow-on public offering, we issued and sold an aggregate of 2,737,000 shares of common stock, including the underwriters’ exercise in full of their overallotment option, under the registration statement at a public offering price of $76.00 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $194.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.5 million and offering-related expenses of $0.7 million.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through 2024. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of the net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Operating Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities of $38.3 million was attributable to a net loss of $45.7 million and a net change of $0.2 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset
by $7.2 million in non-cash charges. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $5.4 million, change in fair value of Series B convertible preferred stock warrant liability and term loan compound derivative of $0.7 million, a loss on debt extinguishment of $0.6 million, amortization of term loan discount and issuance costs of $0.4 million, and depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million, partially offset by a gain on assignment of lease of $0.1 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $3.7 million decrease in accounts payable and $1.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by a $5.0 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, which was primarily due to timing of cash payments for clinical-related activities.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities of $14.2 million was attributable to a net loss of $19.2 million and a net change of $4.3 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by $0.7 million in non-cash charges. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $0.3 million and depreciation and amortization expense of $0.4 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $3.0 million increase in accounts payable, a $0.7 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $0.4 million decrease in receivables due from a related-party. The increase in accounts payable is primarily due to the timing of cash payments and increased activities to support overall business growth.
In the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in operating activities of $13.2 million was attributable to a net loss of $13.7 million partially offset by $0.7 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $0.2 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $0.3 million and depreciation and amortization expense of $0.4 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $0.9 million increase in receivables due from a related-party and $0.3 million decrease in accounts payable. This was partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets resulting from the timing of prepayments made for research and development activities.
Investing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities of $0.6 million was primarily related to proceeds from the sale of certain lab equipment and other assets.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities of $0.4 million was related to capital expenditures on the purchase of property and equipment.
In the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in investing activities of $0.7 million was related to capital expenditures on the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $462.9 million, primarily from the net proceeds from our common stock offerings of $368.3 million, the net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series C convertible preferred stock of $104.7 million and the proceeds from exercise of common stock options under equity incentive plans of $0.3 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by payments for early debt extinguishment of $6.5 million and payments of offering costs of $3.8 million.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $15.4 million was related to net proceeds of $9.4 million from the issuance of Series B convertible preferred shares and $5.9 million from the net proceeds from a term loan entered into in December 2019.
In the year ended December 31, 2018, cash provided by financing activities was nominal.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have contractual obligations from our operating lease, manufacturing and service contracts and other research and development activities. The following table aggregates our material expected contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
Payments due for the office space in Burlingame, California under a single operating sub-lease agreement that expires in 2023.
(2)
In November 2015, we entered into a Master Service Agreement, or the MSA, with KBI Biopharma, Inc. relating to formulation development, process development and cGMP manufacturing of ALX148 for use in clinical trials on a project basis. The MSA had an initial term of three years with successive one-year renewal periods, is cancellable upon notice and is non-exclusive. Statements of work under the MSA commit us to certain purchase obligations of approximately $9.9 million. In addition, we have commitments with a second drug product manufacturer that commits us to certain purchase obligations of approximately $0.4 million. These amounts are based on non-cancellable commitments and forecasts that include estimates of future market demand, quantity discounts and manufacturing efficiencies that may impact timing of purchases.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table of contractual obligations above.
License and Collaboration Agreements
Exclusive (Equity) Agreement with The Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University
In March 2015, we entered into the Stanford Agreement with the Board of Trustees of Stanford, under which we obtained a worldwide, royalty-bearing, sublicensable license under certain patents relating to our current product candidates, to develop, manufacture and commercialize products for use in certain licensed fields, the scope of which would include the application of the licensed intellectual property in oncology. The license granted to us in the Stanford Agreement includes an exclusive grant, subject to certain pre-existing non-exclusive or exclusive rights that Stanford retained for grant to third parties with respect to certain categories of the licensed patents in certain fields of use and retained rights by Stanford and all other nonprofit institutions to use and practice the licensed patents and technology for internal research and other nonprofit purposes. The license granted to us in the Stanford Agreement also includes non-exclusive grants to certain Stanford patents.
In consideration for the rights granted to us under the Stanford Agreement, we paid Stanford a nonrefundable license royalty and reimbursed Stanford for past patent expenses, together totaling less than $0.1 million, and granted Stanford a specified number of our common stock. In addition, we are obligated to pay Stanford ongoing patent expenses and an annual license maintenance fee, which are nominal and will be creditable against any royalties payable to Stanford in the applicable year. We are required to make milestone payments up to an aggregate of $5.0 million in respect of a specified number of licensed products that successfully satisfy certain clinical and regulatory milestones. No milestone payments have been made through December 31, 2020. We also agreed to pay Stanford tiered royalties on a specified percentage of net sales made by us, our affiliates and our sublicensees of licensed products at rates ranging within low single-digit percentages, subject to certain reductions and offsets. Our license, on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis, shall become royalty-free and fully paid-up upon the later of the date on which the last valid claim included in the exclusively or non-exclusively licensed patents expires and ten years after the first commercial sale of the licensed product in such country.
We may terminate the Stanford Agreement, on a licensed product-by-licensed product basis, at any time for any reason by providing at least 60 days’ written notice to Stanford. Stanford may terminate the Stanford Agreement, if we are in breach of any provision of the Stanford Agreement and fail to remedy such breach within 60 days after written notice of such breach by Stanford. In addition, Stanford has the right to terminate the Stanford Agreement, on a licensed product-by-licensed product basis, if we are not diligently developing and commercializing such licensed product under certain conditions or if we fail to achieve specified development milestones for such licensed product by certain dates, subject to our extension rights.
Commercial License Agreement with Selexis SA
In June 2016, we entered into a license agreement with Selexis SA, or Selexis, under which we obtained a worldwide, royalty-bearing, sublicensable license under certain patents, know-how and other intellectual property, to use Selexis generated cell lines to manufacture ALX148 and to make, use and sell licensed products containing such compound in all fields of use. The rights granted under this agreement include the rights to grant sublicenses to contractors or other collaboration partners, in each case to develop production processes or manufacture licensed products, containing ALX148.
In consideration for the rights granted to us under the agreement, we paid Selexis a nominal one-time fee and will pay Selexis an annual maintenance fee. We also agreed to pay Selexis milestone payments up to an aggregate of 1.2 million Swiss Francs in respect of all licensed products developed and/or commercialized under the grant, that successfully satisfies certain milestone events. We also agreed to pay Selexis a flat royalty of a very low single-digit percentage on net sales made by us, our affiliates and our sublicensees of products. This royalty obligation, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, shall terminate and become fully paid-up upon the passing of ten years after the first commercial sale of the product in such country or our exercise of the royalty buyout option, exercisable at any time prior to the first commercial sale of a licensed product.
We may terminate the license agreement at any time for any reason with at least 60 days’ written notice to Selexis. Either party may terminate the license agreement if the other party enters into a bankruptcy event or in the event of a material breach of the agreement (that cannot be cured or remains uncured for 60 days after the date that the defaulting party is provided with written notice of such breach). Our obligations to make payments that are accrued or accruable will survive any termination of the agreement, and in certain circumstances the licenses granted under the agreement will terminate unless they have become fully paid up as described in the previous paragraph.
Commercial Antibody Agreement with Crystal Bioscience, Inc. (Now a Subsidiary of Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated)
In March 2017, we entered into an agreement with Crystal Bioscience, Inc. (now a subsidiary of Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated), or Crystal, under which we obtained an assignment of certain patents, covering certain SIRPα antibodies. Under this agreement, we also received a worldwide, royalty-bearing non-exclusive license, with the right to grant sublicenses through multiple tiers of sublicenses, under certain of Crystal’s background patents and know-how necessary to commercialize the rights under the assigned patents.
In consideration for the rights granted to us under the agreement, we agreed to pay Crystal milestone payments up to $11.1 million in respect of all licensed products developed under the assigned patents, that successfully satisfy certain clinical and regulatory milestones, each milestone being paid only once for all products. We also agreed to pay Crystal tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products made by us, our affiliates and our sublicensees of products at rates ranging within low single-digit percentages, subject to certain potential reductions. This royalty obligation, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, shall terminate and become fully paid-up upon the later of the date on which the last valid claim included in the licensed patents expires and ten years after the first commercial sale of the product in such country.
We agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize licensed products, including meeting defined development milestones by certain specified dates.
We may terminate the agreement at any time for any reason with at least 60 days’ written notice to Crystal. Either party may terminate the agreement if the other party enters into a bankruptcy event or in the event of material breach of the agreement (that remains uncured for 60 days after the date that it is provided with written notice of
such breach). Our obligations to pay royalties and milestone payments which accrued pre-termination or accrue post- termination will survive any termination.
Related-Party Agreement
In June 2018, we entered into the Tollnine Agreement with Tallac Therapeutics, a related-party, to provide research and development services to Tallac Therapeutics. From June 2018 to April 2020, our Chief Executive Officer was also the Chief Executive Officer of Tallac Therapeutics and currently two of our investors are also investors in Tallac Therapeutics. In April 2020, Dr. Hong Wan, our former Chief Scientific Officer, replaced our Chief Executive Officer to become the Chief Executive Officer of Tallac Therapeutics. As such, Tallac Therapeutics was deemed to be a related-party. The services under the Tollnine Agreement were provided at a price based on the costs incurred by us plus a mark-up equal to 10.0% of such costs. We recognized revenue when Tallac Therapeutics, as our customer, obtained control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized related-party revenues of $1.2 million, $4.8 million and $2.1 million, respectively, under the Tollnine Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had outstanding related-party receivables from Tallac Therapeutics of zero, $0.5 million and $0.9 million, respectively.
Effective as of July 1, 2020, we terminated the Tollnine Agreement and entered into the Tallac Services Agreement with Tallac Therapeutics, pursuant to which Tallac Therapeutics will provide certain research and development services to us. The Tallac Services Agreement has an initial term of four years, to be automatically renewed for additional one-year terms unless terminated by either party. The services are to be provided at a price based on the costs incurred by Tallac Therapeutics plus a mark-up equal to 10.0% of such costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the period presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies related to accrued expenses and equity-based compensation are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Clinical and Manufacturing Accruals
We record accruals for estimated costs of research, preclinical studies and clinical trials, and manufacturing development, which are a significant component of research and development expenses. A substantial portion of our ongoing research and development activities are conducted by third-party service providers, including CROs and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs. Our contracts with CROs generally include pass-through fees such as regulatory expenses, investigator fees, travel costs and other miscellaneous costs, including shipping and printing fees. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may
result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. We accrue the costs incurred under agreements with these third parties based on estimates of actual work completed in accordance with the respective agreements. We determine the estimated costs through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fees to be paid for such services.
We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrual balance at the end of each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accruals. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To assist in its estimates we rely upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from our clinical and non-clinical studies and other third-party vendors. Through December 31, 2020, there have been no material differences from our accrued estimated expenses to the actual clinical trial expenses. However, variations in the assumptions used to estimate accruals, including, but not limited to, the number of patients enrolled, the rate of patient enrollment, and the actual services performed, and related costs may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to clinical trial expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect its financial position and results of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense represents the grant-date fair value of awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. For stock options and shares purchased under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or ESPP, we estimate the grant-date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the derivation and use of subjective assumptions to determine the estimated fair value of stock option awards. These assumptions include:
•
Expected Term-We have concluded that our stock option exercise history does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term, and therefore we use the simplified method for estimating the expected term of stock option grants. Under this approach, the weighted-average expected term is presumed to be the average of the vesting term and the contractual term of the option.
•
Expected Volatility-Since we do not have significant trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty. We will continue to use comparable company information until the historical volatility of our common stock is sufficient to measure expected volatility for future option grants.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the award.
•
Dividend Yield-We have not paid dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying dividends for the foreseeable future, and we therefore used an expected dividend yield of zero.
In addition to the Black-Scholes assumptions, we include the effect of forfeitures as they occur.
We expect the impact of our stock-based compensation expense to grow in future periods due to the potential increases in the value of our common stock and the number of awards we expect to grant.
We issue incentive and non-statutory stock options and under the 2020 Amended and Restated Equity Incentive Plan, or 2020 Plan, to certain directors, officers, employees and consultants in consideration for services provided to us. To date, all incentive stock options have provided for vesting over a four year period from either the date of grant or the commencement of service. To date, all non-statutory stock options have provided for vesting over periods ranging from one to four years from either the date of grant or commencement of service. To date, all non-statutory stock options have been granted to directors and vest over a three year period from the award's date of grant, or the date of the Company’s next annual meeting of stockholders that occurs following the date of grant. The 2020 Plan does not allow the option holders to exercise their options prior to vesting.
Prior to our initial public offering, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards was determined on each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuation of common shares. In the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, our board of directors made a reasonable determination of the fair value of our common stock based on the information known to us on the date of grant, upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated fair value per share of the common stock, and timely valuations from an independent third-party valuation in accordance with guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or Practice Aid.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements.