Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Recent Holding Company Reorganization
Amalgamated Financial Corp., a Delaware public benefit corporation, was formed on August 25, 2020 to serve as the holding company for Amalgamated Bank and is a bank holding company registered with the Federal Reserve. On March 1, 2021 (the “Effective Date”), the Company acquired all of the outstanding stock of Amalgamated Bank, a commercial bank and chartered trust company headquartered in New York, New York, in a statutory share exchange transaction (the “Reorganization”) effected under New York law and in accordance with the terms of a Plan of Acquisition dated September 4, 2020 (the “Agreement”). The Reorganization and the Agreement were approved by the Bank’s stockholders at a special meeting held on January 12, 2021. Pursuant to the Reorganization, shares of the Bank’s Class A common stock were exchanged for shares of the Company’s common stock on a one-for-one basis. As a result, the Bank became the sole subsidiary of the Company, the Company became the holding company for the Bank and the stockholders of the Bank became stockholders of the Company.
Before the Reorganization, the Company conducted no operations other than obtaining regulatory approval for the Reorganization. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements, discussions of those financial statements, market data and all other information presented in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, are those of the Bank, and all references to “we,” “us” and “our” in the following discussion and analysis refer to the Bank.
General
The following discussion and analysis presents information concerning our consolidated financial condition as of December 31, 2020, as compared to December 31, 2019, and our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. This discussion and analysis is best read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. Historical results of operations and the percentage relationships among any amounts included, and any trends that may appear, may not indicate results of operations for any future periods.
The comparison of our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2019 to those for the year ended December 31, 2018 is included in our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC as Exhibit 99.2 to the Company’s Amendment No. 1 to Form S-4 filed on September 25, 2020.
In addition to historical information, this discussion includes certain forward-looking statements regarding business matters and events and trends that may affect our future results. Comments regarding our business that are not historical facts are considered forward-looking statements that involve inherent risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements. For additional information regarding our cautionary disclosures, see the “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” beginning on page 1 of this report.
Overview
Our business
The Bank was formed in 1923 as Amalgamated Bank of New York by the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America, one of the country’s oldest labor unions. Although we are no longer majority union-owned, The Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America’s successor, Workers United, an affiliate of the Service Employees International Union that represents workers in the textile, distribution, food service and gaming industries, remains a significant stockholder, holding approximately 41% of our equity as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our total assets were $6.0 billion, our total loans, net of deferred fees and allowance were $3.4 billion, our total deposits were $5.3 billion, and our stockholders' equity was $535.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, our trust business held $36.8 billion in assets under custody and $15.4 billion in assets under management.
We offer a complete suite of commercial and retail banking, investment management and trust and custody services. Our commercial banking and trust businesses are national in scope and we also offer a full range of products and services to both commercial and retail customers through our three branch offices across New York City, one branch office in Washington, D.C., one branch office in San Francisco, one commercial office in Boston and our digital banking platform. Our corporate divisions include Commercial Banking, Trust and Investment Management and Consumer Banking. Our product line includes residential mortgage loans, C&I loans, CRE loans, multifamily mortgages, and a variety of commercial and consumer deposit products, including non-interest bearing accounts, interest-bearing demand products, savings accounts, money market accounts and certificates of deposit. We also offer online banking and bill payment services, online cash management, safe deposit box rentals, debit card and ATM card services and the availability of a nationwide network of ATMs for our customers.
We currently offer a wide range of trust, custody and investment management services, including asset safekeeping, corporate actions, income collections, proxy services, account transition, asset transfers, and conversion management. We also offer a broad range of investment products, including both index and actively-managed funds spanning equity, fixed-income, real estate and alternative investment strategies to meet the needs of our clients. Our products and services are tailored to our target customer base that prefers a financial partner that is socially responsible, values-oriented and committed to creating positive change in the world. These customers include advocacy-based non-profits, social welfare organizations, national labor unions, political organizations, foundations, socially responsible businesses, and other for-profit companies that seek to balance their profit-making activities with activities that benefit their other stakeholders, as well as the members and stakeholders of these commercial customers. Our goal is to be the go-to financial partner for people and organizations who strive to make a meaningful impact in our society and who care about their communities, the environment, and social justice. We have obtained B Corporation TM certification, a distinction we earned after being evaluated under rigorous standards of social and environmental performance, accountability, and transparency. We are also the largest of ten commercial financial institutions in the United States that are members of the Global Alliance for Banking on Values, a network of banking leaders from around the world committed to advancing positive change in the banking sector.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to create extensive disruptions to the global economy and financial markets and to businesses and the lives of individuals throughout the world. In particular, the COVID-19 pandemic has severely restricted the level of economic activity in our markets. Federal and state governments have taken, and may continue to take, unprecedented actions to contain the spread of the disease, including quarantines, travel bans, shelter-in-place orders, closures of businesses and schools, fiscal stimulus, and legislation designed to deliver monetary aid and other relief to businesses and individuals impacted by the pandemic. Although in various locations certain activity restrictions have been relaxed and businesses and schools have reopened with some level of success, in many states and localities the number of individuals diagnosed with COVID-19 has increased significantly, which may cause a freezing or, in certain cases, a reversal of previously announced relaxation of activity restrictions and may prompt the need for additional aid and other forms of relief.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is fluid and continues to evolve, adversely affecting many of our clients. The unprecedented and rapid spread of COVID-19 and its associated impacts on trade (including supply chains and export levels), travel, employee productivity, unemployment, consumer spending, and other economic activities has resulted in less economic activity, lower equity market valuations and significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. In addition, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, market interest rates have declined significantly, with the 10-year Treasury bond falling below 1.00% on March 3, 2020, for the first time, although bond yields have recently begun to rise, nearing where they were before the pandemic in February 2020. In March 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the targeted federal funds interest rate range to 0% to 0.25% percent. These reductions in interest rates and the other effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have had, and are expected to continue to have, possibly materially, an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations is currently uncertain and will depend on various developments and other factors, including the effect of governmental and private sector initiatives, the effect of the recent rollout of vaccinations for the virus, whether such vaccinations will be effective against any resurgence of the virus, including any new strains, and the ability for customers and businesses to return to their pre-pandemic routine.
As a result of these events, we have seen the following impacts to our business since the start of the pandemic:
Impact on our operations
In response to the pandemic, we took a wide range of actions to help protect our employees and customers and to ensure the operational continuity of the Bank, while continuing to provide core banking services to our consumer and commercial clients. The majority of our employees continue to work remotely with the exception of essential branch and facility staff. Our primary geographic markets include the metropolitan areas of New York City, Washington, D.C., San Francisco and Boston. New York City was one of the areas in the United States initially hardest hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, we had to close or reduce hours at our branches in several locations due to the risk of transmission of COVID-19.
Following these COVID-19 related branch closures, executive management reassessed our branch network and recommended permanently closing six branches due to low traffic, which our Board of Directors approved. We expect to fully serve these affected customers through our remaining branch network and through our digital platform. We took a charge of $8.3 million related to these branch closures in 2020. However, we expect these closures to benefit our non-interest expenses by approximately $4.0 million annually once fully phased in over time.
Impact on our loan portfolio
The disruption in economic activity across the United States, and particularly in New York, has caused stress in the financial condition of both our consumer and commercial clients. As a result, we established programs offering payment deferrals for customers that needed assistance. In accordance with interagency guidance and the CARES Act, short term deferrals granted due to the COVID-19 pandemic are not considered troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) unless the borrower was experiencing financial difficulty prior to the pandemic. The CARES Act provides temporary relief from the accounting and reporting requirements for TDRs regarding certain loan modifications related to COVID-19. In addition, under the terms of these deferral agreements, the loans will not be reported as past due or as non-accrual for the agreed upon term of the deferral, unless additional information becomes available that indicates the loan will not perform as expected when the deferral is complete. Interest will continue to accrue during the deferral period. In general, the interest and principal originally due during the deferral period will be due at the contractual end of the loan. If the loan does not exit deferral and does not continue to pay according to contractual terms, the loan will then be considered as any other loan that is past due or not in agreement with contractual terms, and additional allowance and reversal of related accrued interest will likely be required for these loans.
As of December 31, 2020, the following loan balances are still on deferral, accruing interest, and no loan has been on deferral longer than six months.
There is $5.0 million in accrued interest receivables on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 as a result of loans on payment deferral due to COVID-19. Accrued interest was reversed for any loan that moved to non-accrual status during 2020.
The table below shows the credit risk rating of loans that have exited deferral status as of December 31, 2020, including those loans that did not resume payments and have been moved to non-accrual. These loans do not include other special mention or substandard loans that were never granted a payment deferral:
Impact on our investment portfolio
We are also monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the value of our investments. We mark to market our publicly traded investments and we review our investment portfolio for impairment at each period end. While the value of our portfolio has substantially recovered since the pandemic began, market conditions could continue to be volatile. Although we have not
recognized any impairments in our portfolio since the pandemic began, it is possible that impairments may occur in the future if economic conditions deteriorate further.
Impact on our capital
As of December 31, 2020, all of our capital ratios are in excess of all regulatory requirements. While we believe that we have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by credit losses.
Other impacts on our results of operation and financial condition
In addition to the factors above, we believe the following factors may impact our earnings, though we are unable to quantify the impacts at this time:
•Increased allowance related to loans that continue to be impacted by the economy after the payment deferral periods end
•Lower net interest margin due to the Federal Reserves’ decision to lower rates to “near zero” at the end of March
•Lower loan originations as the credit worthiness of borrowers may be impacted by the current economic environment
As of December 31, 2020, we had $12.9 million of goodwill. During the second quarter of 2020, we performed our annual impairment analysis and determined no goodwill impairment was required. However, changes in certain assumptions used in the Bank’s calculations could result in significant differences in the results of the impairment test. Should market conditions or management’s assumptions change significantly in the future, an impairment to goodwill is possible. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic fallout, including changes in our stock price, the Federal Reserve’s significant reduction in interest rates and other business and market considerations, which may require us to reevaluate our goodwill impairment analysis. Any goodwill impairment charges we incur could have a material adverse effect on our earnings for one reporting period, but would not impact the cash flow or regulatory capital levels of the Bank.
These factors, together or in combination with other events or occurrences that may not yet be known or anticipated, may materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared based on the application of accounting policies generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, the most significant of which are described in Note 1 of our audited consolidated financial statements, starting on page 99 of this report. To prepare financial statements in conformity with GAAP, management makes estimates, assumptions and judgments based on available information. These estimates, assumptions and judgments affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements and, as this information changes, actual results could differ from the estimates, assumptions and judgments reflected in the financial statements. In particular, management has identified accounting policies that, due to the estimates, assumptions and judgments inherent in those policies, are critical in understanding our financial statements. Management has presented the application of these policies to the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
The following is a discussion of the critical accounting policies and significant estimates that require us to make complex and subjective judgments. Additional information about these policies can be found in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements, which begin on page 99 of this report.
Additional information about our significant accounting policies and estimates can be found in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements, starting on page 99 of this report.
Allowance for loan losses
We maintain an allowance for loan and lease losses (“allowance”) at a level we believe is sufficient to absorb probable incurred losses in our loan portfolio. Management determines the adequacy of the allowance based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio and other factors, including past loss experience, the results of our ongoing loan grading process, the amount of past due and nonperforming loans, legal requirements, recommendations or requirements of regulatory authorities, and current economic conditions. These evaluations are inherently subjective as they require management to make material estimates, all of which may be susceptible to significant change. Actual losses in any year may exceed allowance amounts. The allowance is increased by
provisions charged to expense and decreased by provisions released from expense or by actual charge-offs, net of recoveries or previous amounts charged-off.
In accordance with the accounting guidance for business combinations, there was no allowance brought forward on any of the loans we acquired in our acquisition of NRB. For purchased non-credit impaired loans, credit and interest rate discounts representing the principal losses expected over the life of the loan are a component of the initial fair value and the total combined discount is accreted to interest income over the life of the loan. Subsequent to the acquisition date, the method used to evaluate the sufficiency of the discount is similar to organic loans, and if necessary, additional reserves are recognized in the allowance.
Our allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific components relate to loans that are individually classified as impaired. Once a loan is deemed to be impaired, we follow guidelines set forth in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) No. 310. For loans secured by CRE, we use collateral value as the basis for determining the size of the impairment. Accruing TDRs are generally evaluated based on the cash flow of the property with any shortfall in the stabilized value of the property charged off. We then compare that balance to the ‘as is’ appraisal value and hold any shortfall as an allowance. Non-accruing loans (TDRs or otherwise) are generally considered collateral dependent via sale of the asset, and we apply the “as is” appraisal less expected cost to sell with any shortfall charged off. For C&I loans, we generally use discounted cash flow as the basis for determining the size of the impairment and any shortfall is held as a specific reserve.
The general component relates to loans that are not impaired and not individually evaluated. Loans in the general component are grouped into the following homogeneous pools:
•CRE loans;
•multi-family loans;
•construction and land loans;
•C&I;
•leveraged commercial loans;
•consumer/small business;
•purchased student loans;
•purchased Government Guaranteed loans
•legacy purchased HELOCs and 1-4 family residential loans;
•HELOCs and 1-4 family residential loans originated by us; and
•recently purchased 1-4 family residential loans.
Commercial loans are further segmented by risk grade: pass, special mention, and classified. We use a historical lookback period to determine loss rates based on our own loss experiences, or, if there is insufficient data, through proxy data. The current lookback period starts in 2010, the earliest time that we have relevant data and will continue to lengthen until we experience a complete economic cycle. Additionally, we apply an estimated loss emergence period (the “LEP”) to recognize that an event may have already occurred that has yet to manifest itself as a deterioration in the credit that may eventually lead to a loss. There are three components to the LEP: (1) observable-the observed time from a downgrade or delinquency to a loss; (2) known pre-emergence period-the time from when information becomes available until a downgrade is recorded; and (3) unknown period-the time between when an event (e.g. loss of income source) occurred until it becomes known and impacts the financial situation of the borrower. We also consider qualitative factors that mirror nine environmental factors suggested by the 2006 Interagency Policy Statement on the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. These factors are reviewed each quarter using empirical data, where it is available and relevant, to guide management’s judgment to set the level and direction of risk for each factor. The maximum size is determined quarterly by looking at the current loss coverage of the allowance against the historical maximum loss rates during the look back period. We update the loss factors quarterly and the LEP annually. We do not use an unallocated allowance. Together, the quantitative and qualitative reserves form the general component of the allowance. Our allowance is heavily weighted to the general allowances for pools of loans, ASC 450-20, which incorporate quantitative adjustments (e.g., historical loan loss rates) and is not overly reliant on Qualitative adjustments (e.g., portfolio growth and trends, credit concentrations, economic and regulatory factors, etc.). This is a function of the dynamic lookback period, which expands from 2010 and is designed to capture a full credit cycle, and the ‘accordion feature’ of the qualitative scale. The current range of possible outcomes for the qualitative allowance is $8 million to $36 million and at year-end 2020, our qualitative allowance is $16.0 million.
Based on management’s determination, the overall level of allowance is periodically adjusted to account for the inherent and specific risks within the entire portfolio. The evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. While management uses available information to recognize losses on
loans, future additions or reductions in the allowance may be necessary due to changes in one or more evaluation factors, such as management’s assumptions as to rates of default, loss or recoveries, or management’s intent with regard to disposition or cure options. The amount of the allowance is also affected by the size and composition of the loan portfolio. Based on this assessment, the allowance and allocation are adjusted each quarter. The allowance reflects management’s best estimate of the losses that are inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. A shift in lending strategy may also warrant a change in the allowance due to a changing credit profile. In addition, various regulatory agencies review our allowance and may require us to recognize additions to, or charge-offs against, the allowance based on their judgment about information available to them at the time of their examination.
There are several controls around the allowance to insure an adequate, precise, and supportable value. We start with a separation of duties. There is a Process Owner who calculates the allowance and incorporates process controls to insure that all balances are accounted for and the overall accuracy of the data. Next, there is a Control Owner that performs separate controls to confirm the data, calculations, and results. We also have the ALLL Management Committee comprised of the Chief Credit Risk Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Accounting Officer, and Chief Risk Officer who review the totality of the ALLL, assumptions, data, controls and offers creditable challenges. The ALLL Management committee compares the ALLL to our peers, historic results, and current expectations and then approves the ALLL. The Credit Policy Committee thereafter reviews the ALLL, any changes from the prior quarter, and ratifies the ALLL.
Fair value
The use of fair values is required in determining the carrying values of certain assets and liabilities, as well as for specific disclosures. ASC No. 820-10 defines fair value as an estimate of the exchange price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction (i.e., not a forced transaction, such as a liquidation or distressed sale) between market participants at the measurement date and is based on the assumptions market participants would use when pricing an asset or liability.
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, market prices of the same or similar instruments are used whenever such prices are available. For financial instruments that trade actively and have quoted market prices or observable market parameters, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. If observable market prices are unavailable or impracticable to obtain, we are required to make judgments about assumptions that market participants would use in estimating the fair value of the financial instrument. For example, reduced liquidity in the capital markets or changes in secondary market activities could result in observable market inputs becoming unavailable. Fair value is estimated using modeling techniques and incorporates assumptions about interest rates, duration, prepayment speeds, future expected cash flows, market conditions, risks inherent in a particular valuation technique and the risk of nonperformance. These assumptions are inherently subjective as they require material estimates, all of which may be susceptible to significant change. The models used to determine fair value adjustments are periodically evaluated by management for relevance under current facts and circumstances.
Fair value measurement and disclosure guidance differentiates between those assets and liabilities required to be carried at fair value at every reporting period on a recurring basis, such as investment securities that are available-for-sale and those assets and liabilities that are only required to be adjusted to fair value under certain circumstances on a non-recurring basis, such as when there is evidence of impairment.
See Note 14 of our consolidated financial statements, which are included beginning on page 134 of this report, for further information on the fair value of financial instruments.
Income taxes
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. The objective of this method is to establish deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the income tax basis of our assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such amounts are realized or settled. Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and available tax planning opportunities. Changes to the estimate of accrued taxes occur periodically due to changes in tax rates, interpretations of tax laws, the status of examinations being conducted by taxing authorities and changes to statutory, judicial, and regulatory guidance that impact the relative risks of tax positions. These changes, when they occur, can affect deferred and accrued taxes as well as the current period’s income tax expense and can be material to our operating results. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining tax expense and in evaluating tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties.
Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from
net operating loss carryforwards. At least once each year, or more frequently, if warranted, we make estimates of future taxable income that we believe we are likely to generate during those future periods. If we conclude, on the basis of those estimates and the amount of tax benefit available to use, that it is more likely than not that we will be able to use those tax benefits before their expiration, we recognize the deferred tax assets in full on our balance sheet. However, if we conclude that it is more likely than not that we will not be able to utilize those tax benefits in full before their expiration, then we establish a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax asset on our balance sheet to the amount that we believe we can utilize. The assessment of tax assets and liabilities involves the use of estimates, assumptions, interpretations, and judgments concerning certain accounting pronouncements and federal and state tax codes. There can be no assurance that future events, such as court decisions or positions of federal and state taxing authorities, will not differ from management’s current assessment, the impact of which could be significant to our consolidated results of operations and reported earnings.
We also invest in renewable energy projects to derive tax benefits (e.g., investment tax credits, accelerated depreciation). The federal and/or state investment tax credits (ITCs) generated from the project flow to the Bank as an investor and provide tax savings or deferred tax assets when not utilized in the current tax year. Federal ITCs are received once the project is placed in service and recognized; state ITCs, if applicable, are subject to a variety of rules that vary by jurisdiction. The accelerated depreciation generated from the project will generally create a deferred tax item as a result of the temporary difference in an investor’s book versus tax basis in that investment. Tax accounting for the ITCs may utilize the flow-through method or the deferral method. The Bank has elected the deferral method where the benefit from the income tax credit is reflected in income over the productive life of the investment. Under this method, the investment tax credits are recognized as a reduction to the related asset.
See Note 11 of our consolidated financial statements, which are included beginning on page 126 of this report for further information on income taxes.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements, which are included beginning on page 105 of this report for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements that have been or will be adopted by us that will require enhanced disclosures in our financial statements in future periods.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to measure financial position and operating results primarily in terms of historic dollars. Changes in the relative value of money due to inflation or recession generally are not considered. The primary effect of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. Therefore, the effect of changes in interest rates will have a more significant effect on our performance than will the effect of changing prices and inflation in general. While interest rates are greatly influenced by changes in the inflation rate, they do not necessarily change at the same rate or in the same magnitude as the inflation rate. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors that are beyond our control, including changes in the expected rate of inflation, the influence of general and local economic conditions and the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government, its agencies and various other governmental regulatory authorities. For more information about how we evaluate interest rate risk, please see the section entitled “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk - Evaluation of Interest Rate Risk.”
Results of Operations
General
Our results of operations depend substantially on net interest income, which is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, consisting primarily of interest income on loans, investment securities and other short-term investments and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, consisting primarily of interest expense on deposits and borrowings. Our results of operations are also dependent on non-interest income, consisting primarily of income from Trust Department fees, service charges on deposit accounts, net gains on sales of investment securities and loans, income from equity investments in solar projects and income from bank-owned life insurance. Other factors contributing to our results of operations include our provisions for loan losses, income taxes, and non-interest expenses, such as salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and depreciation expenses, professional fees, data processing fees and other miscellaneous operating costs.
We had net income for the year ended 2020 of $46.2 million, or $1.48 per diluted common share, compared to $47.2 million, or $1.47 per diluted common share, for the year ended 2019. The $1.0 million decrease in net income for the year ended 2020, compared to the year ended 2019, was primarily due to a $21.0 million increase in the provision for loan losses and a $6.1 million
increase in non-interest expense, partially offset by a $13.4 million increase in net interest income and an $11.4 million increase in non-interest income.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income, representing interest income less interest expense, is a significant contributor to our revenues and earnings. We generate interest income from interest, dividends and prepayment fees on interest-earning assets, including loans, investment securities and other short-term investments. We incur interest expense from interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities, including interest-bearing deposits, FHLB advances and other borrowings. To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor (i) yields on our loans and other interest-earning assets, (ii) the costs of our deposits and other funding sources, (iii) our net interest spread and (iv) our net interest margin. Net interest spread is equal to the difference between rates earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest margin is equal to the annualized net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Because non-interest-bearing sources of funds, such as non-interest-bearing deposits and stockholders’ equity, also fund interest-earning assets, net interest margin includes the benefit of these non-interest-bearing funding sources.
Changes in the market interest rates and interest rates we earn on interest-earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as the volume and types of interest-earning assets, interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing liabilities, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income.
The following table sets forth information related to our average balance sheet, average yields on assets, and average costs of liabilities for the periods indicated:
(1) Amounts include resell agreements
(2) Amounts are net of deferred origination costs / (fees) and the allowance for loan losses
(3) Includes prepayment penalty interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $4.1 million and $888,234 respectively
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Our net interest income was $180.0 million for the year ended 2020, an increase of $13.4 million, or 8.0%, from the year ended 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a decrease in interest expense due to a decrease in Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances and other borrowings, as well as a decrease in rates paid across all classes of interest bearing liabilities, and an increase in average securities of $552.5 million and average loans of $250.7 million, with such growth more than offsetting the lower yields earned on such assets. These impacts were partially offset by an increase in average interest-bearing deposits of $295.7 million.
Our net interest spread was 2.89% for the year ended 2020, compared to 3.20% for the year ended 2019, a decrease of 31 basis points. Our net interest margin was 3.11% for the year ended 2020, compared to 3.55% for the year ended 2019, a decrease of 44 basis points.
The yield on average earning assets was 3.29% for the year ended 2020, compared to 3.96% for the year ended 2019, a decrease of 67 basis points. This decrease was driven primarily by an 83 basis point decrease in the yield on securities and FHLB stock and a 24 basis point decrease in the yield on total loans, due to lower average market rates following the onset of the pandemic. The average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities was 0.40% for the year ended 2020, a decrease of 36 basis points from the year ended 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in average FHLB advances of $201.3 million and a decrease in the average rate paid on deposits in 2020 compared to 2019. Noninterest-bearing deposits represented 52% and 44% of average deposits for the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively, contributing to a total cost of deposits of 0.19% and 0.35% for the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Rate-Volume Analysis
Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in weighted average interest rates (rate). The table below presents the effect of volume and rate changes on interest income and expense. Changes in volume are changes in the average balance multiplied by the previous period’s average rate. Changes in rate are changes in the average rate multiplied by the average balance from the previous period. The net changes attributable to the combined impact of both rate and volume have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
Provision for Loan Losses
We establish an allowance through a provision for loan losses charged as an expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income. The provision for loan losses is the amount of expense that, based on our judgment, is required to maintain the allowance at an adequate level to absorb probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date and that, in management’s judgment, is appropriate under GAAP. Our determination of the amount of the allowance and corresponding provision for loan losses considers ongoing evaluations of the credit quality and level of credit risk inherent in our loan portfolio, levels of nonperforming loans and charge-offs, statistical trends and economic and other relevant factors. The allowance is increased by
provisions charged to expense and decreased by provisions released from expense or by actual charge-offs, net of recoveries on prior loan charge-offs.
Our provisions for loan losses totaled $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.8 million for 2019. The increase in provision expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a $4.4 million increase in allowance related to negative economic factors due to the COVID-19 pandemic and payment deferrals in our loan portfolio, $17.0 million in charge offs primarily related to the economic impacts of COVID-19 on hotel, construction, and C&I loans (of which $4.4 million was previously reserved for in 2019) and a $4.6 million increase related to loan downgrades and other factors. The provision expense for the year ended 2019 was driven primarily by specific reserves on two C&I loans and growth in our loan portfolio, partially offset by improvement in our loss factors.
For a further discussion of the allowance, see “Allowance for Loan Losses” below.
Non-Interest Income
The following table presents our non-interest income for the periods indicated:
Our non-interest income increased to $40.6 million for the year ended 2020, up $11.4 million, or 39.1%, from $29.2 million for the year ended 2019. This increase was primarily due to $7.4 million in tax credits on equity investments in solar projects, a $2.5 million increase in gain on the sale of loans, a $1.5 million increase in gain on the sale of securities, a $1.4 million gain on the sale of a branch reported in other income, and a $1.4 million increase in income on Bank-owned life insurance due to the receipt of multiple death benefit payouts. These increases were partially offset by a $3.4 million decrease in Trust Department fees.
Trust Department fees. Trust Department fees consist of fees we receive in connection with our investment advisory and custodial management services of investment accounts. Our Trust Department fees were $15.2 million in 2020, a decrease of $3.4 million, or 18.2%, from 2019, primarily due to the decline in income from our real-estate fund (discussed below) and the movement of funds to lower yielding products, partially offset by increases in the market value of assets. Our investment management business historically earned fees from a real-estate fund that we have been winding down since 2018 and for which we will no longer earn fees beginning in 2021. This real estate fund contributed $1.8 million in fees for the year ended 2020 and $3.1 million in fees for 2019, reflected in our Trust Department fees.
Service charges on deposit accounts. We earn fees from our clients for deposit related services. Service charges on deposit accounts were $9.2 million for the year ended 2020, an increase of $0.7 million, or 7.7%, from the year ended 2019, primarily due to increases in the number of customers and customer activity.
Bank-owned life insurance income. Income on bank-owned life insurance was $3.1 million for the year ended 2020, compared to $1.6 million for the year ended 2019. The increase in fees in 2020 was primarily due to multiple death benefit payouts during the year.
Gain (loss) on sale of investment securities available for sale, net. We had net gains of $1.6 million for the year ended 2020, compared to $0.1 million for the year ended 2019. The increase in net gains of $1.5 million was primarily due to the decision to take more gains from the sale of securities in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in the price of fixed rate securities due to lower market rates.
Gain (loss) on sale of loans, net. We earn income or take losses on the sale of originated loans. We had net gains on sale of loans of $2.5 million for the year ended 2020, compared to net gains of $13,000 for the year ended 2019. The increase in gains was due to the Bank's decision to sell more originated loans in 2020 compared to 2019 due to favorable pricing and lower market rates.
Gain (loss) on other real estate owned. We earn income or take losses on the sale of properties that we have acquired as the result of the workout process on troubled loans. We had net losses on the sale of foreclosed residential properties of $0.5 million for the year ended 2020, compared to net losses of $0.6 million for the year ended 2019. The decrease in loss in 2020 was primarily due to the sale price of these properties being lower than our fair value estimates.
Equity method investments. We earned $7.4 million of income on our equity method investments for the year ended 2020, driven by tax credits on equity investments in solar projects that we entered into in 2020. We expect a loss in equity method investments of approximately $5.6 million during 2021; this loss is due to the timing of the $7.4 million in tax benefits earned during 2020. These impacts do not include any benefits of new solar equity investments that we may make in the future.
Other income. Other income consists of net gain on sale of fixed assets, fees on letters of credit, penalty fees on loans and miscellaneous fees. We had other income of $2.0 million for the year ended 2020 compared to $0.9 million for the year ended 2019. The increase of $1.2 million was primarily due to the gains on sale of fixed assets related to the branch closures in the year ended 2020.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table presents non-interest expense for the periods indicated:
Our non-interest expense increased to $133.9 million for the year ended 2020, up $6.1 million, or 4.7%, from $127.8 million for the year ended 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $5.3 million increase in occupancy and depreciation expense and a $1.5 million increase in other expenses.
Compensation and employee benefits. Compensation and employee benefit costs are the largest component of our non-interest expense and include employee payroll expense, incentive compensation, pension plan expenses, health benefits and payroll taxes. Compensation and employee benefits decreased to $69.4 million for the year ended 2020, down $0.9 million, or 1.2%, from the year ended 2019.
Occupancy and depreciation. Rent, real estate taxes, depreciation and maintenance comprise the majority of occupancy and depreciation expense. Occupancy and depreciation expense increased to $23.0 million in the year ended 2020, up $5.3 million, or 30.0%, due to $6.0 million in expenses related to the closure of eight branch offices in New York City during 2020.
Professional fees. Professional fees include consulting, legal, audit, and trust sub-advisor fees. Professional fees decreased to $11.2 million in the year ended 2020, down $0.7 million, or 6.1%, from the year ended 2019. The decrease was primarily due lower sub-advisor fees on our assets under management and lower consulting expenses, partially offset by higher legal expenses related to our formation of a holding company and the transition of our CEO role.
Data processing. Data processing expenses include payments to vendors who provide software and services on an outsourced basis and other costs related to our systems, including internal networks. Data processing expense increased to $11.3 million for the year ended 2020, up $0.5 million, or 4.1%, from the year ended 2019, primarily driven by expenses related to the modernization of our custody operations.
Other. Other expenses include FDIC insurance assessments and other miscellaneous expenses. Other expense increased to $10.7 million for the year ended 2020, up $1.5 million, or 16.3% from year ended 2019, primarily due to FDIC insurance assessment credits in 2019 that ceased in the second quarter of 2020.
Income Taxes
We had income tax expense of $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.2 million. The decrease was primarily due to a lower effective tax rate and lower pre-tax earnings. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 25.4% compared to 26.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financial Condition
Balance Sheet
Our total assets were $6.0 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $5.3 billion at December 31, 2019. The $653.3 million increase was primarily driven by a $516.8 million increase in investment securities, of which $157.2 million was from PACE assessments, and a $154.8 million increase in resell agreements backed by Government Guaranteed loans. In the year ended 2020, the Bank also made $26.1 million of investments in solar projects with federal tax benefits and a $5.0 million equity investment in PACE Funding Group, LLC for the purpose of securing a purchase agreement for $150 million in PACE securities.
Our total liabilities were $5.4 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $4.8 billion at December 31, 2019. Our total deposits were $5.3 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $4.6 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in deposits of $697.7 million was due to a $424.1 million increase in non-interest bearing demand deposits and a $273.7 million increase in interest bearing deposits. The Bank had no borrowings at December 31, 2020 compared to $75.0 million at December 31, 2019.
Investment Securities
The primary goal of our securities portfolio is to maintain an available source of liquidity and an efficient investment return on excess capital, while maintaining a low risk profile. We also use our securities portfolio to manage interest rate risk, meet CRA goals and to provide collateral for certain types of deposits or borrowings. An Investment Committee chaired by our Chief Financial Officer manages our investment securities portfolio according to written investment policies approved by our Board of Directors. Investments in our securities portfolio may change over time based on management’s objectives and market conditions.
We seek to minimize credit risk in our securities portfolio through diversification, concentration limits, restrictions on high risk investments (such as subordinated positions), comprehensive pre-purchase analysis and stress testing, ongoing monitoring and by investing a significant portion of our securities portfolio in U.S. Government sponsored entity (“GSE”) obligations. GSEs include the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“FHLMC”), the Federal National Mortgage Association (“FNMA”), the Government National Mortgage Association (“GNMA”) and the Small Business Administration. GNMA is a wholly-owned U.S. Government corporation whereas FHLMC and FNMA are private corporations controlled by the U.S. Government. Mortgage-related securities may include mortgage pass-through certificates, participation certificates and collateralized mortgage obligations. We invest in non-GSE securities in order to generate higher returns, improve portfolio diversification and or reduced interest rate and prepayment risk. With the exception of small legacy CRA investments comprising less than .1% of the portfolio or Trust Preferred securities, all of our non-GSE securities are senior positions that are the top of the capital structure.
Our investment securities portfolio consists of securities classified as available-for-sale and held-to-maturity. There were no trading securities in our investment portfolio during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. All available-for sale securities are carried at fair value and may be used for liquidity purposes should management consider it to be in our best interest.
We had available-for-sale securities of $1.5 billion and $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase of $315.1 million from the year end of 2019 was primarily due to increases in fixed rate asset backed securities, floating rate collateralized loan obligation securities and fixed rate agency CMBS, partially offset by declines in other sections of the investment securities portfolio.
The held-to-maturity securities portfolio consists of residential and commercial PACE assessments, tax exempt municipal bonds and other debt. We carry these securities at amortized cost. We had held-to-maturity securities of $494.4 million and $292.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Certain securities have fair values less than amortized cost and, therefore, contain unrealized losses. At December 31, 2020, we evaluated those securities which had an unrealized loss for other than temporary impairment, or OTTI, and determined substantially all of the decline in value to be temporary. There were $592.4 million of investment securities with unrealized losses at December 31, 2020 of which $12.8 million had a continuous unrealized loss position for 12 consecutive months or longer that was greater than 5% of amortized cost. We anticipate full recovery of amortized cost with respect to these securities by the time that these securities mature, or sooner in the case that a more favorable market interest rate environment causes their fair value to increase. We do not intend to sell these securities and it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell them before full recovery of their amortized cost basis, which may be at the time of their maturity.
The following table is a summary of our investment portfolio, using market value for available-for-sale securities and amortized cost for held-to-maturity securities, as of the dates indicated.
The following table shows contractual maturities and yields for the securities available-for-sale and held-to-maturity portfolios:
(1) Estimated yield based on book price (amortized cost divided by par) using estimated prepayments and no change in interest rates.
The following table shows a breakdown of our asset backed securities by sector and ratings:
Loans
Lending-related income is the most significant component of our net interest income and is the main driver of our results of operations. Total loans, net of deferred origination fees, were $3.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $8.5 million, compared to $3.4 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a $202.9 million increase in C&I loans, which includes $97.7 million of government guaranteed and PPP loans, and a $27.6 million increase in consumer loans. These increases were partially offset by a $127.8 million decrease in residential loans and a $78.4 million decrease in commercial real estate and multifamily loans.
We actively purchase loans from other originating institutions that we believe provide attractive risk-adjusted returns. Over the last two years we have made the following loan purchases:
•In 2020, we purchased $114.4 million of commercial loans that are unconditionally guaranteed by the U.S. Government (which includes $51.3 million of loans originated through the Government’s Paycheck Protection Program), $80.3 million of residential solar loans, $34.6 million of residential mortgages and $2.0 million of commercial energy efficiency loans
•In 2019, we purchased $88.4 million of commercial loans that are unconditionally guaranteed by the U.S. Government, $29.8 million of residential solar loans, and $12.3 million of commercial solar loans
We plan to selectively evaluate the purchase of additional loan pools that meet our underwriting criteria as part of our strategic plan.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio, including our purchased loan pools, for the periods presented.
Commercial loan portfolio
Our commercial loan portfolio comprised 59.0% of our total loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 55.9% of our total loan portfolio at December 31, 2019. The major categories of our commercial loan portfolio are discussed below:
C&I. Our C&I loans are generally made to small and medium-sized manufacturers and wholesale, retail and service-based businesses to provide either working capital or to finance major capital expenditures. The primary source of repayment for C&I
loans is generally operating cash flows of the business. We also seek to minimize risks related to these loans by requiring such loans to be collateralized by various business assets (including inventory, equipment and accounts receivable). The average size of our C&I loans at December 31, 2020 by exposure was $3.3 million with a median size of $1.0 million. We have shifted our lending strategy to focus on developing full customer relationships with these borrowers including deposits, cash management, and lending. The businesses that we focus on are generally mission aligned and include organic and natural products, sustainable companies, clean energy, nonprofits, and B Corporations TM.
Our C&I loans totaled $677.2 million at December 31, 2020, which comprised 33.0% of commercial loans and 19.5% of our total loan portfolio. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the C&I loan portfolio increased by 42.8% from $474.3 million at December 31, 2019, due to increased lending to mission aligned customers and the addition of $51.3 million of PPP loans.
Multifamily. Our multifamily loans are generally used to purchase or refinance apartment buildings of five units or more, which collateralize the loan, in major metropolitan areas within our markets. Our multifamily loans are largely concentrated in New York City, our largest geographic market, with 80% of our multifamily loans originated in this market. Our multifamily loans have been underwritten under stringent guidelines on loan to value and debt service coverage ratios that are designed to mitigate credit and concentration risk in this loan category. As of December 31, 2020, 42% of these loans had a loan-to-value ratio at or below 60% at origination and 92% had a loan-to-value ratio at or below 75% at origination, by original loan amount. The average size of our multifamily loan exposure at December 31, 2020 was $5.1 million with a median size of $3.6 million.
Our multifamily mortgage loans totaled $947.2 million at December 31, 2020 which comprised 46.1% of commercial loans and 27.2% of the total loan portfolio. In 2020, our multifamily mortgage loan portfolio decreased by 3.0% from $976.4 million at December 31, 2019 primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on loan originations and prepayments due to the low interest rate environment.
CRE. Our CRE loans are used to purchase or refinance office buildings, retail centers, industrial facilities, medical facilities and mixed-used buildings. Included in this total are 25 owner-occupied buildings which account for an aggregate total of $42.7 million in loans as of December 31, 2020.
Our CRE mortgages totaled $372.7 million at December 31, 2020, which comprised 18.2% of commercial loans and 10.7% of the total loan portfolio. In 2020, our CRE mortgage portfolio decreased by 11.7% from $421.9 million at December 31, 2019.
Retail loan portfolio
Our retail loan portfolio comprised 41.0% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 44.1% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2019. The major categories of our retail loan portfolio are discussed below.
Residential real estate lending. Our residential 1-4 family mortgage loans are residential mortgages that are primarily secured by single-family homes, which can be owner occupied or investor owned. These loans are either originated by our loan officers or purchased from other originators with the servicing retained by such originators. Our residential real estate lending portfolio is 99% first mortgage loans and 1% second mortgage loans. As of December 31, 2020, 80% of our residential 1-4 family mortgage loans were either originated by our loan officers since 2012 or were acquired in our acquisition of NRB, 13% were purchased from two third parties on or after July, 2014, and 7% were purchased by us from other originators before 2010. Our residential real estate lending loans totaled $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020, which comprised 86.7% of our retail loan portfolio and 35.5% of our total loan portfolio. In 2020, our residential real estate lending loans decreased by 9.4% from $1.4 billion at December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher prepayments due to the low interest rate environment and our decision to sell more loan originations.
Consumer and other. Our consumer and other portfolio is comprised of purchased student loans, purchased residential solar loans, unsecured consumer loans and overdraft lines. Our consumer and other loans totaled $190.7 million at December 31, 2020, which comprised 13.3% of our retail loan portfolio and 5.5% of our total loan portfolio, compared to 10.7% of our retail loan portfolio and 4.7% of our total loan portfolio at December 31, 2019. In 2020, our consumer and other loans increased by 16.9% from $163.1 million at December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to an increase of $58.1 million in purchased residential solar loans, partially offset by a $29.9 million decrease in purchased student loans.
Maturities and Sensitivity of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates
The information in the following tables is based on the contractual maturities of individual loans, including loans that may be subject to renewal at their contractual maturity. Renewal of these loans is subject to review and credit approval, as well as modification of terms upon maturity. Actual repayments of loans may differ from the maturities reflected below because
borrowers have the right to prepay obligations with or without prepayment penalties. The following tables summarize the loan maturity distribution by type and related interest rate characteristics at December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We maintain the allowance at a level we believe is sufficient to absorb probable incurred losses in our loan portfolio given the conditions at the time. Management determines the adequacy of the allowance based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio and other factors, including end-of-period loan levels and portfolio composition, observable trends in nonperforming loans, our
historical loan losses, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, underwriting practices, adverse situations that may impact a borrower’s ability to repay, the estimated value and sufficiency of any underlying collateral, credit risk grade assessments, loan impairment and economic conditions. These evaluations are inherently subjective as they require management to make material estimates, all of which may be susceptible to significant change. The allowance is increased by provisions for loan losses charged to expense and decreased by actual charge-offs, net of recoveries of previous amounts charged-off.
The allowance consists of specific allowances for loans that are individually classified as impaired and general components. Impaired loans include loans placed on nonaccrual status and troubled debt restructurings. Loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due in accordance with the original contractual terms of the loan agreements. When determining if we will be unable to collect all principal and interest payments due in accordance with the original contractual terms of the loan agreement, we consider the borrower’s overall financial condition, resources and payment record, support from guarantors, and the realized value of any collateral. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
Impaired loans are individually identified and evaluated for impairment based on a combination of internally assigned risk ratings and a defined dollar threshold. If a loan is impaired, a specific reserve is applied to the loan so that the loan is reported, net, at the discounted expected future cash flows or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is collateral dependent. Impaired loans which do not meet the criteria for individual evaluation are evaluated in homogeneous pools of loans with similar risk characteristics.
In accordance with the accounting guidance for business combinations, there was no allowance brought forward on any of the loans we acquired in our acquisition of NRB. For purchased non-credit impaired loans, credit discounts representing the principal losses expected over the life of the loan are a component of the initial fair value and the discount is accreted to interest income over the life of the loan. Subsequent to the acquisition date, the method used to evaluate the sufficiency of the credit discount is similar to organic loans, and if necessary, additional reserves are recognized in the allowance. As of December 31, 2020, we have recognized $3.0 million in additional reserves related to the NRB acquisition. At the close of the NRB acquisition, there were no Purchase Credit Impaired loans. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining Mark is $1.8 million. In addition, the ALLL includes $3.4 million on-balance-sheet and $0.1 million off-balance-sheet reserves for loan downgrades, increases in usage of lines of credit, construction disbursements and reclassifications of product types subsequent to the acquisition. Since the close of the NRB acquisition, we have charged off $1.5 million of commercial loans and as of December 31, 2020, there were $12.0 million of nonaccrual loans.
The following table presents, by loan type, the changes in the allowance for the periods indicated.
The allowance increased $7.7 million to $41.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $33.8 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, we had $73.7 million of impaired loans for which we made a specific allowance of $6.2 million, compared to $65.4 million of impaired loans at December 31, 2019 for which we made a specific allowance of $7.5 million. The ratio of allowance to total loans was 1.19% and 0.98% for December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase is attributable to the higher loan balances and higher qualitative factors at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic has had and may continue to have an adverse effect on the credit quality of our loan portfolio during the year ended 2020. The impact of the virus on the economy and on the financial condition of our borrowers could result in increased loan delinquencies and defaults. Impaired loans have increased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and may continue to increase in future periods.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table presents the allocation of the allowance and the percentage of the total amount of loans in each loan category listed as of the dates indicated.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets include all loans categorized as nonaccrual or restructured, other real estate owned and other repossessed assets. The accrual of interest on loans is discontinued, or the loan is placed on nonaccrual, when the full collection of principal and interest is in doubt. We generally do not accrue interest on loans that are 90 days or more past due (unless we are in the process of collection or an extension and feel that the customer is not in financial difficulty). When a loan is placed on nonaccrual, previously accrued but unpaid interest is reversed and charged against interest income and future accruals of interest are discontinued. Payments by borrowers for loans on nonaccrual are applied to loan principal. Loans are returned to accrual status when, in our judgment, the borrower’s ability to satisfy principal and interest obligations under the loan agreement has improved sufficiently to reasonably assure recovery of principal and the borrower has demonstrated a sustained period of repayment performance.
A loan is identified as a troubled debt restructuring, or TDR, when we, for economic or legal reasons related to the borrower’s financial difficulties, grant a concession to the borrower. The concessions may be granted in various forms, including interest rate reductions, principal forgiveness, extension of maturity date, waiver or deferral of payments and other actions intended to minimize potential losses. A loan that has been restructured as a TDR may not be disclosed as a TDR in years subsequent to the restructuring if certain conditions are met. Generally, a nonaccrual loan that is restructured remains on nonaccrual status for a period no less than six months to demonstrate that the borrower can meet the restructured terms. However, the borrower’s performance prior to the restructuring or other significant events at the time of restructuring may be considered in assessing whether the borrower can meet the new terms and may result in the loan being returned to accrual status after a shorter performance period. If the borrower’s performance under the new terms is not reasonably assured, the loan remains classified as a nonaccrual loan.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced a significant increase in the number of requests for temporary loan modifications. As of December 31, 2020, we had COVID-19 related loan payment deferrals or deferral requests in process totaling $41 million. We have granted these borrowers short-term concessions of three to six months, in the form of payment deferrals. According to interagency guidance and the CARES Act, loans modified during the COVID-19 pandemic are not considered TDRs as long as the borrower was not experiencing financial difficulty before the pandemic and the reason for the deferral is temporary in nature and the loans are expected to continue performing after the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table sets forth our nonperforming assets for the periods presented:
Total nonperforming assets were $82.2 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $66.7 million at December 31, 2019. The $15.5 million increase was due to an increase of $29.9 million in nonaccrual loans, primarily related to the pandemic.
The amount of interest that would have been recorded on nonaccrual loans, had the loans not been classified as nonaccrual, totaled $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We recognized no interest income on nonaccrual loans for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.1 million recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Potential problem loans are loans which management has doubts as to the ability of the borrowers to comply with the present loan repayment terms. Potential problem loans are performing loans and include our special mention and substandard-accruing commercial loans and/or loans 30-89 days past due. Potential problem loans are not included in the nonperforming assets table above and totaled $334.0 million, or 5.6% of total assets, at December 31, 2020, as follows: $306.1 million are commercial loans currently in workout that management expects will be rehabilitated; $13.6 million are commercial loans that are current on payments and are reported as 30-89 days past due, in renewal or extension negotiations, and inclusive of workouts; $17.9 million are residential 1-4 family or retail loans, with $14.5 million at 30 days delinquent, and $3.4 million at 60 days delinquent.
Resell Agreements
We have entered into $154.8 million of short term investments of resell agreements backed by government guaranteed loans, with a weighted rate of 1.25%.
Deferred Tax Asset
We had a net deferred tax asset, net of deferred tax liabilities, of $27.9 million at December 31, 2020 and $28.4 million at December 31, 2019.
A valuation allowance is required for deferred tax assets if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the asset will not be realized due to the inability to generate sufficient taxable income in the period and/or of the character necessary to utilize the benefit of the deferred tax asset. The more-likely-than-not criterion means the likelihood of realization is greater than 50%. When evaluating whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized, all available evidence, both positive and negative, that may affect the ability to realize deferred tax assets should be identified and considered in determining the appropriate amount of the valuation allowance. Management assesses all the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize the existing deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we believed our deferred tax assets were fully realizable and, therefore, no valuation allowance was held against the balance. Our management concluded that it was more likely than not that the entire amount will be realized. We will evaluate the recoverability of our net deferred tax asset on a periodic basis and record decreases (increases) as a deferred tax provision (benefit) in the Consolidated Statement of Income as appropriate.
Deposits
Deposits represent our primary source of funds. We are focused on growing our core deposits through relationship-based banking with our business and consumer clients. Total deposits were $5.3 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $4.6 billion at December 31, 2019. Our deposit growth was attributable to our mission-based strategy of developing and maintaining relationships with our clients who share similar values and through maintaining a high level of service.
We gather deposits through each of our three branch locations across New York City, our one branch in Washington, D.C., our one branch in San Francisco and through the efforts of our commercial banking team which focuses nationally on business growth. Through our branch network, online, mobile and direct banking channels, we offer a variety of deposit products including demand deposit accounts, money market deposits, NOW accounts, savings and certificates of deposit. We bank politically active customers, such as campaigns, PACs, and state and national party committees, which we refer to as political deposits. These deposits exhibit seasonality based on election cycles. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $602.8 million in political deposits which are primarily in demand deposits, compared to $578.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
Our total deposits include deposits from Workers United and its related entities of $95.8 million and $86.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth the average balance amounts and the average rates paid on deposits held by us for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Time deposits of $100,000 or more outstanding at December 31, 2020 are summarized as follows:
Borrowings and Other Interest-Bearing Liabilities
In addition to deposits, we also utilize FHLB advances as a supplementary funding source to finance our operations. Our advances from the FHLB are collateralized by residential, multifamily real estate loans and securities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings. We had no month-end balance of borrowings during 2020. The average balance of borrowing for 2020 was $1.6 million with an average rate of 1.70%.
The following tables outline our various sources of borrowed funds during the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, and the amounts outstanding at the end of each period, the maximum month-end amount for each component during the periods, the average amounts for each period, and the average interest rate that we paid for each borrowing source. The maximum month-end balance represents the high indebtedness for each component of borrowed funds at any time during each of the periods shown.
Liquidity
Liquidity refers to our ability to maintain cash flow that is adequate to fund our operations, support asset growth, maintain reserve requirements and meet present and future obligations of deposit withdrawals, lending obligations and other contractual obligations through either the sale or maturity of existing assets or by obtaining additional funding through liability management. Our Funding and Liquidity Risk Management Policy provides the framework that we use to maintain adequate liquidity and sources of available liquidity at levels that enable us to meet all reasonably foreseeable short-term, long-term and strategic liquidity demands. The Asset and Liability Management Committee, is responsible for oversight of liquidity risk management activities in accordance with the provisions of our Liquidity Risk Management Policy and applicable bank regulatory capital and liquidity laws and regulations. Our liquidity risk management process includes (i) ongoing analysis and monitoring of our funding requirements under various balance sheet and economic scenarios, (ii) review and monitoring of lenders, depositors, brokers and other liability holders to ensure appropriate diversification of funding sources and (iii) liquidity contingency planning to address liquidity needs in the event of unforeseen market disruption impacting a wide range of variables. We continuously monitor our liquidity position in order for our assets and liabilities to be managed in a manner that will meet our immediate and long-term funding requirements. We seek to manage our liquidity position to meet the daily cash flow needs of customers, while maintaining an appropriate balance between assets and liabilities to meet the return on investment objectives of our stockholders. We also monitor our liquidity requirements in light of interest rate trends, changes in the economy, and the scheduled maturity and interest rate sensitivity of our securities and loan portfolios and deposits. Liquidity management is made more complicated because different balance sheet components are subject to varying degrees of management control. For example, the timing of maturities of our investment portfolio is fairly predictable and subject to a high degree of control when we make investment decisions. Net deposit inflows and outflows, however, are far less predictable and are not subject to the same degree of certainty.
Our liquidity position is supported by management of our liquid assets and liabilities and access to alternative sources of funds. Our short-term and long-term liquidity requirements are primarily to fund on-going operations, including payment of interest on deposits and debt, extensions of credit to borrowers and capital expenditures. These liquidity requirements are met primarily through our deposits, FHLB advances and the principal and interest payments we receive on loans and investment securities. Cash, interest-bearing deposits in third-party banks, securities available for sale and maturing or prepaying balances in our investment and loan portfolios are our most liquid assets. Other sources of liquidity that are available to us include the sale of loans we hold for investment, the ability to acquire additional national market non-core deposits, borrowings through the Federal Reserve’s discount window and the issuance of debt or equity securities. We believe that the sources of available liquidity are adequate to meet our current and reasonably foreseeable future liquidity needs.
At December 31, 2020, our cash and equivalents, which consist of cash and amounts due from banks and interest-bearing deposits in other financial institutions, amounted to $38.8 million, or 0.6% of total assets, compared to $122.5 million, or 2.3% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Our available-for-sale securities at December 31, 2020 were $1.5 billion, or 25.8% of total assets, compared to $1.2 billion, or 23.0% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Investment securities with an aggregate fair value of $106.1 million at December 31, 2020 were pledged to secure public deposits.
The liability portion of the balance sheet serves as our primary source of liquidity. We plan to meet our future cash needs through the generation of deposits. Customer deposits have historically provided a sizeable source of relatively stable and low-cost funds. We are also a member of the FHLB, from which we can borrow for leverage or liquidity purposes. The FHLB requires that securities and qualifying loans be pledged to secure any advances. At December 31, 2020, we had no advances from the FHLB and a remaining credit availability of $1.6 billion. In addition, we maintain borrowing capacity of approximately $125.5 million with the Federal Reserve’s discount window that is secured by certain securities from our portfolio which are not pledged for other purposes.
Capital Resources
Total stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 was $535.8 million, compared to $490.5 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $45.3 million, or 9.2%. The increase was primarily driven by net income of $46.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and an increase of $14.0 million in accumulated other comprehensive income from the increase in the fair
value of available-for-sale securities, partially offset by $10.1 million in dividend payments and $7.0 million in repurchases of our common stock.
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal banking regulators. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by federal banking regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on our financial statements.
Regulatory capital rules adopted in July 2013 and fully-phased in as of January 1, 2019, which we refer to as Basel III rules, impose minimum capital requirements for bank holding companies and banks. The Basel III rules apply to all national and state banks and savings associations regardless of size and bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with consolidated assets of more than $3 billion. In order to avoid restrictions on capital distributions or discretionary bonus payments to executives, a covered banking organization must maintain the fully-phased in “capital conservation buffer” of 2.5% on top of its minimum risk-based capital requirements. This buffer must consist solely of common equity Tier 1 risk-based capital, but the buffer applies to all three measurements (common equity Tier 1 risk-based capital, Tier 1 capital and total capital).
The following table shows the Bank's regulatory capital ratios at the dates indicated:
(1)Amounts are shown exclusive of the applicable capital conservation buffer of 2.50%.
As of December 31, 2020, we were categorized as “well capitalized” under the prompt corrective action measures, and met the capital conservation buffer.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into contractual obligations in the normal course of business that involve elements of credit risk, interest rate risk and liquidity risk.
The following table summarizes these relations as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Investment Obligations
The Bank is party to an agreement for the purchase of up to $325 million of PACE assessment securities by September 2021, to be held in our held-to-maturity investment portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had fulfilled $165.4 million of its obligation. As of December 31, 2019, the Bank was not party to such an agreement or related purchase obligation. The PACE assessments have equal-lien priority with property taxes and rank senior to first lien mortgages.
Off-Balance Sheet items
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, commercial letters of credit and standby letters of credit. Those instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated statements of financial condition. The contractual or notional amounts of those instruments reflect the extent of involvement we have in particular classes of financial instruments.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amount does not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by us upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty. Collateral is primarily obtained in the form of commercial and residential real estate (including income producing commercial properties).
Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee to a third-party the performance of a customer. Those guarantees are primarily issued to support public and private borrowing arrangements, bond financing and similar transactions. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loan facilities to customers.
Commitments to make loans are generally made for periods of 60 days or less. Excluding impaired loans charging default interest and Letters of Credit, fixed rate commercial loan commitments have interest rates ranging from 1.0% to 8.0% and maturities up to 2048, and variable rate loan commitments have interest rates ranging from 3.0% to 11.3% and maturities up to 2048. Our exposure to credit loss in the event of non-performance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit is represented by the contractual or notional amount of those instruments. We use the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as for funded instruments. We do not anticipate any material losses as a result of the commitments and standby letters of credit. See Note 15 of our consolidated financial statements, which are included on page 138 of this document for further information on commitments.
At December 31, 2020, we had commitments to extend credit totaling $455.5 million and standby letters of credit totaling $17.9 million.