Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) contains certain financial measures, in particular the presentation of Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted Book Value, which are not presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). We are presenting these non-GAAP financial measures because they provide greater transparency and enhanced visibility into the underlying drivers of our business. We do not intend for these non-GAAP financial measures to be a substitute for any GAAP financial measures and they may differ from similar reporting provided by other companies. Readers of this Form 10-K should use these non-GAAP financial measures only in conjunction with the comparable GAAP financial measures. Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted Book Value are non-GAAP financial measures that adjust for the impact of certain non-recurring or non-economic GAAP accounting requirements and include the addition of certain items that the Company has or expects to realize in the future, but that are not reported under GAAP. We provide reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP measures; Adjusted Earnings to Net income attributable to common stockholders and Adjusted Book Value to Total Ambac Financial Group, Inc. stockholders’ equity.
COMPANY OVERVIEW
See Part I, Item 1. "Description of the Business" and Note 1. Background and Business Description for a description of the Company and our key strategies to achieve our primary goal to maximize shareholder value.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
AFG
During 2020, Ambac made significant progress in the development of its specialty property and casualty program insurance and managing general agency/underwriting businesses:
Specialty Property & Casualty Program Insurance - AFG's activities included the following:
•Established Everspan Indemnity Insurance Company, which is eligible under the Non-admitted and Reinsurance Reform Act to write surplus lines in all states, subject to satisfying minimum capital requirements, which were met in first quarter 2021. Everspan Indemnity Insurance Company is seeking to be included on state eligibility lists in numerous states.
•Completed the re-domestication of Everspan Insurance Company from Wisconsin to Arizona. Additionally, Everspan Insurance Company recently converted its license in Arizona to write property and casualty insurance and is working on similarly converting its licenses in all other states. Everspan Insurance Company has been repositioned as a subsidiary of Everspan Indemnity Insurance Company, forming the Everspan Group.
•Neither company has yet issued any new policies. The Everspan Group platform received an A- Financial Strength
| Ambac Financial Group, Inc. 27 2020 FORM 10-K |
Rating from A.M. Best in February 2021 and is expected to launch new underwriting programs in 2021.
Managing General Agency/Underwriting - AFG purchased 80% of Xchange Benefits, LLC and Xchange Affinity Underwriting Agency, LLC (collectively, “Xchange”). Refer to Note 3. Business Combination for further information relating to this acquisition.
AFG Net Assets
As of December 31, 2020 net assets of AFG, excluding its equity investments in subsidiaries, were $366 million.
(1)Includes surplus notes (fair value of $59 million) issued by AAC that are eliminated in consolidation.
AAC and Subsidiaries
A key strategy for Ambac is to increase the value of its investment in AAC by actively managing its assets and liabilities. Asset management primarily entails maximizing the risk-adjusted return on non-VIE invested assets and managing liquidity to help ensure resources are available to meet operational and strategic cash needs. These strategic cash needs include activities associated with Ambac's liability management and loss mitigation programs.
Asset Management
Investment portfolios are subject to internal investment guidelines, as well as limits on types and quality of investments imposed by insurance laws and regulations. The investment portfolios of AAC and Ambac UK also hold fixed maturity securities and various pooled investment funds. Refer to Note 11. Investments to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 in this Form 10-K for further details of fixed maturity investments by asset category and pooled investment funds by investment type.
At December 31, 2020, Ambac and its subsidiaries owned $621 million of distressed Ambac-insured bonds, including significant concentrations of insured Puerto Rico and RMBS bonds, and excluding Ambac's holdings of secured notes issued by Ambac LSNI. Subject to internal and regulatory guidelines, market conditions and other constraints, Ambac may continue to opportunistically purchase or sell Ambac-insured securities.
Liability and Insured Exposure Management
AAC's Risk Management Group focuses on the implementation and execution of risk reduction, defeasance and loss recovery strategies. Analysts evaluate the estimated timing and severity of projected policy claims as well as the potential impact of loss mitigation or remediation strategies in order to target and prioritize policies, or portions thereof, for commutation, reinsurance, refinancing, restructuring or other risk reduction strategies. For targeted policies, analysts will engage with issuers, bondholders and other economic stakeholders to
negotiate, structure and execute such strategies. During 2020, successful risk reduction transactions included:
•A commutation in January 2020, via a refunding, of a watch list public finance transaction with net par outstanding of $171 million at December 31, 2019;
•A refinancing in February 2020 of an adversely classified asset-backed leasing transaction with net par outstanding of $86 million at December 31, 2019;
•Purchasing quota share reinsurance in June 2020 on a transportation revenue credit with net par outstanding of $33 million at December 31, 2019;
•A refinancing in August 2020 of an international stadium transaction with net par outstanding of $217 million at December 31, 2019;
•A refinancing in November 2020 of an international utility transaction with net par outstanding of $298 million at December 31, 2019; and
•Partial commutations of $32 million of adversely classified credits over the course of 2020.
AAC's RMG had additional successes in the first quarter of 2021 as follows:
•In January 2021, AAC completed the purchase of quota share reinsurance on a portfolio of public finance credits with net par outstanding of approximately $823 million at December 31, 2020. Par ceded included general obligation ($347 million), lease and tax-backed revenue ($234 million), higher education ($161 million) and transportation ($81 million) and included $160 million of watch list and adversely classified credits.
•In February 2021, AAC's exposure to an adversely classified stadium transaction was reduced by $540 million through the combination of a refinancing and quota share reinsurance.
The following table provides a comparison of total, adversely classified ("ACC") and watch list credit net par outstanding in the insured portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Net par exposure within the U.S. public finance market includes capital appreciation bonds which are reported at the par amount at the time of issuance of the insurance policy as opposed to the current accreted value of the bonds.
The decrease in total net par outstanding resulted from active de-risking initiatives, including the transactions noted above, as well as scheduled maturities, amortizations, refundings and calls. This overall decrease in total net par outstanding was partially offset by the weakening of the US Dollar compared to the British Pound and the Euro.
The increase in ACC exposures is primarily due to the addition of credits impacted by COVID-19 (including $982 million of net par outstanding from the Watch List category), such as hotel tax, stadium, convention center and public house insured
| Ambac Financial Group, Inc. 28 2020 FORM 10-K |
transactions, partially offset by active de-risking and issuer paydowns and calls.
The decrease in Watch List net par outstanding resulted from active de-risking initiatives (including the transactions noted above), downgrades to ACC due to COVID-19, and scheduled maturities, amortizations, refundings and calls.
In addition, as a result of the economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, $2,397 million of net par outstanding in sectors such as mass transit, toll roads, and private higher education, among others, have been added to the Survey List. The Survey List is a categorization for enhanced monitoring of currently performing credits.
We also continue to experience stress in our exposure to Puerto Rico that consists of several different issuing entities (all below investment grade). Each issuing entity has its own credit risk profile attributable to discreet revenue sources, direct general obligation pledges and general obligation guarantees. Refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Financial Guarantees in Force, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the different issuing entities that encompass Ambac's exposures to Puerto Rico.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19, caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus, was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the outbreak is widespread globally, including in the markets in which we operate. The COVID-19 outbreak had, and continues to have, a notable impact on general economic conditions, including but not limited to higher unemployment; volatility in the capital markets; closure or severe curtailment of the operations and, hence, revenues, of many businesses and public and private enterprises to which we are directly or indirectly exposed, such as hotels, restaurants, sports and entertainment facilities, airports and other transportation facilities, and retail establishments, mostly due to social distancing guidelines, travel bans and restrictions, and business restrictions and shutdowns.
In the U.S., significant monetary policy actions, fiscal stimulus measures and other relief measures have helped to moderate the economic impact of COVID-19. These measures include monetary policy decisions, such as quantitative easing, providing liquidity to financial institutions, providing liquidity to credit markets, the Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility and the Main Street Business Lending Program; Congressional actions, such as the $2.4 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act, the $483 billion Paycheck Protection Program And Health Care Enactment Act, the $190 billion Families First Coronavirus Response Act, and, most recently, the $920 billion 2021 Consolidated Appropriations Act, which, among other things, provides direct payments to households, support for small businesses, renter assistance and funding for transport, airlines, education and state and local governments. In addition, housing measures, such as forbearance on mortgages and suspension of foreclosures and evictions, and various executive orders have helped to provide relief. Outside of the US, and in the United Kingdom and Italy in particular, where Ambac has insured portfolio exposure,
various monetary policy, fiscal stimulus measures and other actions have helped to moderate the economic impact.
Nonetheless, the U.S. and many large global economies contracted on a full year basis in 2020. In the U.S., the trajectory and sustainability of the economic recovery experienced in the second half of 2020 is uncertain due to, among other things, the magnitude of job losses, uncertainty regarding further government support measures, the acceleration of new COVID-19 cases and the uncertainty related to the timing of a critical mass of COVID-19 vaccines being provided to the broader population. For the Ambac insured portfolio, credit risk remains elevated due to the historical and future economic and financial impact related to the COVID-19 crisis.
COVID-19 has also impacted Ambac's operating environment. Ambac has implemented a COVID-19 response plan designed to ensure the safety of our staff and business continuity. Our employees transitioned to working remotely in March 2020 while maintaining full operational capabilities. Since July 2020, Ambac opened certain of its offices to allow a portion of the workforce to safely return on a voluntary basis. We have not experienced and do not anticipate incurring material net incremental operating expenditures to maintain the current operating environment. Although many of Ambac's critical third-party service providers are operating with employees working remotely, we have not presently identified or experienced any limitations or operational constraints with respect to services provided. Ambac does not believe that our current operating environment has resulted in a significant change to our disclosure controls or internal controls over financial reporting.
COVID-19 has adversely impacted Ambac's financial position and results of operations as credit risk in the insured and investment portfolios has increased. In the insured portfolio, municipal, mortgage-backed, student loan and other asset securitization exposures could be materially adversely impacted, and as a result, with the exception of the mortgage-backed sector, we increased loss reserves across each of these and other sectors during the year ended December 31, 2020. In the mortgage-backed sector, significantly lower interest rates have increased excess spread levels and largely offset the impact of higher mortgage delinquencies and projected losses resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. We are continuously evaluating and updating our view of the macro economic environment as well as our specific credit view of each of our insured exposures considering the significant uncertainties brought upon us by the COVID-19 pandemic. The overall financial impact from COVID-19 has been and will be a function of (i) the willingness and ability of issuers of insured debt and other counterparties to pay their obligations when due; (ii) the impact of changes to interest rates on policy and derivative payments; and (iii) the performance of the investment portfolio.
•Ambac’s insurance policies will be drawn in the event that the issuers of insured obligations do not make payments on their obligations when due. As a result of the COVID-19 related economic impact on issuers and markets where Ambac provides financial guarantees; including lower tax, project, and business revenues and increases in forbearances or delinquencies on mortgage and student loan payments, we have increased our loss reserves and
| Ambac Financial Group, Inc. 29 2020 FORM 10-K |
may further increase them in the future depending on the duration and severity of the crisis. The crisis may also impair certain issuers' ability to pay premiums owed to Ambac; however, we believe such issuers currently have the ability to continue to pay such premiums timely, but this is subject to change.
•Ambac has exposure to reinsurance counterparties for their portions of future claim payments. Ambac has reinsured approximately 13.3% of its gross par outstanding to four reinsurance counterparties. Each of these reinsurance counterparties is experienced in the business of reinsuring and/or writing financial guaranty insurance. All have current ratings of A+ (by S&P) or better and have collateralization or replacement triggers upon downgrade. Ambac actively monitors each of these reinsurance entities and currently believes they have the ability to perform under their respective reinsurance policies, but this is subject to change.
•Ambac is exposed to the risk that contractual counterparties (including those under our RMBS litigations and derivative counterparties) may default in their financial obligations, whether as the result of insolvency, lack of liquidity, operational failure, fraud or other reasons. At present, Ambac has no concerns about the ability of our contractual counterparties, which include certain regulated exchanges in the case of interest rate swaps and futures, to perform under their contracts, but this is subject to change.
•Asset prices declined substantially during the first quarter, particularly in directly affected industries such as tourism, airlines, hospitality, commercial real estate and manufacturing. While Ambac does not have significant investments in these asset classes, we did experience a negative total return for the investment portfolio of approximately (4.4)% during the three month period ending March 31, 2020. We evaluated the investment portfolio at March 31, 2020, and in subsequent quarters, and have not recognized credit impairments. Over the last three quarters of 2020, we have repositioned the investment portfolio to manage credit risk while improving risk adjusted return, including redeploying capital into new asset categories. Ambac recognized a total return for the investment portfolio of approximately 4.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020
Given the economic uncertainties associated with the duration and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is impossible to fully predict all of its consequences and, as a result, it is possible that our future operating results and financial condition may be materially adversely affected. Refer to "Financial Guarantees In Force," "Results of Operations" and "Balance Sheet Commentary" for further financial details on the current impact from COVID-19.
With regard to Ambac's new business strategic objective, we continue to evaluate opportunities in a disciplined manner. Our evaluation process has been revised to incorporate consideration of the impact of COVID-19 on new business prospects as well as Ambac's existing business and operations.
Financial Statement Impact of Foreign Currency
The impact of foreign currency as reported in Ambac's Consolidated Statement of Total Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the following:
(1) A portion of Ambac UK's, and to a lesser extent AAC's, assets and liabilities are denominated in currencies other than its functional currency and accordingly, we recognized net foreign currency transaction gains/(losses) as a result of changes to foreign currency rates through our Consolidated Statement of Total Comprehensive Income (Loss). Refer to Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report in Form 10-K for further details on transaction gains and losses.
Future changes to currency rates, may adversely affect our financial results. Refer to Part II,