Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, or MD&A, is a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes. Our MD&A is provided to enhance the understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of our operations and is organized as follows:
Business Overview. This section provides a general description of our business and our operating segments, as well as other matters that we believe are important in understanding our results of operations and financial condition and in anticipating future trends.
Consolidated Results of Operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Our discussion is presented on both a consolidated and segment basis. Our two segments are: (i) National Networks and (ii) International and Other.
Liquidity and Capital Resources. This section provides a discussion of our financial condition as of December 31, 2020 as well as an analysis of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The discussion of our financial condition and liquidity includes summaries of (i) our primary sources of liquidity and (ii) our contractual obligations and off balance sheet arrangements that existed at December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section provides a discussion of our accounting policies considered to be important to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations, and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in their application.
Business Overview
We manage our business through the following two operating segments:
•National Networks: Includes activities of our five national programming networks, AMC Studios operations and AMC Broadcasting & Technology. Our national programming networks are AMC, WE tv, BBC AMERICA, IFC, and SundanceTV. Our AMC Studios operation produces original programming for our programming networks and also licenses such programming worldwide. AMC Networks Broadcasting & Technology is our technical services business, which primarily services most of the national programming networks.
•International and Other: Includes AMCNI, our international programming businesses consisting of a portfolio of channels around the world; AMC Networks Streaming Services consisting of our targeted subscription streaming services (Acorn TV, Shudder, Sundance Now, ALLBLK), AMC+ and other streaming initiatives; Levity, our production services and comedy venues business; and IFC Films, our film distribution business.
Financial Results Overview
The tables presented below set forth our consolidated revenues, net, operating income (loss) and adjusted operating income ("AOI"), defined below, for the periods indicated.
We evaluate segment performance based on several factors, of which the primary financial measure is operating segment AOI. We define AOI, which is a financial measure that is not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), as operating income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, cloud computing amortization, share-based compensation expense or benefit, impairment charges (including gains or losses on sales or dispositions of businesses), restructuring and other related charges and including the Company’s proportionate share of adjusted operating income (loss) from majority-owned equity method investees. From time to time, we may exclude the impact of certain events, gains, losses or other charges (such as significant legal settlements) from AOI that affect our operating performance.
We believe that AOI is an appropriate measure for evaluating the operating performance on both an operating segment and consolidated basis. AOI and similar measures with similar titles are common performance measures used by investors, analysts and peers to compare performance in the industry.
Internally, we use revenues, net and AOI measures as the most important indicators of our business performance, and evaluate management's effectiveness with specific reference to these indicators. AOI should be viewed as a supplement to and not a substitute for operating income (loss), net income (loss), cash flows from operating activities and other measures of performance and/or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. Since AOI is not a measure of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP, this measure may not be comparable to similar measures with similar titles used by other companies.
The following is a reconciliation of consolidated operating income to AOI for the periods indicated:
Items Impacting Comparability
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") a pandemic, and the President of the United States declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency. The rapid spread of the pandemic and the continuously evolving responses to combat it have had a negative impact on the global economy.
The impact of COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread have affected our businesses in a number of ways. Beginning in mid-March, we experienced adverse advertising sales impacts, suspended content production, which led to delays in the creation and availability of substantially all of our programming, and the temporary closure of our comedy venues. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company commenced production activities, however substantially all Company employees continue to work remotely, and the Company continues to restrict business travel. If significant portions of our workforce, including key personnel, are unable to work effectively because of illness, government actions or other restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact of the pandemic on our businesses could be exacerbated.
The Company has evaluated and continues to evaluate the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its consolidated financial statements, including the impairment of goodwill (see Note 9) and indefinite-lived intangible assets and the fair value and collectability of receivables. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a material impact on the Company's operations since mid-March 2020. The Company cannot reasonably predict the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the extent of any adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition, which will depend on, among other things, the duration and spread of the pandemic, the impact of governmental regulations that have been, and may continue to be, imposed in response to the pandemic, the effectiveness of actions taken to contain or mitigate the outbreak, the availability, safety and efficacy of a vaccine, and global economic conditions. The Company does not expect the COVID-19 pandemic and its related economic impact to affect its liquidity position or its ongoing ability to meet the covenants in its debt instruments.
RLJE
In October 2018, we acquired a controlling interest in RLJE, a premium digital channel company that operates the subscription streaming services Acorn TV and UMC or Urban Movie Channel (rebranded to ALLBLK). The operating results of RLJE are included in our International and Other segment in the consolidated statement of income from the date of the acquisition.
Levity
In April 2018, we acquired a controlling interest in Levity, an entertainment company that owns and operates comedy venues as well as produces content for distribution. The operating results of Levity are included in our International and Other segment in the consolidated statement of income from the date of the acquisition.
National Networks
In our National Networks segment, we earn revenue principally from the distribution of our programming and the sale of advertising. Distribution revenue primarily includes subscription fees paid by distributors to carry our programming networks and content licensing revenue from the licensing of original programming for digital, foreign and home video distribution. Subscription fees paid by distributors represent the largest component of distribution revenue. Our subscription fee revenues are based on a per subscriber fee, and, to a lesser extent, fixed fees under multi-year contracts, commonly referred to as "affiliation agreements," which generally provide for annual rate increases. The specific subscription fee revenues we earn vary from
period to period, distributor to distributor and also vary among our networks, but are generally based upon the number of each distributor's subscribers who receive our programming, referred to as viewing subscribers. Content licensing revenue from the licensing of original programming for digital and foreign distribution is recognized upon availability or distribution by the licensee.
Under affiliation agreements with our distributors, we have the right to sell a specified amount of national advertising time on our programming networks. Our advertising revenues are more variable than subscription fee revenues because the majority of our advertising is sold on a short-term basis, not under long-term contracts. Our arrangements with advertisers provide for a set number of advertising units to air over a specific period of time at a negotiated price per unit. Additionally, in these advertising sales arrangements, our programming networks generally guarantee specified viewer ratings for their programming. If these guaranteed viewer ratings are not met, we are generally required to provide additional advertising units to the advertiser at no charge. For these types of arrangements, a portion of the related revenue is deferred if the guaranteed ratings are not met and is subsequently recognized either when we provide the required additional advertising time or the guarantee obligation contractually expires. Most of our advertising revenues vary based upon the popularity of our programming as measured by Nielsen. Our national programming networks have advertisers representing companies in a broad range of sectors, including the automotive, restaurants/food, health, and telecommunications industries.
Changes in revenue are primarily derived from changes in the contractual subscription rates charged for our services; the number of subscribers; the prices and number of advertising spots on our networks; and the availability, amount and timing of licensing fees earned from the distribution of our original programming. Our revenues may increase over time through contractual rate increases stipulated in our affiliation agreements. In negotiating for additional subscribers or extended carriage, we have agreed, in some instances, to make upfront payments to a distributor which we record as deferred carriage fees and are amortized as a reduction to revenue over the period of the related affiliation agreement. We also may help fund the distributors' efforts to market our networks. We believe that these transactions generate a positive return on investment over the contract period. We seek to increase our advertising revenues by increasing the rates we charge for such advertising, which is directly related to the overall distribution of our programming, penetration of our services on various digital platforms such as Advertising Video-on-Demand ("AVOD") services and the popularity (including within desirable demographic groups) of our services as measured by Nielsen.
Our principal goal is to increase our revenues by increasing distribution and penetration of our services, and increasing our ratings. To do this, we must continue to contract for and produce high-quality, attractive programming. As competition for programming increases and alternative distribution technologies continue to emerge and develop in the industry, costs for content acquisition and original programming may increase. There is a concentration of subscribers in the hands of a few distributors, which could create disparate bargaining power between the largest distributors and us by giving those distributors greater leverage in negotiating the price and other terms of affiliation agreements. We also seek to increase our content licensing revenues by expanding the opportunities for licensing our programming through digital distribution platforms, foreign distribution and home video services. Content licensing revenues in each quarter may vary based on the timing of availability of our programming to distributors.
Programming expense, included in technical and operating expense, represents the largest expense of the National Networks segment and primarily consists of amortization and write-offs of programming rights, such as those for original programming, feature films and licensed series, as well as participation and residual costs. The other components of technical and operating expense primarily include distribution and production related costs and program operating costs including cost of delivery, such as origination, transmission, uplinking and encryption.
To an increasing extent, the success of our business depends on original programming, both scripted and unscripted, across all of our networks. In recent years, we have introduced a number of scripted original series. These series generally result in higher ratings for our networks. Among other things, higher audience ratings drive increased revenues through higher advertising revenues. The timing of exhibition and distribution of original programming varies from period to period, which results in greater variability in our revenues, earnings and cash flows from operating activities. We will continue to increase our investment in programming across all of our networks. There may be significant changes in the level of our technical and operating expenses due to the amortization of content acquisition and/or original programming costs and/or the impact of management's periodic assessment of programming usefulness. Such costs will also fluctuate with the level of revenues derived from owned original programming in each period as these costs are amortized based on the individual-film-forecast-computation method.
Most original series require us to make up-front investments, which are often significant amounts. Not all of our programming efforts are commercially successful, which could result in a write-off of program rights. If it is determined that programming rights have limited, or no, future programming usefulness based on actual demand or market conditions, a write-off of the unamortized cost is recorded in technical and operating expense. Program rights write-offs of $85.5 million, $37.9 million and $48.8 million were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively (see further discussion below).
See "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates" for a discussion of the amortization and write-off of program rights.
International and Other
Our International and Other segment includes the operations of AMCNI, AMC Networks Streaming Services, IFC Films and Levity.
In our International and Other segment, we earn revenue principally from the international distribution of programming and, to a lesser extent, the sale of advertising from our AMCNI programming networks. We also earn revenue from; (i) production services from Levity, (ii) our subscription streaming services Acorn TV, Shudder, Sundance Now, ALLBLK (previously known as Urban Movie Channel), and AMC+ from our AMC Networks Streaming Services business, (iii) the distribution of content of IFC Films and RLJE, and (iv) Levity's operation of comedy venues (all of which are temporarily closed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic). For the year ended December 31, 2020, distribution revenues represented 90% of the revenues of the International and Other segment. Distribution revenue primarily includes subscription fees paid by distributors or consumers to carry our programming networks or subscription-based streaming services and production services revenue generated from Levity. Our subscription revenues are generally based on either a per-subscriber fee or a fixed contractual annual fee, under multi-year affiliation agreements, which may provide for annual rate increases, and a monthly fee paid by consumers for our subscription-based streaming services. Our production services revenues are based on master production agreements whereby a third-party engages us to produce content on its behalf. Production services revenues are recognized based on the percentage of cost incurred to total estimated cost of the contract. Distribution revenues are derived from the distribution of our programming networks primarily in Europe and to a lesser extent, Latin America as well as from our owned subscription streaming services available in the United States, Canada, Latin America, parts of Europe, India, Australia and New Zealand.
Programming expense, program operating costs and production costs incurred to produce content for third parties are included in technical and operating expense, and represent the largest expense of the International and Other segment. Programming expense primarily consists of amortization of acquired content, costs of dubbing and sub-titling of programs, production costs, participation and residual costs. Program operating costs include costs such as origination, transmission, uplinking and encryption of our linear AMCNI channels as well as content hosting and delivery costs at our various on-line content distribution initiatives. Not all of our programming efforts are commercially successful, which could result in a write-off of program rights. If it is determined that programming rights have limited, or no, future programming usefulness based on actual demand or market conditions, a write-off of the unamortized cost is recorded in technical and operating expense.
Similar to our National Networks businesses, the most significant business challenges we expect to encounter in our International and Other businesses include programming competition (from both foreign and domestic programmers), limited channel capacity on distributors' platforms, the number of subscribers on those platforms and economic pressures on subscription fees. Other significant business challenges unique to our international operations include increased programming costs for international rights and translation (i.e. dubbing and subtitling), a lack of availability of international rights for a portion of our domestic programming content, increased distribution costs for cable, satellite or fiber feeds, a limited physical presence in certain territories, and our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk. See also the risk factors described under Item 1A, "Risk Factors - We face risks from doing business internationally." in this Annual Report.
Corporate Expenses
We allocate corporate overhead within operating expenses to each segment based upon its proportionate estimated usage of services. The segment financial information set forth below, including the discussion related to individual line items, does not reflect inter-segment eliminations unless specifically indicated.
Impact of Economic Conditions
Our future performance is dependent, to a large extent, on general economic conditions including the impact of direct competition, our ability to manage our businesses effectively, and our relative strength and leverage in the marketplace, both with suppliers and customers.
Capital and credit market disruptions, as well as other events such as the COVID-19 pandemic, could cause economic downturns, which may lead to lower demand for our products, such as lower demand for television advertising and a decrease in the number of subscribers receiving our programming networks from our distributors. Events such as these may adversely impact our results of operations, cash flows and financial position.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The amounts presented and discussed below represent 100% of each operating segment's revenues, net and expenses. Where we have management control of an entity, we consolidate 100% of such entity in our consolidated statements of operations notwithstanding that a third-party owns a significant interest in such entity. The noncontrolling owner's interest in the operating results of consolidated subsidiaries are reflected in net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests in our consolidated statements of operations.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated.
National Networks Segment Results
The following table sets forth our National Networks segment results for the periods indicated.
International and Other Segment Results
The following table sets forth our International and Other segment results for the periods indicated.
Revenues, net
Revenues, net decreased $245.4 million to $2.8 billion for 2020 as compared to 2019. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks
The decrease in National Networks revenues, net was attributable to the following:
•Advertising revenues decreased $101.9 million, primarily attributable to lower ratings and a reduction in the number of episodes of our original programming primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Most of our advertising revenues vary based on the timing of our original programming series and the popularity of our programming as measured by Nielsen. Due to these factors, we expect advertising revenues to vary from quarter to quarter.
•Distribution revenues decreased $171.0 million due to a decrease in content licensing revenues of $92.9 and a decrease in subscription revenues of $78.1 million, as compared to the prior comparable period. Content licensing revenues decreased due to a reduction in the number of original programs we distributed related to production delays. Subscription revenues decreased primarily due to lower subscribers. Subscription revenues may vary based on the impact of renewals of affiliation agreements and content licensing revenues vary based on the timing of availability of our programming to distributors. Because of these factors, we expect distribution revenues to vary from quarter to quarter.
The following table presents certain subscriber information at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
________________
(1)Estimated U.S. subscribers as measured by Nielsen.
International and Other
The increase in International and Other revenues, net was attributable to the following:
Advertising revenues decreased $14.9 million at AMCNI, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, primarily related to pricing and lower demand resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Distribution revenues increased $81.4 million at AMC Networks Streaming Services due to an increase in subscribers. This increase was partially offset by a decrease of $47.7 million at Levity, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its operations, which resulted in the temporary closure of its comedy venues, as well as a decrease of $11.7 million at AMCNI, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Distribution revenues, included in the International and Other segment, include revenues related to AMC Networks Streaming Services of approximately $176.7 million and $95.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Technical and operating expense (excluding depreciation and amortization)
The components of technical and operating expense primarily include the amortization and write-offs of program rights, such as those for original programming, feature films and licensed series, participation and residual costs, distribution and production related costs and program delivery costs, such as transmission, encryption, hosting, and formatting.
Technical and operating expense (excluding depreciation and amortization) decreased $105.4 million to $1.4 billion for 2020 as compared to 2019. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks
The decrease in technical and operating expense of $108.8 million was due to a decrease in program amortization of $83.7 million primarily attributable to a decrease in the amount of original programming as compared to the prior comparable period, which was impacted by the production delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, other direct programming costs decreased $25.7 million. Program rights amortization expense includes write-offs of $85.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to program rights write-offs of $37.9 million for year ended December 31, 2019. Programming write-offs are based on management's periodic assessment of programming usefulness.
There may be significant changes in the level of our technical and operating expenses due to content acquisition and/or original programming costs and/or the impact of management's periodic assessment of programming usefulness. Such costs will also fluctuate with the level of revenues derived from owned original programming in each period as these costs are amortized based on the film-forecast-computation method. As additional competition for programming increases and alternate distribution technologies continue to develop in the industry, costs for content acquisition and original programming may increase.
International and Other
The increase in technical and operating expense of $7.7 million was due to an increase of $31.1 million at AMC Networks Streaming Services primarily related to program amortization and $7.0 million of program write-offs from our RLJ Films distribution business, which was partially offset by decreases of $21.9 million related to Levity and $9.7 million at AMCNI. The decrease at Levity is due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its operations, which resulted in production stoppages and temporary closure of comedy venues.
Selling, general and administrative expense
The components of selling, general and administrative expense primarily include sales, marketing and advertising expenses, administrative costs and costs of non-production facilities.
Selling, general and administrative expense increased $29.4 million to $708.8 million, for 2020 as compared to 2019. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks
The decrease in the National Networks segment selling, general and administrative expense was principally due to a decrease in advertising and marketing expenses of $13.5 million related to the mix of original programming, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, general and administrative costs were lower across substantially all expense categories.
There may be significant changes in the level of our selling, general and administrative expense from quarter to quarter and year to year due to the timing of promotion and marketing of original programming series.
International and Other
The increase in the International and Other segment selling, general and administrative expense primarily related to $90.6 million at AMC Networks Streaming Services primarily related to advertising and subscriber acquisition expenses, which was partially offset by decreases of $17.9 million at Levity primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and $4.7 million at AMCNI, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations. Foreign currency translation had a favorable impact to the change in selling, general and administrative expense of $1.6 million.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $3.5 million to $104.6 million for 2020 as compared to 2019. The net change by segment was as follows:
The increase in depreciation and amortization expense in the National Networks segment was primarily due to depreciation of equipment at our AMC Networks Broadcasting and Technology facilities. The decrease in depreciation and amortization expense in the International and Other segment was primarily due to the lower carrying values of long-lived assets resulting from the impairment charge recognized in June 2020.
Impairment charges
During 2020, as a result of the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we qualitatively assessed whether it was more likely than not that goodwill and long-lived assets were impaired. Based on our current projections and updated forecasts, we determined that sufficient indicators of potential impairment of long-lived assets existed and, in connection with the preparation of the Company's second quarter financial information, the Company performed a recoverability test of certain long-lived asset groups within the AMCNI reporting unit. This resulted in an impairment charge of $97.1 million primarily related to certain identifiable intangible assets, as well as property and equipment, and operating lease right-of-use assets. The Company then performed a goodwill impairment test and determined that the carrying value of the AMCNI reporting unit exceeded its fair value, resulting in an impairment charge of $25.1 million.
In December 2019, in connection with the preparation of our fourth quarter financial information, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test and concluded that the estimated fair value of our AMCNI reporting unit declined to less than its carrying amount. The decrease in the estimated fair value was in response to current and expected trends across the
International television broadcasting markets, as well as a decrease in the financial multiples used to estimate the fair value using the market approach. As a result, we recognized an impairment charge of $98.0 million in 2019, reflecting a partial write-down of the goodwill associated with the AMCNI reporting unit. Additionally, during 2019, in connection with the dispositions of certain businesses, AMCNI recognized impairment charges of $8.6 million.
Restructuring and other related charges
In November 2020, management commenced a restructuring plan (the “2020 Plan”) designed to streamline the Company’s operations through a reduction of its domestic workforce. The 2020 Plan is intended to improve the organizational design of the Company through the elimination of certain roles and centralization of certain functional areas of the Company. In connection with the 2020 Plan, the Company incurred severance costs of $21.2 million. Additionally during 2020, the Company incurred restructuring charges of $6.2 million at AMCNI related to costs associated with the termination of distribution in certain territories and restructuring charges of $7.7 million related to prior restructuring activities in domestic operations.
Restructuring and other related charges of $40.9 million for the year ended December 2019 primarily related to the management re-organization commenced in September 2019. In connection with this re-organization, a number of roles were eliminated to improve the effectiveness of management while reducing the cost structure of the Company. As a result, we incurred restructuring charges of $26.0 million. In addition, charges associated with the AMC Networks Streaming Services re-organization consisted of severance and other personnel related costs of $1.9 million and programming write-offs of $13.0 million related to a change in programming strategy.
Operating Income (Loss)
The decrease in operating income at the National Networks segment was primarily attributable to a decrease in revenues of $272.9 million, an increase in restructuring charges of $7.1 million and an increase in depreciation and amortization of $7.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in technical and operating expense of $108.8 million and a decrease in selling, general and administrative expense of $31.0 million.
The increase in operating loss at the International and Other segment, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, was primarily attributable to an increase in technical and operating expense of $8.5 million, an increase in selling, general and administrative expense of $62.6 million and an increase in impairment charges of $10.7 million, partially offset by an increase in revenues of $12.9 million, a decrease in restructuring charges of $13.3 million and a decrease in depreciation and amortization of $4.3 million. Foreign currency translation had an unfavorable impact to the change in operating loss of $2.8 million.
AOI
The following is a reconciliation of our consolidated operating income to consolidated AOI:
AOI decreased $177.4 million to $766.6 million for 2020 as compared to 2019. The net change by segment was as follows:
The decrease in AOI at the National Networks segment is principally due to the decrease in operating income. The decrease in AOI at the International and Other segment is principally due to the increase in operating loss.
Interest expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net of $24.5 million is primarily due to lower interest rates on our credit facility and lower average outstanding long-term debt balances.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
In March 2020, we redeemed $200 million principal amount of the then-outstanding $600 million principal amount of our 4.75% Notes due 2022. The loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $2.9 million represents the redemption premium, the write-off of a portion of the unamortized discount and deferred financing costs.
Miscellaneous, net
The increase in miscellaneous, net of $77.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily related to an increase in net realized and unrealized gains of $92.0 million from certain marketable equity securities, partially offset by an unfavorable variance of $15.0 million in the foreign currency remeasurement of monetary assets and liabilities (principally intercompany loans) that are denominated in currencies other than the underlying functional currency of the applicable entity.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $145.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an effective tax rate of 36%. The effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% due primarily to tax expense of $41.7 million for an increase in valuation allowances for foreign deferred tax assets; state and local income tax expense of $14.7 million, tax expense of $8.4 million for excess tax deficiencies related to share-based compensation and tax expense from foreign operations of $6.8 million partially offset by tax benefit of $5.3 million relating to uncertain tax positions (including accrued interest).
Income tax expense was $78.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an effective tax rate of 16%. The effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% due primarily to tax benefit of $21.0 million resulting from a net decrease in valuation allowances for foreign deferred tax assets, tax benefit of $11.5 million from a deferred tax adjustment to record the impact of an investment tax credit under the deferral method of accounting, partially offset by state and local income tax expense of $12.2 million and $9.0 of tax expense from foreign operations.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated.
National Networks Segment Results
The following table sets forth our National Networks segment results for the periods indicated.
International and Other Segment Results
The following table sets forth our International and Other segment results for the periods indicated.
Revenues, net
Revenues, net increased $88.4 million to $3.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks
The decrease in National Networks revenues, net was attributable to the following:
•Advertising revenues decreased $40.4 million driven by a decrease of $65.0 million at AMC due to lower ratings, partially mitigated by increased pricing. The decrease at AMC was partially offset by increases at our other networks. Most of our advertising revenues vary based on the timing of our original programming series and the popularity of our programming as measured by Nielsen. Due to these factors, we expect advertising revenues to vary from quarter to quarter.
•Distribution revenues decreased $3.9 million due to a decrease in subscription revenues of $17.5 million primarily due to lower subscribers and the impact of an interpretation of a contractual provision in an affiliate agreement, partially offset by increased pricing. Content licensing revenues increased $13.6 million, primarily at AMC, due to an increase in the number of original programs we distributed. Distribution revenues may vary based on the impact of renewals of affiliation agreements and content licensing revenues vary based on the timing of availability of our programming to distributors. Because of these factors, we expect distribution revenues to vary from quarter to quarter.
The following table presents certain subscriber information at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018:
________________
(1)Estimated U.S. subscribers as measured by Nielsen.
International and Other
The increase in International and Other revenues, net was attributable to the following:
The decrease of $1.7 million in advertising revenues was principally due to the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $5.1 million. Distribution revenues increased $147.5 million due to the impact of the Levity and RLJE acquisitions. In addition, distribution revenues increased $22.9 million from our Shudder and Sundance Now targeted streaming services. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in revenues at AMCNI of $16.4 million, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, primarily due to the termination of distribution in certain territories. Foreign currency translation had an unfavorable impact to distribution revenues of $15.2 million.
Technical and operating expense (excluding depreciation and amortization)
The components of technical and operating expense primarily include the amortization and write-offs of program rights, such as those for original programming, feature films and licensed series, participation and residual costs, distribution and production related costs and program delivery costs, such as transmission, encryption, hosting, and formatting.
Technical and operating expense (excluding depreciation and amortization) increased $61.0 million to $1.5 billion for 2019 as compared to 2018. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks
The decrease in technical and operating expense was due to a decrease of $30.1 million in other direct programming expense attributable to reduced personnel and the timing of production related costs. The decrease in other direct programming expense was partially offset by a net increase in program rights amortization of $26.1 million, consisting of an increase in program amortization of $47.4 million primarily attributable to the mix of original programming as compared to the prior year, partially offset by a reduction of $21.3 million attributable to the utilization of certain investment tax credits. In addition, program rights amortization includes write-offs of $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to program rights write-offs of $48.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Programming write-offs are based on management's periodic assessment of programming usefulness.
There may be significant changes in the level of our technical and operating expenses due to content acquisition and/or original programming costs and/or the impact of management's periodic assessment of programming usefulness. Such costs will also fluctuate with the level of amortization recorded from owned original programming in each period based on the individual-film-forecast-computation method. As additional competition for programming increases and alternative distribution technologies continue to develop, costs for content acquisition and original programming may increase.
International and Other
The increase in the International and Other segment was primarily due to an $89.7 million impact from the Levity and RLJE acquisitions. In addition, technical and operating expense increased $13.3 million at our targeted streaming services (Shudder and Sundance Now) due to the continued investment in programming. Technical and operating expense decreased $19.6 million at AMCNI, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, due primarily to reduced programming amortization resulting from termination of distribution in certain territories. Foreign currency translation had a favorable impact to the change in technical and operating expense of $12.8 million.
Selling, general and administrative expense
The components of selling, general and administrative expense primarily include sales, marketing and advertising expenses, administrative costs and costs of non-production facilities.
Selling, general and administrative expense increased $22.0 million to $679.4 million for 2019 as compared to 2018. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks
The decrease in the National Networks segment selling, general and administrative expense was principally due to a $16.7 million decrease in advertising and marketing costs related to the timing of promotion and marketing of original programming.
There may be significant changes in the level of our selling, general and administrative expense from quarter to quarter and year to year due to the timing of promotion and marketing of original programming series and subscriber retention marketing efforts.
International and Other
The increase in the International and Other segment was primarily due to a $50.7 million impact from the acquisitions of Levity and RLJE, partially offset by a decrease of $8.7 million at AMCNI, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations. Foreign currency translation had a favorable impact to the change in selling, general and administrative expense of $6.7 million.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $9.8 million to $101.1 million for 2019 as compared to 2018. The net change by segment was as follows:
The increase in depreciation and amortization expense in the International and Other segment was primarily due to a $6.4 million impact from the acquisitions of Levity and RLJE as well as an increase in depreciation expense of $6.2 million related to corporate leasehold additions.
Impairment charges
In December 2019, in connection with the preparation of our fourth quarter financial information, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test and concluded that the estimated fair value of our AMCNI reporting unit declined to less than its carrying amount. The decrease in the estimated fair value was in response to current and expected trends across the International television broadcasting markets, as well as a decrease in the financial multiples used to estimate the fair value using the market approach. As a result, we recognized an impairment charge of $98.0 million in 2019, reflecting a partial write-down of the goodwill associated with the AMCNI reporting unit.
During 2019 and 2018, in connection with the dispositions of certain businesses, AMCNI recognized impairment charges of $8.6 million and $4.5 million, respectively.
Restructuring and other related charges
Restructuring and other related charges of $40.9 million and $45.8 million for the years ended December 2019 and 2018, respectively, primarily related to the management re-organizations which resulted in the elimination of a number of roles to improve the effectiveness of management while reducing the cost structure of the Company. As a result, we incurred restructuring charges of $26.0 million and $35.9 million for the years ended December 2019 and 2018, respectively. During 2019, we also incurred restructuring charges associated with the AMC Networks Streaming Services re-organization which consisted of severance and other personnel related costs of $1.9 million and programming write-offs of $13.0 million related to a change in programming strategy. During 2018, we also incurred restructuring charges of $9.9 million associated with the termination of distribution in certain territories at AMCNI.
Operating Income
The decrease in operating income at the National Networks segment was primarily attributable to a decrease in revenues of $44.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in technical and operating expense of $4.0 million, a decrease in selling, general and administrative expense of $14.2 million, and a decrease in restructuring expense of $3.7 million
The increase in operating loss at the International and Other segment was primarily attributable to a net increase of $95.0 million in the combined impairment charges and restructuring and other related charges, partially offset by an increase in operating income at AMCNI.
AOI
The following is a reconciliation of our consolidated operating income to consolidated AOI:
AOI increased $11.4 million to $944.0 million for 2019 as compared to 2018. The net change by segment was as follows:
National Networks AOI decreased due to the aforementioned explanation for the decrease in operating income.
International and Other AOI increased primarily due to an increase of $14.5 million at AMCNI, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, and an increase of $15.6 million related to the impact of the acquisitions of Levity and RLJE (including the impact of AOI related to majority-owned equity method investees).
Interest expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net of $2.7 million is driven by an increase in interest income of $5.5 million, partially offset by an increase in interest expense of $2.8 million due to a higher variable interest rate on our term loan.
Miscellaneous, net
The increase in miscellaneous expense, net of $35.2 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 was primarily driven by the absence of $50.4 million of gains associated with the increase in fair value of our investment in RLJE recognized prior to the acquisition during 2018, partially offset by an $17.8 million favorable variance in foreign currency transactions gains and losses. In addition, miscellaneous expense, net decreased $6.3 million associated with increased earnings from equity method investees, partially offset by an increase related to the partial write-down of certain of our non-marketable equity securities and a note receivable.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $78.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an effective tax rate of 16%. The effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% due primarily to tax benefit of $21.0 million resulting from a net decrease in valuation allowances for foreign deferred tax assets, tax benefit of $11.5 million from a deferred tax adjustment to record the impact of an investment tax credit under the deferral method of accounting, partially offset by state and local income tax expense of $12.2 million and $9.0 of tax expense from foreign operations.
Income tax expense was $156.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, representing an effective tax rate of 25%. The effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% due primarily to tax expense of $16.4 million for an increase in valuation allowances for foreign deferred tax assets; state and local income tax expense of $11.5 million and a tax benefit of $12.8 million for the one-time rate change on deferred tax assets and liabilities that resulted from the extension of certain television production cost deductions included in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (enacted February 9, 2018) and return to provision adjustments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our operations have historically generated positive net cash flow from operating activities. However, each of our programming businesses has substantial programming acquisition and production expenditure requirements.
Sources of cash primarily include cash flow from operations, amounts available under our revolving credit facility and access to capital markets. Although we currently believe that amounts available under our revolving credit facility will be available when and if needed, we can provide no assurance that access to such funds will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets. The obligations of the financial institutions under our revolving credit facility are several and not joint and, as a result, a funding default by one or more institutions does not need to be made up by the others. As a public company, we may have access to capital and credit markets.
On February 8, 2021, the Company issued $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 4.25% senior notes due 2029 (the “4.25% Notes due 2029”) and received net proceeds of $982.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and expenses. The Company used such proceeds to redeem (i) the remaining $400 million principal amount of the Company’s 4.75% senior notes due 2022 and (ii) $600 million principal amount of the Company’s 5.00% senior notes due 2024 on February 26, 2021 (the "Redemption Date"). The 4.75% senior notes due 2022 were redeemed at a redemption price of 100.000% of the principal amount of such notes and the 5.00% senior notes due 2024 were redeemed at a redemption price of 102.500% of the principal amount of such notes, in each case, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the Redemption Date.
On February 8, 2021, the Company entered into Amendment No. 1 (“Amendment No. 1”) to its existing credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement"). Amendment No. 1 extends the maturity dates of the $675 million term loan A facility and $500 million revolving credit facility under the Credit Agreement to February 8, 2026, and makes certain other amendments to the covenants and other provisions of the Credit Agreement.
Our Board of Directors has authorized a program to repurchase up to $1.5 billion of its outstanding shares of common stock (the "Stock Repurchase Program"). The Stock Repurchase Program has no pre-established closing date and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 14.8 million shares of its Class A common stock at an average purchase price of $23.91 per share (inclusive of the results of the modified "Dutch auction" tender offer discussed below). As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $135.3 million available for repurchase under the Stock Repurchase Program.
On September 16, 2020, we commenced a modified "Dutch auction" tender offer (the "Tender Offer") to purchase up to $250 million in value of shares of our Class A Common Stock, plus up to an additional 2% of the outstanding shares of Class A Common Stock, at a price not greater than $26.50 nor less than $22.50 per share. The Tender Offer expired on October 14, 2020. On October 21, 2020, we accepted for purchase 10.8 million shares of its Class A Common Stock, at a price of $23.20 per share, for an aggregate cost of $250.6 million. The cost of these shares, and the fees relating to the Tender Offer, are classified in Treasury stock in the consolidated balance sheet.
Our principal uses of cash include the acquisition and production of programming, investments and acquisitions, repurchases of outstanding debt and common stock, debt service, and payments for income taxes. Although impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to increase our investment in original programming, the funding of which generally occurs six to nine months in advance of a program's airing. In March 2020, we redeemed $200 million principal amount of the then-outstanding $600 million principal amount of our 4.75% Notes due 2022.
As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated cash and cash equivalents balance includes approximately $221.5 million held by foreign subsidiaries. Most or all of the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries will continue to be permanently reinvested in foreign operations and we do not expect to incur any significant, additional taxes related to such amounts, nor have any been provided for in the current period.
We believe that a combination of cash-on-hand, cash generated from operating activities and availability under our revolving credit facility will provide sufficient liquidity to service the principal and interest payments on our indebtedness, along with our other funding and investment requirements over the next twelve months and over the longer term. However, we do not expect to generate sufficient cash from operations to repay at maturity the entirety of the then outstanding balances of our debt. As a result, we will then be dependent upon our ability to access the capital and credit markets in order to repay or refinance the outstanding balances of our indebtedness. Failure to raise significant amounts of funding to repay these obligations at maturity would adversely affect our business. In such a circumstance, we would need to take other actions including selling assets, seeking strategic investments from third parties or reducing other discretionary uses of cash. See Item 1A, "Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Debt" in this Annual Report.
Cash Flow Discussion
The following table is a summary of cash flows provided by (used in) operations for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities amounted to $748.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $483.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities resulted primarily from $1.5 billion of net income before amortization of program rights, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation and other non-cash items, a decrease in accounts receivable, trade of $63.3 million due to the timing of cash receipts, an decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $64.1 million, and an increase in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other liabilities of $16.0 million. Partially offsetting these increases were payments for program rights of $850.0 million. Changes in all other assets and liabilities during the year resulted in an increase in cash of $5.1 million.
In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities amounted to $483.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $606.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities resulted from $1.7 billion of net income before amortization of program rights, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation and other non-cash items, which was partially offset by payments for program rights of $969.9 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $142.3 million primarily related to an increase in production tax credits and taxes receivable, an increase in accounts receivable, trade of $43.3 million due to the timing of cash receipts, and a decrease in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other liabilities of $28.4 million primarily as a result of lower employee related liabilities. Changes in all other assets and liabilities during the year resulted in a decrease in cash of $5.1 million.
In 2018, net cash provided by operating activities resulted from $1.6 billion of net income before amortization of program rights, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation and other non-cash items, which was partially offset by payments for program rights of $978.8 million. Additionally, income taxes payable decreased $17.0 million and accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities increased $48.9 million primarily due to higher accruals for participation and
residuals, partially offset by lower employee related liabilities at December 31, 2018 as compared to the prior year. Accounts receivable, trade, increased $52.1 million at December 31, 2018 as compared to the prior year primarily driven by higher distribution revenues as well as timing of cash receipts. Changes in all other assets and liabilities during the year resulted in a decrease in cash of $13.4 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $35.2 million, $89.7 million and $260.2 million, respectively. In 2020, net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to capital expenditures of $46.6 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sales of investments of $10.0 million.
In 2019, net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to capital expenditures of $91.6 million, primarily related to leasehold improvements, and the purchase of investments of $3.5 million, partially offset by a return of capital from investees of $5.4 million.
In 2018, net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to capital expenditures of $89.8 million, primarily related to modernization and improvements of facilities and equipment, payments for acquisitions, net of cash acquired of $84.4 million related to Levity and RLJE, and the purchase of several minority investments, including loans to investees, of $90.1 million, partially offset by a return of capital from investees.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities amounted to $648.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $131.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $314.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. In 2020, financing activities primarily consisted of purchases of Class A Common Stock of $356.7 million under our Stock Repurchase Program, principal payments on long-term debt of $262.3 million, taxes paid in lieu of shares issued for equity-based compensation of $16.0 million, and distributions to noncontrolling members of $15.8 million.
In 2019, financing activities primarily consisted of purchases of Class A Common Stock of $70.6 million under our Stock Repurchase Program, principal payments on long-term debt of $23.0 million, taxes paid in lieu of shares issued for equity-based compensation of $23.0 million, and distributions to noncontrolling members of $15.6 million.
In 2018, financing activities primarily consisted of purchases of Class A Common Stock of $283.1 million under our Stock Repurchase Program, distributions to noncontrolling members of $14.3 million, and taxes paid in lieu of shares issued for equity-based compensation of $16.8 million.
Debt Financing Agreements
The Company's principal amount of long-term debt consists of:
(a) The Company's $500 million revolving credit facility remains undrawn at December 31, 2020. Total undrawn revolver commitments are available to be drawn for general corporate purposes of the Company.
In March 2020 we redeemed $200 million principal amount of the outstanding $600 million principal amount of our 4.75% Notes due 2022. In connection with the redemption, we incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $2.9 million representing the redemption premium and the write-off of a portion of the unamortized discount and deferred financing costs.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, on February 26, 2021, we redeemed (i) the remaining $400 million principal amount of our 4.75% Notes due 2022 and (ii) $600 million principal amount of our 5.00% Notes due 2024.
Additional information regarding our outstanding indebtedness and the significant terms and provisions of our Senior Secured Credit Facility and our Senior Notes is discussed in Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The following is a description of the terms and conditions of the guarantees with respect to the outstanding notes for which AMC Networks is the issuer.
Note Guarantees
Debt of AMC Networks as of December 31, 2020 included $400.0 million of 4.75% Notes due December 2022, $1.0 billion of 5.00% Notes due April 2024 and $800.0 million of 4.75% Notes due August 2025 (collectively, the “notes”). The notes were issued by AMC Networks and are unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, on an unsecured basis, by each of AMC Networks’ existing and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions (each, a “Guarantor Subsidiary,” and collectively, the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”). The obligations of each Guarantor Subsidiary under its note guarantee are limited as necessary to prevent such note guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law. A guarantee of the notes by a Guarantor Subsidiary is subject to release in the following circumstances: (i) any sale or other disposition of all of the capital stock of a Guarantor Subsidiary to a person that is not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) a restricted subsidiary, in compliance with the terms of the applicable indenture; (ii) the designation of a restricted subsidiary as an “Unrestricted Subsidiary” under the applicable indenture; or (iii) the release or discharge of the guarantee (including the guarantee under the AMC Networks’ credit agreement) which resulted in the creation of the note guarantee (provided that such Guarantor Subsidiary does not have any preferred stock outstanding at such time that is not held by AMC Networks or another Guarantor Subsidiary).
Foreign subsidiaries of AMC Networks do not and will not guarantee the notes.
The following tables present the summarized financial information specified in Rule 1-02(bb)(1) of Regulation S-X for AMC Networks and each Guarantor Subsidiary. The summarized financial information has been prepared in accordance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X.
Summarized Financial Information
Contractual Obligations and Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table:
(1)Subsequent to December 31, 2020, our Senior Secured Credit Facility was refinanced and we issued new Senior Notes and redeemed certain of our existing Senior Notes, all of which impact the obligations reflected in this table. See Note 11, Long-Term Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(2)Interest on variable rate debt and the variable portion of interest rate swap contracts is estimated based on a LIBOR yield curve as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Purchase obligations consist primarily of program rights obligations, participations, residuals, and transmission and marketing commitments.
(4)Operating and finance lease obligation amounts include imputed interest.
The contractual obligations table above does not include any liabilities for uncertain income tax positions due to the fact that we are unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of any related payments in settlement of our liabilities for uncertain income tax positions. At December 31, 2020, the liability for uncertain tax positions was $9.7 million, excluding the related accrued interest liability of $2.7 million and deferred tax assets of $2.1 million. See Note 15 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the Company's income taxes.
In connection with the 2018 acquisition of RLJE, the terms of the operating agreement provide the noncontrolling member with a right to put all of its noncontrolling interest to a subsidiary of the Company at the greater of the then fair market value or enterprise value of RLJE, in each case pursuant to the operating agreement and applied to the equity interest. The put option is exercisable following the seven year anniversary of the agreement (October 31, 2025), or earlier upon a change of control. The above table does not include any future payments that would be required upon the exercise of these put rights.
In connection with the 2018 acquisition of Levity, the terms of the operating agreement provide the noncontrolling interest holders with a right to put 50% of their interests to a subsidiary of the Company on the four year anniversary of the agreement (April 20, 2022), and a right to put all of their interests to the Company on the six year anniversary of the agreement (April 20, 2024). The put rights are at fair market value. The above table does not include any future payments that would be required upon the exercise of these put rights.
In connection with the 2014 acquisition of BBC AMERICA, the terms of the agreement provide the BBC with a right to put all of its 50.1% noncontrolling interest to a subsidiary of the Company at the greater of the then fair value or the fair value of the initial equity interest at the closing date of the acquisition. The put option is exercisable on the fifteen (October 23, 2029) and twenty-five (October 23, 2039) year anniversaries of the agreement. The above table does not include any future payments that would be required upon the exercise of these put rights.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. These estimates and assumptions can be subjective and complex and, consequently, actual results could differ materially from our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience, known or expected trends and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances.
We believe the following critical accounting policies comprise the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Program Rights
Licensed rights to programming, including feature films and episodic series, are stated at the lower of amortized cost or fair value. Such licensed rights along with the related obligations are recorded at the contract value when a license agreement is executed, unless there is uncertainty with respect to either cost, acceptability or availability. If such uncertainty exists, those rights and obligations are recorded at the earlier of when the uncertainty is resolved or when the license period begins. Costs are amortized to technical and operating expense on a straight-line or accelerated basis, based on the expected exploitation strategy of the rights, over a period not to exceed the respective license periods. We periodically review the remaining useful lives of our licensed program rights based on several factors, including expected future revenue generation from airings on our networks and other exploitation opportunities, ratings, type and quality of program material, standards and practices and fitness for exhibition through various forms of distribution. If it is determined that film or other program rights have limited, or no, future programming usefulness, the remaining useful life of such rights is adjusted accordingly, which may result in the accelerated amortization or write-off of such costs to technical and operating expense.
Owned original programming costs, including estimated participation and residual costs qualifying for capitalization as program rights are amortized to technical and operating expense over their estimated useful lives, commencing upon the first airing, based on attributable revenue for airings to date as a percentage of total projected attributable revenue ("ultimate revenue") under the individual-film-forecast-computation method. We base our estimates of projected attributable revenue on distribution and advertising revenues historically generated from similar content in comparable markets, and projected program usage. Projected program usage is based on our current expectation of future exhibitions. We periodically review attributable revenue estimates and projected program usage and revise our assumptions if necessary, which could either accelerate or delay the timing of amortization expense or result in a write-down of the unamortized costs to fair value. For example, a program's strong performance could result in increased usage and increased attributable revenues in a particular period, resulting in accelerated amortization of costs in that period. Poor ratings may result in the reduction of attributable revenue from planned usage or the abandonment of a program, which would require a write-off of any unamortized costs. Actual attributable revenue and exhibitions may vary from our projections due to factors such as market acceptance, levels of distribution and advertising revenue, resulting in changes to our decisions regarding planned program usage. A failure to adjust for a downward change in estimates of ultimate revenues could result in the understatement of program rights amortization expense for the period. Any capitalized development costs for programs that we determine will not be produced are also written off. Historically, other than instances of write-offs associated with our decisions to abandon programming, actual ultimate revenue amounts have not significantly differed from our estimates of ultimate revenue.
Program rights write-offs of $108.3 million, $40.9 million and $50.5 million were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Useful Lives of Affiliate Intangible Assets
The carrying amount of our intangible assets as of December 31, 2020 is $410.7 million, of which $294.3 million is comprised of affiliate relationships acquired in business combinations. Useful lives of affiliate relationships (ranging from 6 to 25 years) are initially determined based upon weighted average remaining terms of agreements in place with major distributors when purchase accounting is applied, plus an assumption for expected renewals. We periodically update our assumption for expected renewals based on recent experience and known or expected trends. We have historically been successful in renewing our major affiliation agreements and expect to renew such agreements in the future. However, if renewal trends deteriorate in the future (e.g., failure to renew, or renewals with significantly shorter terms), we may revise the remaining useful lives of affiliate intangible assets, resulting in higher amortization expense in future periods. In June 2020, we recognized impairment charges associated with certain intangible assets. See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually as of December 1, or more frequently upon the occurrence of certain events or substantive changes in circumstances. The annual goodwill impairment test allows for the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If it is determined, on the basis of qualitative factors, that the fair value of a reporting unit is, more likely than not, less than its carrying value, the quantitative impairment test is required. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update 2017-04 Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, the Company recognizes goodwill impairment as the difference between the carrying amount of a reporting unit and its fair value, but not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
The carrying amount of goodwill, by operating segment is as follows:
Based on our annual and interim impairment tests for goodwill during 2020 and 2019, we recognized impairment charges of $25.1 million and $98.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements is discussed in Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.