ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition for 2020, 2019 and 2018. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and Part I, Item 1, “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following analysis contains forward-looking statements about our future revenues, operating results and expectations. See “Special Caution Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the risks, assumptions and uncertainties affecting these statements as well as Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a provider of high-quality in-home healthcare and related services to the chronic, co-morbid, aging American population, with approximately 75%, 74% and 73% of our revenue derived from Medicare for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Our operations involve servicing patients through our three reportable business segments: home health, hospice and personal care. Our home health segment delivers a wide range of services in the homes of individuals who may be recovering from an illness, injury or surgery. Our hospice segment provides care that is designed to provide comfort and support for those who are facing a terminal illness. Our personal care segment provides patients assistance with the essential activities of daily living. As of December 31, 2020, we owned and operated 320 Medicare-certified home health care centers, 180 Medicare-certified hospice care centers and 14 personal-care care centers, including unconsolidated joint ventures, in 39 states within the United States and the District of Columbia.
Care Centers Summary (Includes Unconsolidated Joint Ventures)
When we refer to “same store business,” we mean home health, hospice and personal-care care centers that we have operated for at least the last twelve months and start-ups that are an expansion of a same store care center; when we refer to “acquisitions,” we mean home health, hospice and personal-care care centers that we acquired within the last twelve months; and when we refer to “denovos,” we mean home health, hospice and personal-care care centers opened by us in the last twelve months which are not an expansion of a same store care center. Once a care center has been in operation for a twelve month period, the results for that particular care center are included as part of our same store business from that date forward.
2020 Developments
•Achieved the highest Quality of Patient Care Star Score in the Home Health industry in the October 2020 Home Health Compare ("HHC") release of 4.33 stars with 95% of our care centers at 4+ Stars.
•Outperformed the industry on all Hospice Item Set ("HIS") measures.
•Performed over 11.5 million visits.
•Acquired and successfully integrated Asana Hospice ("Asana") and AseraCare Hospice ("AseraCare") making Amedisys the third largest hospice company in the United States, exceeding 13,000 in hospice average daily census.
•Successfully procured personal protective equipment ("PPE") and implemented protocols to ensure the safety of our employees and patients during the novel coronavirus pandemic as discussed in further detail under Novel Coronavirus Pandemic ("COVID-19") below.
•Ended the year with overall voluntary turnover of 18.3% and reduced our early exit rate by 6% over 2019, ending 2020 at 11.9%.
•Successfully piloted several tools and data analytics platforms of Medalogix, a predictive data and analytics company, helping to further optimize our current business and positioning us to work more closely with Medicare Advantage payors.
•Implemented pay practice changes and staffing model efficiencies to further drive operational excellence.
•Successfully navigated the transition to the Patient-Driven Groupings Model ("PDGM") while continuing to deliver operational efficiencies through margin expansion.
•Executed a Care Coordination Agreement with BrightStar Care to facilitate the coordination of care between home health and hospice care centers and a network of personal care partners.
•Increased operating income 24%.
•Expanded home health gross margin as a percentage of revenue by 320 basis points.
•Delivered $289 million in cash flow from operations.
2021 Strategy
•Further advance our industry leading Quality of Patient Care Star scores in home health.
•Drive best-in-class hospice quality while continuing to integrate acquired hospice assets.
•Advance our culture and sense of belonging through diversity and inclusion initiatives.
•Build a learning culture through world class leadership development.
•Reduce turnover in critical clinician roles.
•Continue our success in operating under PDGM.
•Expand our analytics capabilities internally and through our Medalogix investment.
•Deliver above industry average growth rates in all three lines of business.
•Pursue consolidations in the home health industry via a regional-based acquisition strategy.
•Incrementally innovate around our core business to deliver new home based care models such as Skilled Nursing Facility ("SNF") at Home.
Financial Performance
Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were impacted by acquisitions, COVID-19, the suspension of sequestration and the transition to PDGM. On a consolidated basis, we increased operating income $42 million on a $116 million increase in net service revenue.
Our home health care centers experienced growth in volumes and improvement in utilization and clinician mix which, combined with our variable cost structure and sequestration relief, mitigated a significant portion of our estimated COVID-19 impact and led to the segment delivering a $26 million increase in operating income.
Our hospice segment completed the acquisitions of Asana and AseraCare in 2020. These acquisitions contributed approximately $13 million in operating income to the hospice segment.
Our personal care segment contributed approximately $6 million in operating income during 2020.
Economic and Industry Factors
Our home health, hospice and personal care segments operate in a highly fragmented and highly competitive industry. The degree of competitiveness varies based upon whether our care centers operate in states that require a certificate of need ("CON") or permit of approval ("POA"). In such states, expansion by existing providers or entry into the market by new providers is permitted only where determination is made by state health authorities that a given amount of unmet healthcare need exists. Currently, 71% and 27% of our home health and hospice care centers, respectively, operate in CON/POA states.
As the Federal government continues to debate a reduction in expenditures and a reform of the Medicare system, our industry continues to face reimbursement pressures. These reform efforts could result in major changes in the health care delivery and reimbursement system on a national and state level, including changes directly impacting the reimbursement systems for our home health and hospice care centers.
Payment
Hospice
On July 31, 2020, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ("CMS") issued a final rule to update hospice payment rates and the wage index for fiscal year 2021 effective for services provided beginning October 1, 2020. CMS estimates hospices serving Medicare beneficiaries would see an estimated 2.4% increase in payments. This increase is the result of a 2.4% market basket adjustment as required under the Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (collectively, "PPACA"). The rule also changed the hospice wage index by adopting the most recent Office
of Management and Budget statistical area delineations with a five percent cap on wage index decreases. Finally, CMS increased the aggregate cap amount by 2.4% to $30,684. Based on our analysis of the final rule, we expect our impact to be in line with the 2.4% increase.
Home Health
On October 31, 2019, CMS issued the Calendar Year 2020 Home Health Final Rule, which confirmed the implementation of PDGM effective January 1, 2020 as well as a change in the unit of payment from a 60-day episode of care to a 30-day period of care. Additionally, in an effort to reduce fraud risks, CMS reduced requests for anticipated payment ("RAPs") for 2020 to 20% with the full elimination in 2021. CMS estimated that the final rule would result in a 1.3% increase in payments to home health providers. The increase is the result of a statutorily mandated 1.5% market basket increase pursuant to the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, reduced by 0.2% for the rural add-on. In calculating the impact, CMS also assumed that the industry would make certain behavioral changes related to coding practices, low utilization payment adjustment ("LUPA") management and co-morbidities. As a result, CMS reduced reimbursement by 4.36%. The impact of the final rule on us was a 2.8% reduction in revenue for 2020.
On October 29, 2020, CMS issued the Home Health Final Rule for Medicare home health providers for calendar year 2021. CMS estimates that the final rule will result in a 1.9% increase in payments to home health providers. The increase is the result of a 2.0% market basket adjustment reduced by 0.1% for the rural add-on. Based on our analysis of the final rule, we expect our impact to be in line with the 1.9% increase. Additionally, CMS made permanent the telehealth flexibilities that were announced in the Interim Final Rule (Emergency Rule) for COVID-19 in March 2020. These flexibilities allow home health agencies to provide certain care via telehealth if it is clinically appropriate and included in the plan of care. Telehealth visits still do not count as visits for purposes of patient eligibility or payment.
The following payment adjustments are effective for each of the years indicated based on CMS’s final rules:
(1)Effective for services provided from October 1, 2020 to September 30, 2021.
(2)Our company-specific impact of the home health final rule could differ depending on differences in the wage index, our patient case mix and other factors, such as LUPAs or outliers, which are described in more detail under Critical Accounting Estimates below. Our company-specific impact of the hospice final rule could differ based on our mix of patients and differences in the wage index.
Novel Coronavirus Pandemic ("COVID-19")
Our operations and financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 have been impacted by COVID-19. The impacts on our operations began during the second week of March 2020, as we experienced declines in referral volumes and an increase in missed visits. Our home health segment experienced a referral low-point the week of April 5th. Since that time, we have seen a steady recovery in referral volumes and a corresponding drop in missed visits. In our hospice segment, our referrals hit their low-point the week of March 22nd. While hospice admission volumes have improved significantly, the slowdown in March has impacted our average daily census and has been most significant in our facility-based census. Additionally, we have seen a decline in our hospice average daily census as a result of a significant increase in deaths, an increase in the discharge rate of same-month admissions and a delay in the timing of patients coming onto service resulting in a shorter length of stay. The financial impacts of COVID-19 during the year ended December 31, 2020 are discussed in further detail under "Results of Operations" below.
While we currently believe that we have a reasonable view of operations, the uncertainty created by COVID-19 could alter our outlook of the pandemic's impact on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. The following factors could potentially impact our performance: the continued increase or decrease in the number of COVID-19 cases nationwide, the severity and impacts of new variants of the virus, uncertainty regarding vaccine distribution timing and
efficiency, the utilization of elective procedures, the return of patient confidence to enter a hospital or a doctor's office, the ability to have access to our patients in their homes and in facilities, cost normalization around PPE and any future or prolonged shelter-in-place orders and other federal, state and local requirements. Potential impacts of COVID-19 on our results include lower revenue, higher salary and wage expense related to quarantine pay and training and increased supply costs related to PPE and COVID-19 testing. The impacts to revenue may consist of the following:
•lower volumes due to interruption of the operations of our referral sources, patients' unwillingness to accept services and restrictions on access to facilities for hospice services;
•lower reimbursement due to missed visits resulting in an increase in LUPAs and lost billing periods; and
•lower hospice average daily census due to a decline in average length of stay and an increase in deaths.
On March 27, 2020, the bipartisan Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was signed into legislation. The CARES Act provides for the following:
•$175 billion to healthcare providers, including hospitals on the front lines of the COVID-19 pandemic. Of this total allocated amount, $30 billion was distributed immediately to providers based on their proportionate share of Medicare fee-for-service reimbursements in 2019. Healthcare providers were required to sign an attestation confirming receipt of the Provider Relief Fund ("PRF") funds and agree to the terms and conditions of payment. Our home health and hospice segments received approximately $100 million from the first $30 billion of funds distributed to healthcare providers in April 2020, which is inclusive of $2 million related to our joint venture care centers (equity method investments). We also acquired approximately $6 million of PRF funds in connection with the acquisition of AseraCare. Consistent with the terms and conditions for receipt of the payment, we are allowed to use the funds to cover lost revenues and health care costs related to COVID-19, and we are required to properly and fully document the use of these funds in reports to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ("HHS").
For our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we have decided to only utilize PRF funds to the extent we have qualifying COVID-19 expenses, which totaled $33 million for our home health and hospice segments during the year ended December 31, 2020. Accordingly, for our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we will not be using the funds to cover lost revenues resulting from COVID-19. In September 2020, HHS issued new guidance noting that PRF funds can be used through June 30, 2021. We do not believe that we will fully utilize the funds received; therefore, we have recorded a liability related to the funds that we do not expect to utilize totaling $60 million which is reflected in the Provider Relief Fund Advance account in current liabilities within our consolidated balance sheet. Funds that we intend to use in the future to cover COVID-19 expenses, which we have estimated to be approximately $12 million, have been recorded to a deferred liability account within accrued expenses in our consolidated balance sheet. These estimates may change as our ability to utilize and retain the funds will depend on the magnitude, timing and nature of the impact of the pandemic.
•The temporary suspension of the automatic 2% reduction of Medicare claim reimbursements ("sequestration") for the period May 1 through December 31, 2020. The impact was an increase to our 2020 net service revenue of approximately $23 million. In December 2020, Congress passed additional COVID-19 relief legislation as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021. This legislation extended the suspension of sequestration through March 31, 2021.
•The deferral of the employer share of social security tax (6.2%), effective for payments due after the enactment date. Fifty percent is due on December 31, 2021 with the remaining amounts due on December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred approximately $55 million of social security tax which has increased our cash flow from operations by the same amount; approximately $28 million is reflected in each of payroll and employee benefits and other long-term obligations within our consolidated balance sheet.
•The temporary suspension of Medicare patient coverage criteria and documentation and care requirements and the expansion of providing home health and hospice care to patients via telehealth.
•The ability for non-physician practitioners to certify for home health, order home health services, establish and review plans of care and certify and recertify eligibility.
The well-being of our employees has been one of our top priorities during this pandemic. We have taken the following steps to support our employees: implemented up to 14 days of paid leave during any required quarantine periods; awarded SPIRIT bonuses to our clinicians and caregivers who have seen patients during the pandemic; completed an early cash pay-out of employee paid-time-off; instituted work-from-home arrangements for our corporate and administrative support employees; allowed employees to temporarily suspend any 401(k) plan loan deductions and offered employees the option of making a
withdrawal from their 401(k) plan for coronavirus-related distributions without incurring the additional 10% early withdrawal penalty; granted access to Teladoc services to all employees; provided access to COVID-19 self-test kits to all employees and created a COVID-19 Resource Center, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week for employees to access educational materials, safety documents, policies, clinical protocols and operational metrics.
The safety of our clinicians and patients has also been a focus, and as a result, we have made the following business changes: developed clinical protocols for COVID-19 testing, proper usage of PPE, caring for COVID-positive patients and maintaining safety measures in our care centers; researched each state's vaccination plan to develop a state by state protocol to work with local health departments and other health systems to obtain vaccine appointments for our clinical staff; implemented software enabling us to track staff that have been vaccinated; procured millions in PPE and created a centralized distribution center for all critical PPE, allowing us to flex our inventory on a care center by care center basis, based on need and demand. We have had success in utilizing both traditional and non-traditional suppliers for our PPE needs. While we were very fortunate to secure the supplies needed, we faced significantly higher per unit costs for the purchase of PPE.
Network Developments
In August 2020, we signed a Care Coordination Agreement with BrightStar Care to add its agencies to the Amedisys personal care network, which helps facilitate the coordination of care between our home health and hospice care centers and a network of personal care partners.
In July 2019, we signed an agreement with ClearCare, Inc. ("ClearCare"), the provider of the personal care industry’s leading software platform, representing 4,000 personal care agencies in every zip code in the United States. Our agreement with ClearCare creates an opportunity to establish a network partnership between Amedisys and personal care agencies using ClearCare in order to better coordinate patient care.
Long term, we believe these agreements will allow us to build a nation-wide network of personal care agencies and further our efforts to provide patients with a true care continuum in the home. These relationships will also help us as we continue to have innovative payment conversations with Medicare Advantage plans who have begun to recognize the value that combined home health, hospice and personal care services bring to their members and care delivery infrastructure.
Governmental Inquiries and Investigations and Other Litigation
See Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the subpoena and civil investigative demands issued by the U.S. Department of Justice and the South Carolina and Florida Zone Program Integrity Contractor audits. No assurances can be given as to the timing or outcome of these items.
Results of Operations
Consolidated
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations (amounts in millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
On a consolidated basis, our operating income increased approximately $42 million on a revenue increase of $116 million. COVID-19 resulted in significant impacts to all of our segments; however, we experienced a significant increase in our gross margin as a percentage of revenue which drove our improvement over 2019. Our results were also impacted by acquisitions, the suspension of sequestration, the transition to PDGM, a reduction in revenue adjustments, severance associated with reductions in staffing levels, primarily within our home health segment and an asset impairment charge related to our acquired names intangibles.
Our 2020 results include the acquisitions of Asana and AseraCare, which contributed revenue of $88 million and an operating loss of $12 million, which is inclusive of acquisition and integration costs totaling $10 million and intangibles amortization totaling $9 million. Our results also reflect one additional month of revenue and operating income from Compassionate Care Hospice ("CCH"), which was acquired on February 1, 2019, and three additional months of revenue and operating income from RoseRock Healthcare ("RoseRock"), which was acquired on April 1, 2019.
COVID-19 disrupted both net service revenue and costs during 2020. The most significant impact occurred in the second quarter during which we experienced a $30 million decline in net service revenue over prior year due to COVID-19. Our variable cost structure helped us mitigate a significant portion of the revenue impact. Our home health segment, which was the most heavily impacted by COVID-19, recovered quickly and returned to year over year growth in volumes during the third and fourth quarters. Our hospice segment experienced declines in admissions during the second quarter but saw an overall slower decline in average daily census, which is the main driver of hospice revenue. While we have experienced strong admission growth during the third and fourth quarters, a significant increase in deaths, an increase in the discharge rate of same-month admissions and a delay in the timing of patients coming onto service has driven down our length of stay resulting in average daily census growth of only 1% year over year. Based on our current projections, we are anticipating a decline in average daily census early in 2021 despite strong growth in admissions. We expect that our length of stay will return to normal levels during 2021.
Our 2020 operating results were positively impacted by the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020, which resulted in an increase to net service revenue of approximately $23 million ($13 million home health, $10 million hospice) but negatively impacted by the change in reimbursement under PDGM, which resulted in a $23 million reduction in net service revenue. We were able to significantly mitigate the PDGM rate cut and expand margin in our home health segment by
delivering improvements in clinician utilization and discipline mix and by reducing our revenue adjustments. Additionally, we experienced an expansion in our hospice gross margin resulting from lower costs associated with a decline in visit volumes due to access restrictions imposed by facilities as well as a reduction in revenue adjustments; prior year results included a $7 million reduction to revenue related to settlement discussions with the U.S. Department of Justice (See Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Each of our segments incurred incremental costs related to COVID-19. As noted above, for our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we have elected to use the CARES Act Provider Relief Funds to cover COVID-19 expenses incurred by our home health and hospice segments which totaled $33 million during 2020. Our personal care segment received funds from the Mass Home Care ASAP COVID-19 Provider Sustainability Program totaling $1 million. We have used these funds to cover COVID-19 expenses as well. We have recorded income associated with both of these programs totaling $34 million in other operating income within our consolidated statement of operations.
Our operating results reflect a 1.2% increase in our other operating expenses as a percentage of revenue compared to prior year; this increase is due to the addition of resources to support growth (primarily business development employees), investments related to PDGM and planned wage increases, partially offset by overall reductions in spend during the pandemic and lower acquisition and integration costs.
Last, we recorded a $4 million asset impairment charge related to acquired names which are no longer in use (see Item 8, Note 5 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Total other (expense) income, net includes the following items (amounts in millions):
Interest expense decreased $4 million in 2020 from 2019 as a result of a decrease in borrowings under our Amended Credit Agreement (see Item 8, Note 8 - Long-Term Obligations to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our Amended Credit Agreement). Miscellaneous, net includes a $3 million loss from the sale of our investment in the Heritage Healthcare Innovation Fund, LP during 2020 (see Item 8, Note 1 - Nature of Operations, Consolidation and Presentation of Financial Statements to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Overall, our operating income increased $22 million on a revenue increase of $293 million. Our 2019 operating results include the acquisitions of CCH and RoseRock which contributed approximately $174 million in revenue and an operating loss of approximately $5 million, which is inclusive of $14 million in acquisition and integration costs and $6 million in intangibles amortization.
Additionally, our operating income was negatively impacted by a $7 million accrual related to settlement discussions with the U.S. Department of Justice (see Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information) and a $2 million asset impairment charge related to our acquired names (see Item 8, Note 5 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Our year-to-date performance reflects growth and operating improvement in all three segments of our legacy operations. We expanded gross margin as a percentage of revenue in our home health and personal care segments. Both segments benefited from rate increases with home health also delivering improvements in clinician utilization and discipline mix. Our hospice segment's gross margin as a percentage of revenue decreased due to our acquisition activity. Additionally, our other operating expenses as a percentage of revenue increased only 1% compared to 2018; this increase is inclusive of approximately $16 million in acquisition and integration costs. Excluding the acquisition and integration costs, our other operating expenses as a percentage of revenue remained relatively flat compared to 2018 despite planned wage increases and the addition of resources to support growth.
Total other (expense) income, net includes the following items (amounts in millions):
Interest expense increased $7 million in 2019 from 2018 as a result of an increase in borrowings under our Amended Credit Agreement (see Item 8, Note 8 - Long-Term Obligations to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our Amended Credit Agreement). Equity in earnings from equity method investments includes gains of $2 million and $5 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Home Health Division
The following table summarizes our home health segment results of operations:
(1)Same store information represents the percent change in our Medicare, Non-Medicare and Total revenue, admissions or volume for the period as a percent of the Medicare, Non-Medicare and Total revenue, admissions or volume of the prior period. Effective July 1, 2019, same store is defined as care centers that we have operated for at least the last twelve months and startups that are an expansion of a same store care center.
(2)Total volume includes all admissions and recertifications.
(3)Total includes acquisitions and denovos.
(4)Average Medicare revenue per completed episode is the average Medicare revenue earned for each Medicare completed episode of care. Average Medicare revenue per completed episode for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the transition to PDGM effective January 1, 2020 and the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020.
(5)Medicare visits per completed episode are the home health Medicare visits on completed episodes divided by the home health Medicare episodes completed during the period.
(6)Prior year amounts have been recast to conform to the current year calculation.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Results
Overall, our operating income increased $26 million on a $7 million decrease in net service revenue. Our results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were impacted by COVID-19, the suspension of sequestration, the transition to PDGM, severance associated with reductions in staffing levels and a reduction in revenue adjustments. Despite the decrease in net service revenue, we saw significant improvement in our operating performance driven by improvements in our clinician utilization and discipline mix, both of which have contributed to year over year gross margin expansion.
COVID-19 resulted in disruption to our home health volumes beginning at the end of the first quarter through most of the second quarter and amplified the negative impact of the PDGM rate cut on our Medicare revenue per episode. Volumes significantly improved during the third and fourth quarters and our efforts to operationalize PDGM reduced the impact of the PDGM rate cut in the second half of the year. While we are very encouraged by the improvement in volumes and Medicare revenue per episode that we have experienced, we will continue to closely monitor COVID-19 cases and the potential impacts on our operating results.
Our operating results were also impacted by incremental costs totaling $20 million related to COVID-19, which were offset by the recognition of income totaling $20 million associated with the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund, and severance totaling $5 million related to reductions in staffing levels.
Net Service Revenue
Our net service revenue decreased $7 million primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19 and the 2020 change in reimbursement under PDGM. The combination of these resulted in lower volumes than anticipated and lower Medicare revenue per episode for the year ended December 31, 2020. COVID-19 significantly increased the number of missed visits which increased the number of LUPA episodes and the number of episodes with lost billing periods (i.e. episodes with no visits during one of the 30-day billing periods), leading to a decline in our Medicare revenue per episode. Additionally, the implementation of PDGM resulted in a $23 million reduction in net service revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. This reduction was partially offset by $13 million resulting from the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020.
We have seen significant increases in both volumes and Medicare revenue per episode in the second half of the year as the impacts of COVID-19 have moderated and as we have been able to refocus our efforts on operationalizing PDGM. We have provided additional training, increased our focus on OASIS accuracy and coding and also completed the rollout of Medalogix Care to all of our home health care centers, all of which have resulted in higher case mix and functional impairment scores for our patients. Additionally, we have seen a reduction in our revenue adjustments year over year.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income consists of the recognition of funds received from the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund. In accordance with the terms and conditions, these funds can be used to cover lost revenues as well as costs directly attributable to COVID-19. For our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we have elected to utilize the funds to cover COVID-19 related costs only, and therefore, have recognized income equal to the amount of COVID-19 costs incurred to date totaling $20 million. These costs are associated with the purchase of personal protective equipment, bonuses paid to our clinicians, clinician training, quarantine pay and COVID-19 testing. Of the $20 million of COVID-19 costs incurred to date, $19 million has been recorded to cost of service and $1 million has been recorded to other operating expenses.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our cost of service consists of costs associated with direct clinician care in the homes of our patients as well as the cost of clinical managers who monitor the overall delivery of care. Overall, our total cost of service decreased 3% on an 11% decrease in total visits. Lower costs associated with a decline in volumes driven by COVID-19, improvements in clinician utilization as evidenced by a decline of 2.1 visits per completed episode year over year and optimization of discipline mix were partially offset by an 8% increase in our total cost per visit, which was driven by planned wage increases, an increase in the utilization of contractors to supplement clinician visits in certain areas, new hire pay, a change in the mix of our visits, costs directly attributable to COVID-19 totaling approximately $19 million and severance totaling $5 million related to a reduction in staffing levels. While we compensate our clinicians on a per visit basis, there is a fixed cost component of our cost structure which resulted in an increase in our cost per visit as we had a significant decline in visits.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased approximately $10 million primarily due to planned wage increases, the addition of resources to support volume growth, investments related to PDGM and approximately $1 million of costs directly attributable to COVID-19. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in travel and training expense and an overall reduction in spend during the pandemic.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Operating Results
Overall, our operating income increased $27 million on an $82 million increase in net service revenue. Our gross margin as a percentage of revenue was positively impacted by the 2019 changes in reimbursement, growth in volumes, the acuity level of our patients, improved utilization and a focus on discipline mix. The impact of the 2019 change in reimbursement was an increase in net service revenue and gross margin of approximately $12 million.
Net Service Revenue
Our revenue increased $82 million (7%) on a 5% increase in total volume and a 2% increase in Medicare revenue per episode. The volume growth was driven by a 7% increase in admissions offset by lower recertification volume. The increase in Medicare revenue per episode is the result of a 1.2% increase in reimbursement with the remainder due to an increase in the acuity level of our patients. Additionally, our non-Medicare (per visit and episodic) rates increased approximately 3% which is a combination of rate increases and increases in the acuity level of our patients. Revenue was also positively impacted by a reduction in our revenue adjustments.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our cost of service increased 4% on a 3% increase in total visits. Our total cost per visit increased approximately 1% as improvements in clinician utilization and optimization of discipline mix partially offset planned wage increases. Additionally, changes in our home health care center staffing resulted in a shift of some office staff from cost of service to other operating expenses totaling approximately $4 million.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased approximately $22 million primarily due to an increase in salaries and benefits expense as a result of the addition of resources to support volume growth, planned wage increases and the home health staffing shifts referenced above.
Hospice Division
The following table summarizes our hospice segment results of operations:
(1)Same store information represents the percent change in our Medicare revenue, Hospice admissions or average daily census for the period as a percent of the Medicare revenue, Hospice admissions or average daily census of the prior period. Effective July 1, 2019, same store is defined as care centers that we have operated for at least the last twelve months and startups that are an expansion of a same store care center.
(2)Total includes acquisitions and denovos.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Results
Our operating results for 2020 include the results of the acquisition of Asana on January 1, 2020 (8 hospice care centers) and AseraCare on June 1, 2020 (44 hospice care centers). Acquisitions are included in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates. As a result of our acquisitions, our hospice segment operating results for 2020 and 2019 are not fully comparable.
Overall, our operating income increased $41 million on a $133 million increase in net service revenue. Our 2020 results include the acquisitions of Asana and AseraCare, which contributed revenue of $88 million and operating income of $13 million. Our results also reflect one additional month of revenue and operating income from CCH and three additional months of revenue and operating income from RoseRock. Additionally, our operating results were favorably impacted by the following: 1% growth in average daily census, changes in reimbursement, which resulted in an increase in net service revenue and gross margin of approximately $6 million and $3 million, respectively, lower revenue adjustments, the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020 and lower visit volumes due to facility access restrictions.
Net Service Revenue
Our net service revenue increased $133 million, approximately $88 million of which is attributable to our Asana and AseraCare acquisitions during 2020. The remaining increase in net service revenue is the result of one additional month of revenue from our 2019 acquisition of CCH (approximately $15 million), three additional months of revenue from our 2019 acquisition of RoseRock (approximately $2 million), growth in our average daily census, the suspension of sequestration effective May 1, 2020 ($9 million excluding acquisitions), a 0.5% increase in reimbursement effective October 1, 2019 ($3 million), a 2.4% increase in reimbursement effective October 1, 2020 ($3 million, excluding acquisitions) and lower revenue adjustments as prior year results included a $7 million reduction to revenue related to settlement discussions with the U.S. Department of Justice (see Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
While COVID-19 significantly impacted our admission volumes during the second quarter, our hospice admissions rebounded quickly, resulting in strong year over year growth in admissions during the third and fourth quarters. Our same store admissions growth was up 6% year over year; however, our average daily census, which is the main driver of hospice revenue, was up only 1%. Generally, changes in average daily census lag changes in admission volumes; however, we have not seen an increase in our average daily census growth due to a significant increase in the number of deaths, an increase in the discharge rate of same-month admissions and a delay in the timing of patients coming onto service resulting in a lower length of stay. This lower length of stay resulted in a declining census as we exited 2020. Based on our current projections, we expect this trend to continue into 2021.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income consists of the recognition of funds received from the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund. In accordance with the terms and conditions, these funds are intended to cover lost revenues as well as costs directly attributable to COVID-19. For our wholly-owned subsidiaries, we have elected to utilize the funds to cover COVID-19 related costs only, and therefore, have recognized income equal to the amount of COVID-19 costs incurred to date totaling $13 million. These costs are associated with the purchase of personal protective equipment, bonuses paid to our clinicians, clinician training, quarantine pay and COVID-19 testing. Of the $13 million of COVID-19 costs incurred to date, $12 million has been recorded to cost of service and $1 million has been recorded to other operating expenses.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our hospice cost of service increased $66 million, approximately $52 million of which is attributable to our Asana and AseraCare acquisitions during 2020. The remaining increase is primarily due to one additional month of costs from our 2019 acquisition of CCH, three additional months of costs from our 2019 acquistion of RoseRock, a 1% increase in average daily census, planned wage increases, COVID-19 costs totaling $12 million and an increase in our general inpatient and respite facility costs as the majority of the reimbursement increase, which became effective October 1, 2019, was passed through to these facilities. These increases were offset by a decline in visits performed by our hourly licensed practical nurses and hospice aides due to facility access restrictions as well as lower transportation costs.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased $39 million, approximately $25 million of which is related to our Asana and AseraCare acquisitions during 2020. The remaining increase is due to the addition of resources to support census growth and planned wage increases, partially offset by a decrease in travel and training expense.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Operating Results
On February 1, 2019, we acquired CCH, which owned and operated 53 hospice care centers. On April 1, 2019, we acquired RoseRock, which owned and operated one hospice care center. Acquisitions are included in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates. As a result, our hospice segment operating results for 2019 and 2018 are not fully comparable.
Overall, our operating income increased $30 million on a $206 million increase in net service revenue. Our operating income was negatively impacted by a $7 million reduction to revenue and gross margin related to settlement discussions with the U.S. Department of Justice (see Item 8, Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for
additional information). Our operating results were positively impacted by changes in reimbursement, which resulted in an increase in net service revenue and gross margin of approximately $7 million and $6 million, respectively. The majority of the revenue increase associated with the 2020 change in reimbursement, which became effective October 1, 2019, was passed through to our general inpatient and respite facilities. Our operating results were also positively impacted by continued growth and by our acquisitions which contributed approximately $174 million in net service revenue and $22 million in operating income to our hospice segment's results for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Service Revenue
Our hospice revenue increased $206 million; approximately $174 million of which is attributable to our acquisition activities. The remaining $32 million increase is the result of a 7% increase in our average daily census and increases in reimbursement totaling 1.6% and 0.5% effective for services provided from October 1, 2018 and October 1, 2019, respectively, partially offset by an increase in our revenue adjustments, which include a $7 million reduction to revenue and gross margin related to the U.S. Department of Justice matter noted above.
Cost of Service, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Our hospice cost of service increased $123 million, approximately $110 million of which is attributable to our acquisition activity. The remaining $13 million increase is primarily due to a 7% increase in average daily census, planned wage increases and an increase in our general inpatient and respite facility costs as the majority of the reimbursement increase, which became effective October 1, 2019, was passed through to these facilities. Our cost of service per day increased 7%, largely driven by our acquisitions as our same store cost of service per day remained relatively flat.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased $53 million; approximately $42 million of the increase is related to our acquisition activity. The remaining $11 million increase is due to increases in other care center related expenses, primarily salaries and benefits expense due to the addition of resources to support census growth and planned wage increases, professional fees and travel and training expense.
Personal Care Division
The following table summarizes our personal care segment results of operations:
(1)Total includes acquisitions.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating income related to our personal care segment decreased approximately $3 million on a $10 million decrease in net service revenue. The decrease in net service revenue is due to the impact of COVID-19 partially offset by rate increases. The impact of COVID-19 was mitigated by a reduction in costs as most of our personal care employees are paid on an hourly basis and rate increases which were intended to address market pressures and incremental costs related to the pandemic. Our personal care segment incurred approximately $2 million of COVID-19 costs related to the purchase of PPE, bonuses paid to our employees and quarantine pay. Additionally, our personal care segment received funds totaling $1 million under the Mass Home Care ASAP COVID-19 Provider Sustainability Program. These funds were used to cover COVID-19 related costs and are recorded to other operating income within our consolidated statement of operations.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Operating income related to our personal care segment increased $3 million on a $5 million increase in net service revenue. These results are inclusive of the acquisitions of East Tennessee Personal Care Services (May 2018) and Bring Care Home (October 2018). As a result, our personal care operating results for 2019 and 2018 are not fully comparable.
Gross margin as a percentage of revenue increased 170 basis points as the segment benefited from rate increases combined with operating cost controls. Additionally, other operating expenses decreased approximately $1 million resulting in an increase in operating income.
Corporate
The following table summarizes our corporate results of operations:
Corporate expenses consist of costs relating to our executive management and administrative support functions, primarily information services, accounting, finance, billing and collections, legal, compliance, risk management, procurement, marketing, clinical administration, training, human resources and administration.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Corporate total operating expenses increased approximately $22 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Our 2020 acquisitions of Asana and AseraCare added approximately $15 million which is inclusive of $9 million related to intangibles amortization. The remaining $7 million increase is primarily due to one additional month of corporate support costs from our 2019 acquisition of CCH, planned wage increases, the addition of corporate support staff, an increase in employer payroll taxes associated with employee stock option exercises, incentive compensation accruals, fees related to our ClearCare partnership and lower gains on the sale of fleet vehicles in 2020 as compared to 2019; these items were partially offset by decreases in travel and training expense and acquisition and integration costs.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
During 2019, corporate operating expenses increased $37 million; approximately $27 million of which is attributable to the CCH acquisition: $7 million relates to CCH corporate and administrative support functions, $6 million relates to CCH intangibles amortization and approximately $14 million relates to CCH acquisition and integration costs. Excluding the impact of the CCH acquisition, corporate operating expenses increased $10 million which represents 3% of our $293 million increase in revenue. This increase is primarily due to increases in salaries and benefits expense and information technology expense which were partially offset by decreases in professional fees and legal settlements as well as gains on the sale of fleet vehicles.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (amounts in millions):
Cash provided by operating activities for 2020, 2019 and 2018 have provided sufficient liquidity to finance our capital expenditures, both routine and non-routine, and acquisitions. Changes in our cash provided by operating activities during the past three years were primarily the result of fluctuations in our net income, the collections of our accounts receivable and the timing of payments of accrued expenses. Additionally, our cash provided by operating activities for 2020 also includes the deferral of payroll taxes as provided for in the CARES Act totaling $55.4 million and the receipt of Provider Relief Funds, which we expect to retain, totaling $38.5 million, partially offset by the payment of COVID-19 related expenses.
Our cash used in investing activities primarily consists of the purchase of property and equipment, investments in equity method investees and acquisitions. Additionally, during 2020, our cash flows from investing activities includes proceeds from the sale of our investment in the Heritage Healthcare Innovation Fund, LP (see Item 8, Note 1 - Nature of Operations, Consolidation and Presentation of Financial Statements to our consolidated financial statements for additional information). Cash used in investing activities decreased $65.8 million during 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of a reduction in acquisition spend. Cash used in investing activities increased $330.7 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to the acquisitions of CCH and RoseRock.
Our financing activities primarily consist of borrowings under our term loan and/or revolving credit facility, repayments of borrowings, the remittance of taxes associated with shares withheld on non-cash compensation and proceeds related to the exercise of stock options and the purchase of stock under our employee stock purchase plan. Additionally, during 2020, our financing activities included the receipt of Provider Relief Funds, which we do not expect to retain, totaling $60 million (see Note 3 - Novel Coronavirus Pandemic ("COVID-19") to our consolidated financial statements for additional information). Cash used in financing activities totaled $15.0 milling during 2020 primarily due to repayments of borrowings and the remittance of tax withholding obligations related to non-cash compensation and stock option exercises (see Item 8, Note 10 - Capital Stock and Share-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements for additional information), partially offset by the receipt of Provider Relief Funds totaling $60.0 million. Cash provided by financing activities totaled $227.2 million during 2019 and is primarily related to our borrowings under our Amended Credit Agreement to fund acquisitions. Cash used in financing activities totaled $267.4 million in 2018 and is primarily related to our repurchase of company stock and the repayments of borrowings.
Liquidity
Typically, our principal source of liquidity is the collection of our patient accounts receivable, primarily through the Medicare program. In addition to our collection of patient accounts receivable, from time to time, we can and do obtain additional sources of liquidity by the incurrence of additional indebtedness.
During 2020, we spent $5.3 million in capital expenditures compared to $7.9 million and $6.6 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our capital expenditures for 2021 are expected to be approximately $6.0 million to $8.0 million, excluding the impact of any future acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $81.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and $470.2 million in availability under our $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility. Our cash and cash equivalents include $60.0 million related to CARES Act funds that we do not expect to utilize and have recorded as a liability within our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Based on our operating forecasts and our debt service requirements, we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to fund our operations, capital requirements and debt service requirements.
Outstanding Patient Accounts Receivable
Our patient accounts receivable increased $17.5 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 due to our acquisition activity which added $19.6 million to accounts receivable and the reduction in RAP payments under PDGM, partially offset by a reduction in days revenue outstanding which decreased 0.7 days despite an estimated negative impact of 2.7 days related to the transition to PDGM. Our cash collection as a percentage of revenue was 106% and 105% for the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our days revenue outstanding, net at December 31, 2020 was 40.2 days which is a decrease of 0.7 days from December 31, 2019.
Our patient accounts receivable includes unbilled receivables and are aged based upon the initial service date. We monitor unbilled receivables on a care center by care center basis to ensure that all efforts are made to bill claims within timely filing deadlines. Our unbilled patient accounts receivable can be impacted by acquisition activity, probe edits or regulatory changes which result in additional information or procedures needed prior to billing. The timely filing deadline for Medicare is one year from the date the episode was completed, varies by state for Medicaid-reimbursable services and varies among insurance companies and other private payors.
The following schedules detail our patient accounts receivable, by payor class, aged based upon initial date of service (amounts in millions, except days revenue outstanding):
(1)Our calculation of days revenue outstanding, net is derived by dividing our ending net patient accounts receivable at December 31, 2020 and 2019 by our average daily net patient service revenue for the three-month periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Indebtedness
First Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
On February 4, 2019, we entered into the First Amendment to the Credit Agreement (as amended by the First Amendment, the “Amended Credit Agreement”). The Amended Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured credit facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of up to $725.0 million, which includes the $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility under the Credit Agreement, and a term loan facility with a principal amount of up to $175.0 million (the “Term Loan Facility” and collectively with the Revolving Credit Facility, the “Credit Facility”), which was added by the First Amendment.
We borrowed the entire principal amount of the Term Loan Facility on February 4, 2019 in order to fund a portion of the purchase price of the CCH acquisition, with the remainder of the purchase price and associated transactional fees and expenses funded by proceeds from the Revolving Credit Facility.
Our weighted average interest rate for borrowings under our $175.0 million Term Loan Facility was 2.2% for the period ended December 31, 2020 and 3.8% for the period February 4, 2019 to December 31, 2019. Our weighted average interest rate for borrowings under our $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility was 2.2% for the period ended December 31, 2020 and 4.0% for the period ended December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated leverage ratio was 0.6, our consolidated interest coverage ratio was 25.6 and we are in compliance with our covenants under the Amended Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, our availability under our $550.0 million Revolving Credit Facility was $470.2 million as we have $51.0 million outstanding in borrowings and $28.8 million outstanding in letters of credit.
See Item 8, Note 8 - Long Term Obligations to our consolidated financial statements for additional details on our outstanding long-term obligations.
Share Repurchases
2021 Stock Repurchase Program
On December 23, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program, under which we may repurchase up to $100 million of our outstanding common stock through December 31, 2021.
Under the terms of the program, we are allowed to repurchase shares from time to time through open market purchases, unsolicited or solicited privately negotiated transactions, an accelerated stock repurchase program, and/or a trading plan in compliance with Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1. The timing and the amount of the repurchases will be determined by management based on a number of factors, including but not limited to share price, trading volume and general market conditions, as well as on working capital requirements, general business conditions and other factors.
We did not repurchase any shares pursuant to this stock repurchase program during the year ended December 31, 2020.
2019 Stock Repurchase Program
On February 25, 2019, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program, under which we could repurchase up to $100 million of our outstanding common stock through March 1, 2020. We did not repurchase any shares pursuant to this stock purchase program during 2019 or 2020. The stock repurchase plan expired on March 1, 2020.
2018 Share Repurchase
On June 4, 2018, we purchased 2,418,304 of our common shares from affiliates of KKR Credit Advisors (US) LLC ("KKR"), representing one-half of KKR's then current holdings in the Company and 7.1% of the aggregate outstanding shares of the Company's common stock for a total purchase price of $181.4 million including related direct costs. The Company repurchased the shares at $73.96 which represents 96% of the closing stock price of the Company's common stock on June 4, 2018. The repurchased shares are classified as treasury shares.
Contractual Obligations
Our future contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 were as follows (amounts in millions):
(1)Interest on debt with variable rates was calculated using the current rate for that particular debt instrument at December 31, 2020.
(2)Purchase obligations are primarily related to information technology contracts and software licenses.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, collectability of accounts receivable, reserves related to insurance and litigation, business combinations, goodwill, intangible assets, income taxes and contingencies. We base these estimates on our historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results experienced may vary materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations may be affected.
We believe the following critical accounting policies represent our most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue from contracts with customers in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and as such, we recognize revenue in the period in which we satisfy our performance obligations under our contracts by transferring our promised services to our customers in amounts that reflect the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for providing patient care, which are the transaction prices allocated to the distinct services. The Company's cost of obtaining contracts is not material.
Revenues are recognized as performance obligations are satisfied, which varies based on the nature of the services provided. Our performance obligation is the delivery of patient care services in accordance with the nature and frequency of services outlined in physicians' orders, which are determined by a physician based on a patient's specific goals.
The Company's performance obligations relate to contracts with a duration of less than one year; therefore, the Company has elected to apply the optional exemption provided by ASC 606 and is not required to disclose the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied as of the end of the reporting period. The unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied performance obligations are generally completed when the patients are discharged, which generally occurs within days or weeks of the end of the reporting period.
We determine the transaction price based on gross charges for services provided, reduced by estimates for contractual and non-contractual revenue adjustments. Contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for the difference between our standard rates and the contracted rates to be realized from patients, third party payors and others for services provided. Non-contractual revenue adjustments include discounts provided to self-pay, uninsured patients or other payors, adjustments resulting from payment reviews and adjustments arising from our inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation, authorizations or face-
to-face documentation. Subsequent changes to the estimate of the transaction price are recorded as adjustments to net service revenue in the period of change.
Non-contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for self-pay, uninsured patients and other payors by major payor class based on our historical collection experience, aged accounts receivable by payor and current economic conditions. The non-contractual revenue adjustments represent the difference between amounts billed and amounts we expect to collect based on our collection history with similar payors. The Company assesses its ability to collect for the healthcare services provided at the time of patient admission based on the Company's verification of the patient's insurance coverage under Medicare, Medicaid, and other commercial or managed care insurance programs. Medicare represents approximately 75% of the Company's consolidated net service revenue.
Amounts due from third-party payors, primarily commercial health insurers and government programs (Medicare and Medicaid), include variable consideration for retroactive revenue adjustments due to settlements of audits and payment reviews. We determine our estimates for non-contractual revenue adjustments related to payment reviews based on our historical experience and success rates in the claim appeals and adjudication process.
We determine our estimates for non-contractual revenue adjustments related to our inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation, authorizations, or face-to-face documentation based on our historical experience which primarily includes a historical collection rate of over 99% on Medicare claims. Revenue is recorded at amounts we estimate to be realizable for services provided.
Home Health Revenue Recognition
Medicare Revenue
Effective January 1, 2020, CMS implemented a revised case-mix adjustment methodology, PDGM, to better align payment with patient care needs and ensure that clinically complex and ill beneficiaries have adequate access to home health care. PDGM uses 30-day periods of care rather than 60-day episodes of care as the unit of payment, eliminates the use of the number of therapy visits provided in determining payment and relies more heavily on clinical characteristics and other patient information.
Net service revenue is recorded based on the established Federal Medicare home health payment rate for a 30-day period of care. ASC 606 notes that if an entity has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of the entity’s performance completed to date, the entity may recognize revenue in the amount to which the entity has a right to invoice. We have elected to apply the "right to invoice" practical expedient and therefore, our revenue recognition is based on the reimbursement we are entitled to for each 30-day payment period. We utilize our historical average length of stay for each 30-day period of care as the measure of progress towards the satisfaction of our performance obligation.
PDGM uses timing, admission source, functional impairment levels and principal and other diagnoses to case-mix adjust payments. The case-mix adjusted payment for a 30-day period of care is subject to additional adjustments based on certain variables including, but not limited to: (a) an outlier payment if our patient’s care was unusually costly (capped at 10% of total reimbursement per provider number); (b) a low utilization payment adjustment (“LUPA”) if the number of visits provided was less than the established threshold, which ranges from two to six visits and varies for every case-mix group under PDGM; (c) a partial payment if a patient transferred to another provider or from another provider before completing the 30-day period of care; and (d) the applicable geographic wage index. Payments for routine and non-routine supplies are now included in the 30-day payment rate.
Medicare can also make various adjustments to payments received if we are unable to produce appropriate billing documentation or acceptable authorizations. We estimate the impact of such adjustments based on our historical experience, which primarily includes a historical collection rate of over 99% on Medicare claims, and record this estimate during the period in which services are rendered to revenue and a corresponding reduction to patient accounts receivable.
Amounts due from Medicare include variable consideration for retroactive revenue adjustments due to settlements of audits and payment reviews. We determine our estimates for non-contractual revenue adjustments related to payment reviews based on our historical experience and success rates in the claim appeals and adjudication process.
The Medicare home health benefit requires that beneficiaries be homebound (meaning that the beneficiary is unable to leave his/her home without a considerable and taxing effort), require intermittent skilled nursing, physical therapy or speech therapy services, and receive treatment under a plan of care established and periodically reviewed by a physician. In order to provide greater flexibility during the novel coronavirus pandemic ("COVID-19"), CMS has relaxed the definition of homebound status through the duration of the public health emergency. During the pandemic, a beneficiary is considered homebound if they have been instructed by a physician not to leave their home because of a confirmed or suspected COVID-19 diagnosis or if the patient has a condition that makes them more susceptible to contracting COVID-19. Therefore, if a beneficiary is homebound due to COVID-19 and requires skilled services, the services will be covered under the Medicare home health benefit.
All Medicare contracts are required to have a signed plan of care which represents a single performance obligation, comprised of the delivery of a series of distinct services that are substantially similar and have a similar pattern of transfer to the customer. Accordingly, the Company accounts for the series of services ("episode") as a single performance obligation satisfied over time, as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the goods and services provided. An episode starts the first day a billable visit is performed and ends 60 days later or upon discharge, if earlier, with multiple continuous episodes allowed.
A portion of reimbursement from each Medicare episode, referred to as a request for anticipated payment ("RAP") is billed near the start of each 30-day period of care, and cash is typically received before all services are rendered. Any cash received from Medicare for a RAP for a 30-day period of care that exceeds the associated revenue earned is recorded to accrued expenses within our consolidated balance sheets. CMS reduced the upfront payment for RAPs to 20% for 2020 and has fully eliminated payments associated with RAPs in 2021.
Non-Medicare Revenue
Episodic-based Revenue. We recognize revenue in a similar manner as we recognize Medicare revenue for amounts that are paid by other insurance carriers, including Medicare Advantage programs; however, these amounts can vary based upon the negotiated terms which generally range from 90% to 100% of Medicare rates.
Non-episodic based Revenue. Gross revenue is recorded on an accrual basis based upon the date of service at amounts equal to our established or estimated per-visit rates. Contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for the difference between our standard rates and the contracted rates to be realized from patients, third parties and others for services provided and are deducted from gross revenue to determine net service revenue. We also make non-contractual revenue adjustments to non-episodic revenue based on our historical experience to reflect the estimated transaction price. We receive a minimal amount of our net service revenue from patients who are either self-insured or are obligated for an insurance co-payment.
Hospice Revenue Recognition
Hospice Medicare Revenue
Gross revenue is recorded on an accrual basis based upon the date of service at amounts equal to the estimated payment rates. The estimated payment rates are predetermined daily or hourly rates for each of the four levels of care we deliver. The four levels of care are routine care, general inpatient care, continuous home care and respite care. Routine care accounted for 97% of our total Medicare hospice service revenue for each of 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. There are two separate payment rates for routine care: payments for the first 60 days of care and care beyond 60 days. In addition to the two routine rates, we may also receive a service intensity add-on (“SIA”). The SIA is based on visits made in the last seven days of life by a registered nurse or medical social worker for patients in a routine level of care.
The performance obligation is the delivery of hospice services to the patient, as determined by a physician, each day the patient is on hospice care.
We make adjustments to Medicare revenue for non-contractual revenue adjustments, which include our inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation or acceptable authorizations and other reasons unrelated to credit risk. We estimate the impact of these non-contractual revenue adjustments based on our historical experience, which primarily includes a historical collection rate of over 99% on Medicare claims, and record it during the period services are rendered.
Additionally, our hospice service revenue is subject to certain limitations on payments from Medicare which are considered variable consideration. We are subject to an inpatient cap limit and an overall Medicare payment cap for each provider number. We monitor these caps on a provider-by-provider basis and estimate amounts due back to Medicare if we estimate a cap has been exceeded. We record these adjustments as a reduction to revenue and an increase in accrued expenses within our consolidated balance sheets. Providers are required to self-report and pay their estimated cap liability by February 28th of the following year. As of December 31, 2020, we have settled our Medicare hospice reimbursements for all fiscal years through
October 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded $9.3 million for estimated amounts due back to Medicare in accrued expenses for the Federal cap years ended October 31, 2014 through September 30, 2021; approximately $2.0 million of this balance was acquired with the AseraCare acquisition. As of December 31, 2019, we had recorded $5.7 million for estimated amounts due back to Medicare in accrued expenses for the Federal cap years ended October 31, 2013 through September 30, 2020.
Hospice Non-Medicare Revenue
Gross revenue is recorded on an accrual basis based upon the date of service at amounts equal to our established rates or estimated per day rates, as applicable. Contractual revenue adjustments are recorded for the difference between our standard rates and the contractual rates to be realized from patients, third party payors and others for services provided and are deducted from gross revenue to determine our net service revenue. We also make non-contractual adjustments to non-Medicare revenue based on our historical experience to reflect the estimated transaction price.
Personal Care Revenue Recognition
Personal Care Revenue
We generate net service revenues by providing our services directly to patients based on authorized hours, visits or units determined by the relevant agency, at a rate that is either contractual or fixed by legislation. Net service revenue is recognized at the time services are rendered based on gross charges for the services provided, reduced by estimates for contractual and non-contractual revenue adjustments. We receive payment for providing such services from payors, including state and local governmental agencies, managed care organizations, commercial insurers and private consumers. Payors include the following elder service agencies: Aging Services Access Points ("ASAPs"), Senior Care Options ("SCOs"), Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly ("PACE") and the Veterans Administration ("VA").
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. Acquisitions are accounted for as purchases and are included in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, are measured at fair value on the acquisition date using the appropriate valuation method. Goodwill generated from acquisitions is recognized for the excess of the purchase price over tangible and identifiable intangible assets. In determining the fair value of identifiable intangible assets, we use various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow analysis, the income approach, the cost approach and the market approach. These valuation methods require us to make estimates and assumptions surrounding projected revenues and costs, future growth and discount rates.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the amount of the purchase price in excess of the fair values assigned to the underlying identifiable net assets of acquired businesses. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to an annual impairment test. Tests are performed more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount. These events or circumstances include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business environment, regulatory environment or legal factors, or a substantial decline in the market capitalization of our stock.
U.S. GAAP allows for impairment testing to be done on either a quantitative or qualitative basis. During 2020, we utilized a qualitative analysis for our annual impairment test and determined that there were no triggering events that would indicate that it is "more likely than not" that the carrying values of our reporting units are higher than their respective fair values. As a result, we did not record any goodwill impairment charges and none of the goodwill associated with our various reporting units was considered at risk of impairment as of October 31, 2020. Since the date of our last annual goodwill impairment test, there have been no material developments, events, changes in operating performance or other circumstances that would cause management to believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of our reporting units would be less than their carrying amounts.
Intangible assets consist of certificates of need, licenses, acquired names and non-compete agreements. We amortize non-compete agreements and acquired names that we do not intend to use indefinitely on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which is generally two to three years for non-compete agreements and up to three years for acquired names. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the intangible asset below its carrying amount. During 2020, we performed a qualitative assessment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets; as a result of this analysis, we wrote off approximately $4.2 million of acquired names that are no longer in use. There have been no material developments, events,
changes in operating performance or other circumstances that would cause management to believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of our remaining intangible assets would be less than their carrying amounts.