ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 including the notes thereto, included in this Report. The discussion below contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors”. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made. We undertake no obligation to update or revise such statements to reflect new circumstances or unanticipated events as they occur, and you are urged to review and consider disclosures that we make in this and other reports that discuss factors germane to our business.
Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we operated and franchised a system-wide total of 35 fast casual restaurants, of which 26 were company-owned and 9 were owned and operated by franchisees under franchise agreements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we permanently closed 8 restaurants due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
American Burger Company (“ABC”) is a fast-casual dining chain consisting of 3 company-owned locations as of December 31, 2020 in North Carolina and New York. During 2020, ABC permanently closed 2 locations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. ABC is known for its diverse menu featuring fresh salads, customized burgers, milk shakes, sandwiches, and beer and wine.
BGR: The Burger Joint (“BGR”) was acquired in March 2015 and consists of 7 company-owned locations as of December 31, 2020 and 9 franchisee-operated locations in the United States and the Middle East. During 2020, BRG permanently closed 1 location in the United States due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Little Big Burger (“LBB”) was acquired in September 2015 and consists of 15 company-owned locations in the Portland, Oregon, Seattle, Washington, and Charlotte, North Carolina areas. During 2020, LBB permanently closed 4 locations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Of the company-owned restaurants, 8 of those locations are operated under partnership agreements with investors where we control the management and operations of the stores and the partner supplied the capital to open the store in exchange for a noncontrolling interest.
As of December 31, 2020, we operated 1 company-owned Hooters full-service restaurant in the United Kingdom. No Hooters locations were operated in the United States as of December 31, 2020 as the Hooters Oregon location was permanently closed in 2020 as a result of COVID-19 pandemic. Hooters restaurants are casual beach-themed establishments featuring music, sports on large flat screens, and a menu that includes seafood, sandwiches, burgers, salads, and of course, Hooters original chicken wings and the “nearly world famous” Hooters Girls. The Company started initially as an investor in corporate owned Hooters and, subsequently, evolved into a franchisee operator. We hold a minority investment stake in Hooters of America.
Recent Developments
Merger
On April 1, 2020, Chanticleer completed its merger transaction with Sonnet BioTherapeutics, Inc. (“Sonnet”), in accordance with the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 10, 2019, among the Company, Sonnet, Biosub Inc. (“Merger Sub”), and Sonnet Sub, as amended by Amendment No. 1 thereto, dated as of February 7, 2020 (as so amended, the “Merger Agreement”), pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into Sonnet Sub, with Sonnet Sub surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Chanticleer (the “Merger”). On April 1, 2020, in connection with the Merger, Chanticleer changed its name to “Sonnet BioTherapeutics Holdings, Inc.”
Spin-Off
In connection with and prior to the Merger, Chanticleer contributed and transferred to Amergent Hospitality Group, Inc. (“Amergent”), a newly-formed, wholly-owned subsidiary of Chanticleer, all of the assets and liabilities relating to Chanticleer’s restaurant business. On March 16, 2020, the board of directors of Chanticleer declared a dividend with respect to the shares of Chanticleer’s common stock outstanding at the close of business on March 26, 2020 of one share of the Amergent common stock held by Chanticleer for each outstanding share of Chanticleer common stock. The dividend, which together with the contribution and transfer of Chanticleer’s restaurant business described above, is referred to as the “Spin-Off.” Prior to the Spin-Off, Amergent engaged in no business or operations.
PPP Loan
On March 27, 2020, Congress passed “The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act” (CARES Act), which included the “Paycheck Protection Program” (PPP) for small businesses. On April 27, 2020, Amergent received a PPP loan of $2.1 million. Due to the Spin-Off and Merger, Amergent was not publicly traded at the time of the loan application or funding. The note bears interest at 1% per year, matures in April 2022, and requires monthly interest and principal payments of approximately $119,000 beginning in November 2020 and through maturity. The currently issued guidelines of the program allow for the loan proceeds to be forgiven if certain requirements are met. Any loan proceeds not forgiven will be repaid in full. The Company applied for forgiveness of the loan and the application is under review by the government agency administering the PPP. No assurance can be given as to the amount, if any, of forgiveness. The application for forgiveness allowed the Company to defer the timing of repayment until the forgiveness assessment is completed.
On February 25, 2021, we received an additional $2.0 million PPP loan. The note bears interest at 1% per year, matures on February 25, 2026, and requires monthly principal and interest payments of approximately $44,660 beginning June 25, 2022 through maturity. The loan may be forgiven if certain criteria are met.
EIDL Loan
On August 4, 2020, we obtained two loans under the Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) assistance program from the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business. The principal amount of the loans is $299,900, with proceeds to be used for working capital purposes. Interest accrues at the rate of 3.75% per year. Total installment payments, including principal and interest, are due monthly beginning August 4, 2021 in the amount of $1,762 monthly. The balance of principal and interest is payable over the next thirty years from the date of the promissory note. There are no penalties for prepayment. Based upon guidance issued by the SBA on June 19, 2020, the EIDL loans are not required to be refinanced by the PPP loan.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Our results of operations are summarized below:
* Restaurant cost of sales, operating expenses and closing expense percentages are based on restaurant sales, net. Other percentages are based on total revenue.
Revenue
Total revenue decreased to $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
● Revenue from Restaurant sales decreased 37.6% to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for the decline was due to COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, where a portion of the restaurants were temporarily closed, and the units that remained open were only able to provide take-out and delivery orders for customers due to government restrictions and mandates. Additionally, there was a decline in revenue from the closure of of non-performing stores. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company permanently closed 8 stores. These permanently closed stores provided revenue of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus $3.6 million for the comparable 2019 period.
● Gaming income decreased 36.9% to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for this decline was due to the affect COVID-19 pandemic had on operations. The gaming location in Portland was totally shut down for 6 weeks in 2020 due to COVID-19 during the months of April and May.
● Franchise Income decreased 40.7% to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for this decline was due to the affect COVID-19 pandemic had on revenue of franchise locations.
Restaurant cost of sales
Restaurant cost of sales decreased to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The percent of restaurant sales decreased to 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 32.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall decrease in cost of sales was due to the 37.6% decline in restaurant revenue to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $29.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restaurant operating expenses
Restaurant operating expenses decreased to $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, The overall decrease of restaurant operating expenses was driven by the overall decline of revenue as described in the revenue section above, and the corresponding adjustment of labor at the store level and tighter controls of store level operating expenses.
Restaurant pre-opening and closing expenses
Restaurant pre-opening and closing expenses decreased to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to no new restaurants opening in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to one restaurant that incurred pre-opening expenses in the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and administrative expense (“G&A”)
G&A expenses decreased to $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreased in G&A was driven by the reduction of Salaries and benefits resulting from the departure of two senior management personnel, a reduction in Advertising, insurance and other resulting from decreased expenditures due to store closures and the COVID-19 pandemic, and a reduction in travel and entertainment due to not having to manage unionization efforts that occurred in 2019, and improvements in management of operations. The decreases were slightly offset by increases in Audit, legal and other professional services resulting from the Company filing its Form-10 in 2020 for the Merger transaction. Significant components of G&A are summarized as follows:
Asset impairment charges
Asset impairment charges decreased to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2019, we recognized impairment charges related to the closure of three BGR locations, a Hooters location, and one American Burger location. We also recognized impairment charges related to our Hooters Nottingham location of approximately $1.0 million, and an impairment of $1.0 million related to the Hooters in Portland, Oregon. Due to the adoption of ASC 842 and termination fees from the above-mentioned store closures, the Company recognized another $5.2 million impairment in the year ended December 31, 2019.
In the 2020 period, the Company recorded an impairment on tradenames/trademarks of approximately $0.3 million, property and equipment of approximately $0.8 million and right of use asset of approximately $0.5 million primarily due to the lower level of cash flow at the store level along with the permanent closures related to the impact of COVID-19 on operations.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company has curtailed opening new stores in the past several years and in making acquisitions of property and equipment due to its financial condition. Recent impairments of property and equipment and intangible assets have caused a decrease in the gross value of the underlying assets thereby resulting in a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense.
Other (expense) income
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $0.7 million was comparable to the comparative period in 2019. This is consistent with the Company’s debt load at the end of each period of approximately $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the change in fair value of derivative liabilities was income of $0.6 million. The derivative liabilities arise from transactions in 2020 and as such, there was no amount in 2019. The derivative liabilities were marked to market at each quarter end through August 2020. An amendment was entered into on August 17, 2020 (see Note 7 in the financial statements) which eliminated the requirement to continue to mark-to-market these instruments.
In connection with the Merger, the Company obtained warrants to purchase 186,101 shares of Sonnet at $0.001 per share. The warrants were exercised in a cashless transaction in November 2020 resulting in the Company receiving 185,422 shares of Sonnet. The share price of Sonnet decreased from $8.76 at April 1, 2020 (the Merger date) to $2.23 at December 31, 2020 causing a loss on investment of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The shares will continue to be recorded at fair value until the securities are sold.
On April 1, 2020, the Company exchanged the then existing 8% non-convertible notes for 10% convertible notes. Warrants to purchase common stock were also issued in connection with the issuance of the new notes. The Company recorded a $11.8 million loss on the extinguishment of the 8% notes based on the difference in the carrying value of the old notes and the fair value of the new notes and warrants issued. See Note 7 to the financial statements for further discussion. There were no similar transactions in the year ended December 31, 2019.
In the year ended 2020, the Company recognized a gain on the extinguishment of lease liabilities of $0.5 million due to the derecognition of lease liabilities resulting from the Company negotiating the cancellation of its obligations under certain lease agreements. The cancellations resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic. There were no similar transactions in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other income was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other expense of ($0.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019 an expense of $0.4 million was recorded for the write down of an investment in Hooters of America. The item did not re-occur in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized approximately $0.2 million of income related to the remeasurement of right of use lease liabilities.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Cash used in operating activities was approximately $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used in operating activities of approximately $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This use of cash was primarily driven by the net loss of $21.1 million and $17.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Losses were also offset by non-cash charges to operations of $16.2 million and $13.1 in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The balance of the change in cash flows from operating activities was related to net movements in asset and liability accounts.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.06 million compared to cash provided of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities in 2020 was for the purchase of property and equipment. The cash provided from investing activities in 2019 was related to $0.5 million received from the sale of assets, $0.3 million from tenant improvement allowances offset by $0.5 million of expenditures for property and equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $7.1 million compared to cash provided by financing activities of approximately $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary drivers of the cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was proceeds from the bridge preferred equity investment, proceeds from the exercise of warrants, and the $5.4 million of net Merger Consideration received. The primary driver of the cash provided from financing activities in 2019 were proceeds received from a rights offering and contributions received from a non-controlling interest.
LIQUIDITY, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND GOING CONCERN
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, our cash balance was $1,928,804, of which $1,250,336 was restricted cash, our working capital deficiency was $12,281,398 and we had significant near-term commitments and contractual obligations. The level of additional cash needed to fund operations and our ability to conduct business for the next 12 months will be influenced primarily by the following factors:
● our ability to access the capital and debt markets to satisfy current obligations and operate the business;
● our ability to qualify for and access financial stimulus programs available through federal and state government programs;
● our ability to refinance or otherwise extend maturities of current debt obligations;
● our ability to manage our operating expenses and maintain gross margins;
● popularity of and demand for our fast-casual dining concepts; and
● general economic conditions and changes in consumer discretionary income.
We have typically funded our operating costs, acquisition activities, working capital requirements and capital expenditures with proceeds from the issuances of our common stock and other financing arrangements, including convertible debt, lines of credit, notes payable, capital leases, and other forms of external financing.
On March 10, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the novel COVID-19 virus as a global pandemic. The COVID-19 outbreak in the United States has resulted in a significant impact throughout the hospitality industry. The Company has been impacted due to restrictions placed on them by state and local governments that caused temporary restaurant closures or significantly reduced the Company’s ability to operate, restricting the Company’s restaurants to take-out only. It is difficult to estimate the length or severity of this outbreak; however, the Company has made operational changes, as needed, to reduce the impact. However, there can be no certainty regarding the length and severity of the outbreak and such its ultimate financial impact on the restaurant operations.
As a result of the Merger discussed in the audited consolidated and combined financial statements, on April 1, 2020, Amergent received gross proceeds of $6,000,000 in cash and warrants to purchase 186,161 shares of the Company’s common stock of Sonnet as well as paid down and refinanced certain debt obligations. Even considering the additional liquidity on April 1, 2020, proceeds from the PPP loan on April 27, 2020 and Febuary 25, 2021, and EIDL loans on April 4, 2020, the Company expects to be required to seek additional debt or equity funding to maintain ongoing operations and there can be no assurances that such funding would be available at commercially reasonable terms, if at all.
As Amergent executes its business plan over the next 12 months, it intends to carefully monitor the impact of its working capital needs and cash balances relative to the availability of cost-effective debt and equity financing. In the event that capital is not available, Amergent may then have to scale back or freeze its operations plans, sell assets on less than favorable terms, reduce expenses, and/or curtail future acquisition plans to manage its liquidity and capital resources.
The Company’s current operating losses, combined with its working capital deficit and uncertainties regarding the impact of COVID-19, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
In addition, our business is subject to additional risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
The consolidated and combined financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our reported results of operations and financial position are dependent upon the application of certain accounting policies and estimates that require subjective or complex judgments. Such estimates are inherently uncertain and changes in such estimates could have a significant impact on reported results and balances for the periods presented as well as future periods. The following is a description of what we consider to be our most critical accounting policies.
Leases
We determine if a contract contains a lease at inception. Our material operating leases consist of restaurant locations and office space. Our leases generally have remaining terms of 1-20 years and most include options to extend the leases for additional 5-year periods. Generally, the lease term is the minimum of the noncancelable period of the lease or the lease term inclusive of reasonably certain renewal periods up to a term of 20 years. If the estimate of our reasonably certain lease term was changed, our depreciation and rent expense could differ materially.
Operating lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date. Operating lease liabilities represent the present value of lease payments not yet paid. Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset and are based upon the operating lease liabilities adjusted for prepayments or accrued lease payments, initial direct costs, lease incentives, and impairment of operating lease assets. To determine the present value of lease payments not yet paid, we estimate incremental borrowing rates corresponding to the reasonably certain lease term. As we have no committed credit facilities, secured or otherwise, we estimate this rate based on prevailing financial market conditions, comparable company and credit analysis, and management judgment. If the estimate of our incremental borrowing rate was changed, our operating lease assets and liabilities could differ materially.
Estimated Lease Termination and Other Closing Costs
Once we have determined that a restaurant location is to be closed, we estimate the expected proceeds to be received from such disposal and impair the carrying value of the net assets of such locations to this estimate and report these net assets as assets held for sale. Our estimate of disposal proceeds is dependent upon multiple assumptions including our ability to identify a buyer as well as the general market for commercial real estate at the expected time of disposal. Actual results could significantly differ from these estimates, which could result in a significant impact to reported operations in future periods. Assets that have been impaired to their estimated disposal proceeds are maintained at the lower of this new carrying value or the most recently developed estimate of eventual proceeds.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, operating lease assets, and purchased intangible assets subject to depreciation and amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Some of the events or changes in circumstances that would trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to:
● significant under-performance relative to expected and/or historical results (negative comparable sales growth or operating cash flows for two consecutive years);
● significant negative industry or economic trends;
● knowledge of transactions involving the sale of similar property at amounts below the Company’s carrying value; or
● the Company’s expectation to dispose of long-lived assets before the end of their estimated useful lives, even though the assets do not meet the criteria to be classified as “Held for Sale.”
If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group be tested for possible impairment, the Company first compares undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques, including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary.
Due to the continued impact of this pandemic on the Company’s business, management performed an impairment analysis of its long-lived assets at each quarter end in 2020, including December 31, 2020, and determined that the carrying value of the Company’s trade name/trademark intangible asset, property and equipment and operating lease assets were impaired for an aggregate amount of $1.6 million. The determination was based on the best judgment of management for the future of the asset and on information known at the time of the assessment.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not subject to amortization but is tested at least annually or when impairment indicators are present. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, the Company may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired. If the Company does not perform a qualitative assessment, or determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, a quantitative assessment is performed to calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recorded to reduce the carrying value to the estimated fair value. The Company’s decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment is influenced by a number of factors, including the significance of the excess of the reporting unit’s estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments, and the price of our common stock. Impairment is measured as the excess of carrying value of the goodwill to its estimated fair value. Due to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, management performed an impairment analysis of goodwill as of each quarter end in 2020, including December 31, 2020. No goodwill impairment was required in 2020.
Derivative Liability
Accounting for the derivative liability relating to the Company’s true-up payment, warrants and debt conversion feature requires Amergent’s management to exercise judgment and make estimates and assumptions regarding fair value. Each derivative liability was initially recorded at fair value upon the date of issuance and is subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes recognized in the consolidated statement of operations until the liability expires or qualifies for equity classification. See note 11 to the combined consolidated financial statements for a discussion of these liabilities. At December 31, 2020, the only remaining derivative liability was related to a true-up payment. Changes in the fair value of the true-up payment will continue to be recognized until it is settled.
Modification of Debt
When we change the terms of existing notes payable, we evaluate the amendments under ASC 470-50, Debt Modification and Extinguishment to determine whether the change should be treated as a modification or as a debt extinguishment. This evaluation includes analyzing whether there are significant and consequential changes to the economic substance of the note. If the change is deemed insignificant then the change is considered a debt modification, whereas if the change is substantial the change is reflected as a debt extinguishment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We do not engage in off-balance sheet financing arrangements. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. We therefore believe that we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if it had engaged in these relationships.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact the our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to the consolidated and combined financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.