ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact, including without limitation, statements containing the words “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates” and similar words, constitute forward-looking statements that are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. From time to time we may make other forward-looking statements. Investors are cautioned that such forward-looking statements are subject to an inherent risk that actual results may materially differ as a result of many factors, including the risks discussed from time to time in this report, including the risks described under “Risk Factors” in any filings we have made with the SEC.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to useful lives of real estate assets, cost reimbursement income, bad debts, impairment, net lease intangibles, contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
Background
American Cannabis Company, Inc. and subsidiary is a publicly listed company quoted on the OTC Markets OTCQB Trading Tier under the symbol “AMMJ”. We are based in Denver, Colorado and operate a fully-integrated business model that features end-to-end solutions for businesses operating in the regulated cannabis and hemp industries in states and countries where cannabis and hemp is regulated and/or has been otherwise de-criminalized for medical use and/or legalized for recreational use. We provide advisory and consulting services specific to this industry, design industry-specific products and facilities, and sell both exclusive and non-exclusive customer products commonly used in these industries.
The Company was incorporated in the State of Delaware on September 24, 2001 under the name “Naturewell, Inc.” On March 13, 2013, the Company completed a merger transaction whereby it acquired Brazil Interactive Media, Inc. (“BIMI”), a Brazilian interactive television company and television production company. The Company’s Articles of Incorporation were amended to reflect a new name: Brazil Interactive Media, Inc. On May 15, 2014, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Cannamerica Corp. (the “Merger Sub”), a wholly owned subsidiary of BIMI, and Hollister & Blacksmith, Inc. a wholly owned subsidiary of American Cannabis Consulting (“American Cannabis Consulting”). The merger was completed on September 29, 2014, resulting in American Cannabis Consulting being merged with and into the Merger Sub (the “Reverse Merger”). The Company subsequently amended its Articles of Incorporation to change its name to “American Cannabis Company, Inc.” Upon the closing of the Reverse Merger, all of the Company’s officers and directors appointed designee officers and directors from American Cannabis Consulting and resigned. Consistent with the Merger Agreement, the Company consummated a complete divestiture of BIMI, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, pursuant to a Separation and Exchange Agreement dated May 16, 2014 (the “Separation Agreement”) between the Company, BIMI, Inc., and Brazil Investment Holding, LLC (“Holdings”), a Delaware limited liability company. On October 10, 2014, the Company changed its stock symbol from BIMI to AMMJ.
The foregoing descriptions of the Merger Agreement and Separation Agreement do not purport to be complete and are qualified in their entirety by the terms of such agreements, which are filed as exhibits to the Current Report on Form 8-K filed by the Company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on October 3, 2014.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency in response to a new strain of a coronavirus (the “COVID-19 outbreak”). In June 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve as of the date of this report. Management is actively monitoring the global situation and its effects on the Company’s industry, financial condition, liquidity, and operations. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, the Company has seen decreases consulting revenue during the last half of 2020 due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company expects to continue to see some depressive effect on consulting revenue but expects to see this offset by opportunities created in states that have recently legalized marijuana in the 2020 election. The Company has implemented changes to operations as necessitate by state and local jurisdictions, with no significant impact on operations.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019:
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, were $1,569,794 and $2,130,735 respectively, a decrease of $560,994. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in the demand for consulting services in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, consulting services revenue was $505,363 and $1,470,245, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, products and equipment revenues were $1,064,431 and $660,490 respectively. The decrease in our consulting services revenue was a result of new and established businesses halting building and expansion projects due the uncertainties presented by the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase attributable to our product revenues was due to our clients ordering more products and a focus by our management on product sales.
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues primarily consist of labor, travel, marketing and other costs directly attributable to providing services or offering products. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our total costs of revenues were $849,115 and $791,783, respectively. The increase was primarily due to higher margins on consulting services as a result of the decrease in sales and the increase in product sales.. For the year ended December 31, 2020, consulting related costs were $108,706 or 6.9% of total revenues, and costs associated with products and equipment were $740,409 or 47.16% of total revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2019, consulting related costs were $292,375 or 13.7% of total revenues, and costs associated with products and equipment were $499,408 or 23.4% of total revenues.
Gross Profit
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, gross profit was $720,679 and $1,338,952, respectively. This decrease of $618,273 was primarily due to a decrease in our client base and volume of operations for consulting services. As a percentage of total revenues, gross profit was 45.9% and 62.8% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This decrease was primarily due to the year ended December 31, 2020 having a higher proportion of total revenues from product and equipment sales, which have a lower profit margin than consulting sales which also had decreased during the period.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $1,344,719 and $1,672,816, respectively. This decrease of $328,097 was attributed to a decrease in warrant expenses and stock compensation expenses combined with decreases in sales and marketing expenses related to website work and design
Income Tax Expense
We did not have any income tax expense or benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. Although our tax status changed from a non-taxable pass-through entity (S-Corporation) to a taxable entity (C-Corporation) during the year ended December 31, 2014, due to cumulative losses since we became a C-Corporation, we recorded a valuation allowance against our related deferred tax asset which netted our deferred tax asset and benefit for income taxes to zero. We were an S-Corporation throughout the period from Inception (March 5, 2013) through December 31, 2013, and accordingly, no provision or benefit for income taxes was applicable.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors discussed above, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was ($532,413) and ($301,742), respectively. For December 31, 2020 our net loss was 33.9% of total revenues. For December 31, 2019, our net loss represented a 14.1% of total revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, our primary internal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $1,723,132 and $945,181, respectively. We also have the ability to raise additional capital as needed through an external equity financing transaction. We believe our liquidity and capital resources to be adequate to fund our operational and general and administrative expenses for the next 12 months.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued 16,700,000 registered shares of common stock in exchange for net proceeds of $1,193,566 pursuant to the Common Stock Purchase Agreement entered into on October 11, 2019 with White Lion Capital LLC.
Operating Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had a Net Cash Used in Operating Activities of ($525,794) and ($102,848), respectively. The decrease in Net Used In Operating Activities was attributed to delays in collections of accounts receivable combined with decrease consulting services being billed caused a decrease in accounts receivable and funds available for use.. Due to this factor and considering that our fixed overhead costs are relatively low, we have the ability to issue stock and stock equivalents to compensate employees and management, and the level of future revenue we expect to generate from executed client contracts, we believe our liquidity and capital resources to be adequate to fund our operational and general and administrative expenses for the next 12 months.
Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, net cash provided by (used in) investing activities was $267 and $38,536, respectively.
Financing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, financing activities were a source of cash of $1,303.478 and $0, respectively.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use Adjusted EBITA, a non-GAAP metric, to monitor our overall business performance. We define Adjusted EBITA as net income (loss) before interest expense, net, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, stock-based compensation and certain non-recurring expenses. We believe that such adjustments to arrive at Adjusted EBITA provides us with a more comparable measure for managing our business. We also believe that it is a useful measure for securities analysts, investors, and other interested parties in the evaluation of our Company.
A reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITA is provided below.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect amounts reported in those statements. We have made our best estimates of certain amounts contained in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. However, application of our accounting policies involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties, and, as a result, actual results could differ materially from these estimates. Management believes that the estimates, assumptions, and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
We cannot predict what future laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes in laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our financial statements when we deem it necessary.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents are held in operating accounts at a major financial institution.
Inventory
Inventory is primarily comprised of products and equipment to be sold to end-customers. Inventory is valued at cost, based on the specific identification method, unless and until the market value for the inventory is lower than cost, in which case an allowance is established to reduce the valuation to market value. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, market values of all of our inventory were greater than cost, and accordingly, no such valuation allowances was recognized.
Deposits
Deposits is comprised of advance payments made to third parties, primarily for inventory for which we have not yet taken title. When we take title to inventory for which deposits are made, the related amount is classified as inventory, then recognized as a cost of revenues upon sale (see “Costs of Revenues” below).
Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets
Prepaid expenses and other current assets are primarily comprised of advance payments made to third parties for independent contractors’ services or other general expenses. Prepaid services and general expenses are amortized over the applicable periods which approximate the life of the contract or service period.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at the net value of face amount less any allowance for doubtful accounts. On a periodic basis, we evaluate our accounts receivable and, based on a method of specific identification of any accounts receivable for which we deem the net realizable value to be less than the gross amount of accounts receivable recorded, we establish an allowance for doubtful accounts for those balances. In determining our need for an allowance for doubtful accounts, we consider historical experience, analysis of past due amounts, client creditworthiness and any other relevant available information. However, our actual experience may vary from our estimates. If the financial condition of our clients were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability or unwillingness to pay our fees, we may need to record additional allowances or write-offs in future periods. This risk is mitigated to the extent that we collect retainers from our clients prior to performing significant services.
The allowance for doubtful accounts, if any, is recorded as a reduction in revenue to the extent the provision relates to fee adjustments and other discretionary pricing adjustments. To the extent the provision relates to a client's inability to make required payments on accounts receivables, the provision is recorded in operating expenses. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019 our allowance for doubtful accounts was $57,512 and $39,677, respectively. For December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we recorded bad debt expense of $4,910 and $88,749, respectively.
Operating Lease
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). This ASU requires lessees to recognize a lease liability, on a discounted basis, and a right-of-use asset for substantially all leases, as well as additional disclosures regarding leasing arrangements. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842), which provides an optional transition method of applying the new lease standard. Topic 842 can be applied using either a modified retrospective approach at the beginning of the earliest period presented, or as permitted by ASU 2018-11, at the beginning of the period in which it is adopted.
We adopted this standard using a modified retrospective approach in 2019. The modified retrospective approach includes a number of optional practical expedients relating to the identification and classification of leases that commenced before the adoption date; initial direct costs for leases that commenced before the adoption date; and the ability to use hindsight in evaluating lessee options to extend or terminate a lease or to purchase the underlying asset.
The Company elected the package of practical expedients permitted under ASC 842 allowing it to account for its existing operating lease that commenced before the adoption date as an operating lease under the new guidance without reassessing (i) whether the contract contains a lease; (ii) the classification of the lease; or, (iii) the accounting for indirect costs as defined in ASC 842.
In considering its qualitative disclosure obligations under ASC 842-20-50-3, the Company examined its one lease for office space that has a fixed monthly rent with no variable lease payments and no options to extend. The lease is for an office space. The lease does not provide for terms and conditions granting residual value guarantees by the Company, or any restrictions or covenants imposed by the lease for dividends or incurring additional financial obligations by the Company. The Company also elected a short-term lease exception policy and an accounting policy to not separate non-lease components from lease components for our facility lease, as we determined our right of use asset to be zero.
In July 2020, our operating lease for our office space expired, at that time we fully amortized our ROU Asset for such lease. On June 1, 2020, the Company entered into a new lease membership agreement for a one-year term for an amount of $2,895 per month. We determined under ASC 842, due to the short term nature of the lease that the lease membership agreement met the criteria of ASC 842-20-25-2 and as such it is not necessary to capitalize the lease and rent will be recognized on a monthly straight-line basis.
The adoption of this guidance resulted in no significant impact to our results of operations or cash flows.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and Equipment is stated at net book value, cost less depreciation. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Depreciation of owned equipment is provided using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, ranging from two to seven years. Depreciation of capitalized construction in progress costs, a component of property and equipment, net, begins once the underlying asset is placed into service and is recognized over the estimated useful life. Property and equipment are reviewed for impairment as discussed below under “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.” We did not capitalize any interest as of December 31, 2020 and as of December 31, 2019.
Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Upon such an occurrence, recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to forecasted undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. For long-lived assets held for sale, assets are written down to fair value, less cost to sell. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, appraised values or management's estimates, depending upon the nature of the assets. We have not recorded any impairment charges related to long-lived assets during the year ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Revenue Recognition
During the first quarter of 2019, we adopted the following accounting principles related to revenue recognition: (a) FASB ASU 2016-12 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Due to the nature of our contracts with customers, adopting the new accounting principles did not have a significant impact on our prior period results of operations, cash flows or financial position.
Our service and product revenues arise from contracts with customers. Service revenue includes Operations Divisions consulting revenue. Product revenue includes (a) Operations Division product sales (So-Hum Living Soils) and (b) Equipment Sales Division. The majority of our revenue is derived from distinct performance obligations, such as time spent delivering a service or the delivery of a specific product.
We may also enter into contracts with customers that identify a single, or few, distinct performance obligations, but that also have non-distinct, underlying performance obligations. These contracts are typically fulfilled within one to six months. Only an insignificant portion of our revenue would be assessed for allocation between distinct (contractual) performance obligations and non-distinct deliverables between reporting periods and, accordingly, we do not record a contract asset for completed, non-distinct performance obligations prior to invoicing the customer.
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606 using the following 5 steps to identify revenues:
(1) Identify the contract with the Customer. Our customary practice is to obtain written evidence, typically in the form of a contract or purchase order.
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract. We have rights to payment when services are completed in accordance with the underlying contract, or for the sale of goods when custody is transferred to our customers either upon delivery to our customers’ locations, with no right of return or further obligations.
(3) Determination of the transaction price. Prices are typically fixed, and no price protections or variables are offered.
(4) Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract. Transaction prices are typically allocated to the performance obligations outlined in the contract.
(5) Recognize Revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We typically require a retainer for all or a portion of the goods or services to be delivered. We recognize revenue as the performance obligations detailed in the contract are met.
Advances from Clients deposits are contract liabilities with customers that represent our obligation to either transfer goods or services in the future, or refund the amount received. Where possible, we obtain retainers to lessen our risk of non-payment by our customers. Advances from Clients deposits are recognized as revenue as we meet specified performance obligations as detailed in the contract.
Product Sales
Revenue from product and equipment sales, including delivery fees, is recognized when an order has been delivered to the customer, the price is fixed and determinable when the order is placed, the product is delivered, title has transferred and collectability is reasonably assured. Generally, our suppliers’ drop-ship orders to our clients with destination terms. Given the facts that (1) our customers exercise discretion in determining the timing of when they place their product order; and, (2) the price negotiated in our product sales contracts is fixed and determinable at the time the customer places the order, we are not of the opinion that our product sales indicate or involve any significant financing that would materially change the amount of revenue recognized under the contract, or would otherwise contain a significant financing component for us or the customer under FASB ASC Topic 606. During the year ended December 31, 2020, sales returns were $109 comprised of product returns and replacement.
Consulting Services
We also generate revenues from professional services consulting agreements. These arrangements are generally entered into: (1) on an hourly basis for a fixed fee; or, (2) on a contingent fee basis. Generally, we require a complete or partial prepayment or retainer prior to performing services.
For hourly based fixed fee service contracts, we utilize and rely upon the proportional performance method, which recognizes revenue as services are performed. Under this method, in order to determine the amount of revenue to be recognized, we calculate the amount of completed work in comparison to the total services to be provided under the arrangement or deliverable. We segregate upon entry into a contract any advances or retainers received from clients for fixed fee hourly services into a separate “Advances from Clients” account, and only recognize revenues as we incur and charge billable hours, and then deposit the funds earned into our operating account. Because our hourly fees for services are fixed and determinable and are only earned and recognized as revenue upon actual performance, we are of the opinion that such arrangements are not an indicator of a vendor or customer based significant financing, that would materially change the amount of revenue we recognize under the contract or would otherwise contain a significant financing component under FASB ASC Topic 606.
Occasionally, our fixed-fee hourly engagements are recognized under the completed performance method. Some fixed fee arrangements are for completion of a final deliverable or act which is significant to the arrangement as a whole. These engagements do not generally exceed a one-year term. If the performance is for a final deliverable or act, we recognize revenue under the completed performance method, in which revenue is recognized once the final act or deliverable is performed or delivered for a fixed fee. Revenue recognition is affected by a number of factors that change the estimated amount of work required to complete the deliverable, such as changes in scope, timing, awaiting notification of license award from local government, and the level of client involvement. Losses, if any, on fixed-fee engagements are recognized in the period in which the loss first becomes probable and reasonably estimable. FASB ASC Topic 606 provides a practical expedient to disregard the effects of a financing component if the period between payment and performance is one year or less. As, our fixed fee hourly engagements do not exceed one year, no significant customer based financing is implicated under FASB ASC Topic 606. During the year ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we have incurred no losses from fixed fee engagements that terminate prior to completion. We believe if an engagement terminates prior to completion, we can recover the costs incurred related to the services provided.
We primarily enter arrangements for which fixed and determinable revenues are contingent and agreed upon achieving a predetermined deliverable or future outcome. Any contingent revenue for these arrangements is not recognized until the contingency is resolved and collectability is reasonably assured.
Our arrangements with clients may include terms to deliver multiple services or deliverables. These contracts specifically identify the services to be provided with the corresponding deliverable. The value for each deliverable is determined based on the prices charged when each element is sold separately or by other vendor-specific objective evidence (“VSOE”) or estimates of stand-alone selling prices. Revenues are recognized in accordance with our accounting policies for the elements as described above (see Product Sales). The elements qualify for separation when the deliverables have value on a stand-alone basis and the value of the separate elements can be established by VSOE or an estimated selling price.
While assigning values and identifying separate elements requires judgment, selling prices of the separate elements are generally readily identifiable as fixed and determinable as we also sell those elements individually outside of a multiple services engagement. Contracts with multiple elements typically incorporate a fixed-fee or hourly pricing structure. Arrangements are typically terminable by either party upon sufficient notice or do not include provisions for refunds relating to services provided.
Reimbursable expenses, including those relating to travel, other out-of-pocket expenses and any third-party costs, are included as a component of revenues. Typically, an equivalent amount of reimbursable expenses is included in total direct client service costs. Reimbursable expenses related to time and materials and fixed-fee engagements are recognized as revenue in the period in which the expense is incurred and collectability is reasonably assured. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are presented in the statement of operations on a net basis.
Costs of Revenues
Our policy is to recognize costs of revenue in the same manner in conjunction with revenue recognition. Cost of revenues include the costs directly attributable to revenue recognition and includes compensation and fees for services, travel and other expenses for services and costs of products and equipment. Selling, general and administrative expenses are charged to expense as incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
Restricted shares are awarded to employees and entitle the grantee to receive shares of restricted common stock at the end of the established vesting period. The fair value of the grant is based on the stock price on the date of grant. We recognize related compensation costs on a straight-line basis over the requisite vesting period of the award, which to date has been one year from the grant date. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, stock-based compensation expense for restricted shares was $29,970 and $73,514, respectively. Compensation expense for warrants are based on the fair value of the instruments on the grant date, which is determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model and are expensed over the expected term of the awards. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, compensation expense for warrants was $0 and $151,906 respectively. The decrease was attributed to the Company issuing less warrants to its consultants and employees.
Income Taxes
Our corporate status changed from an S-Corporation, which it had been since inception, to a C-Corporation during the year ended December 31, 2014. As provided in Section 1361 of the Internal Revenue Code, for income tax purposes, S-Corporations are not subject to corporate income taxes; instead, the owners are taxed on their proportionate share of the S-Corporation’s taxable income. Accordingly, we were only subject to income taxes for a portion of 2014. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns in accordance with applicable accounting guidance for accounting for income taxes, using currently enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We record a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, due to cumulative losses since our corporate status changed, we recorded a valuation allowance against our deferred tax asset that reduced our income tax benefit for the period to zero. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had no liabilities related to federal or state income taxes and the carrying value of our deferred tax asset was zero. The years 2010 to 2015 remain subject to examination by the Company’s major tax jurisdictions.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We report net loss per common share in accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”. This statement requires dual presentation of basic and diluted earnings with a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator of the earnings per share computations. Basic net loss per share is computed by dividing net income attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period and excludes the effects of any potentially dilutive securities. Diluted net income (loss) per share gives effect to any dilutive potential common stock outstanding during the period. The computation does not assume conversion, exercise or contingent exercise of securities that would have an anti-dilutive effect on earnings.
Related Party Transactions
We follow FASB ASC subtopic 850-10, “Related Party Transactions”, for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions.
Pursuant to ASC 850-10-20, related parties include: a) affiliates of the Company; b) entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the fair value option under the Fair Value Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity; c) trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management; d) principal owners of the Company; e) management of the Company; f) other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and g) other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
Material related party transactions are required to be disclosed in the consolidated financial statements, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of consolidated or combined financial statements is not required in those statements. The disclosures shall include: a) the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b) a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which statements of operation are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c) the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which statements of operations are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d) amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.