Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are “forward-looking statements.” See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” under Item 1, “Business.” We intend this MD&A section to provide you with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following sections comprise this MD&A:
•Changes to Our Reportable Segments
•Overview of Our Business
•Recent Trends
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Off-Balance Sheet and Other Financing Arrangements
•Contractual Obligations
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Changes to Our Reportable Segments
Effective March 8, 2020, we modified our reportable segments. We previously utilized three reportable segments, which we identified as follows: (1) nurse and allied solutions, (2) locum tenens solutions, and (3) other workforce solutions. In light of our acquisitions as well as our organizational changes to better align our structure with our strategy, our management reorganized our reportable segments to better reflect how the business is evaluated by the chief operating decision maker. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we have disclosed the following three reportable segments: (1) nurse and allied solutions, (2) physician and leadership solutions, and (3) technology and workforce solutions. The nurse and allied solutions segment includes our travel nurse staffing, rapid response nurse staffing and labor disruption, allied staffing, local staffing, and revenue cycle solutions businesses. The physician and leadership solutions segment includes our locum tenens staffing, healthcare interim leadership staffing, executive search, and physician permanent placement businesses. The technology and workforce solutions segment includes language interpretation, vendor management systems, workforce optimization, recruitment process outsourcing, education, credentialing and flex pool management businesses. Prior period data in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” has been reclassified to conform to the new segment reporting structure.
Overview of Our Business
We provide healthcare workforce solutions and staffing services to healthcare facilities across the nation. As an innovative total talent solutions partner, our managed services programs, or “MSP,” vendor management systems, or “VMS,” workforce consulting services, predictive modeling, staff scheduling, credentialing services, revenue cycle solutions, language interpretation services and the placement of physicians, nurses, allied healthcare professionals and healthcare leaders into temporary and permanent positions enable our clients to successfully reduce staffing complexity, increase efficiency and lead their organizations within the rapidly evolving healthcare environment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded revenue of $2,393.7 million, as compared to $2,222.1 million for 2019. We recorded net income of $70.7 million for 2020, as compared to $114.0 million for 2019. Nurse and allied solutions segment revenue comprised 71% and 70% of total consolidated revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Physician and leadership solutions segment revenue comprised 19% and 25% of total consolidated revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Technology and workforce solutions segment revenue comprised 10% and 5% of total consolidated revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For a description of the services we provide under each of our business segments, please see, “Item 1. Business-Our Services.”
We believe we are recognized as the market-leading innovator in providing healthcare talent solutions in the United States. We seek to advance our market-leading position through a number of strategies that focus on market penetration, expansion of our talent solutions, increasing operational efficiency and scalability and increasing our supply of qualified healthcare professionals. Our market growth strategy continues to focus on broadening and investing, both organically and
through strategic acquisitions, in service and technology offerings beyond our traditional temporary staffing and permanent placement services, to include more strategic and recurring revenue sources from innovative talent solutions offerings such as MSP, VMS, credentialing, workforce optimization service, and other technology-enabled services. We also seek strategic opportunities to expand into complementary service offerings to our staffing businesses that leverage our core capabilities of recruiting and credentialing healthcare professionals.
As part of our long-term growth strategy to add value for our clients, healthcare professionals, and stockholders, on February 14, 2020, December 19, 2019, June 14, 2019, January 30, 2019, April 9, 2018 and April 6, 2018, we acquired Stratus Video (which we have since rebranded as AMN Language Services), b4health, Advanced (which we have since rebranded as American Mobile and Med Travelers for the travel nurse staffing and allied staffing divisions, respectively), Silversheet, MedPartners (which we have since rebranded as AMN Revenue Cycle Solutions), and Phillips DiPisa and Leaders For Today (“PDA” and “LFT”, which we have since rebranded as B.E. Smith), respectively. Stratus Video is a remote video interpreting company that provides healthcare interpretation via remote video, over the phone, and onsite in-person, all supported by proprietary technology platforms. b4health is an innovative technology company and a leading provider of a web-based internal float pool management solution and VMS for healthcare facilities. Advanced is a national healthcare staffing company that specializes in placing therapists and nurses across multiple settings, including hospitals, schools, clinics, skilled nursing facilities, and home health. Silversheet provides innovative credentialing software solutions to clinicians and healthcare enterprises. See additional information in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (2), Acquisitions.”
Operationally, our strategic initiatives focus on investing in and further developing our processes and systems to achieve market leading efficiency and scalability, which we believe will provide operating leverage as our revenue grows. From a healthcare professional supply perspective, we continue to invest in new candidate recruitment and engagement initiatives and technologies to access and effectively utilize our network of qualified healthcare professionals to capitalize on the demand growth we are experiencing, which we expect to continue in the future due to the combined effects of healthcare reform, the aging population and labor shortages within certain regions and disciplines.
Over the last several years, we have worked to execute on our management strategies and intend to continue to do so in the future. Over the past five years, we have grown our business both organically and as a result of a number of acquisitions.
We typically experience modest seasonal fluctuations during our fiscal year and they tend to vary among our business segments. These fluctuations can vary slightly in intensity from year to year. Over the past five years, these quarterly fluctuations have been muted in our consolidated results.
Recent Trends
Demand for our temporary and permanent placement staffing services is driven in part by U.S. economic and labor trends, and in 2020 through present, demand has been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2020, we experienced historically high demand for nurses and certain allied healthcare professionals and our demand for these disciplines continues to be elevated. However, when the imposition of “shelter-in-place” orders and the suspension of elective and “non-essential” healthcare services occurred in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 health crisis, demand for many of our businesses declined significantly. Although most of these “shelter-in-place” orders and service suspensions have been lifted, general utilization of healthcare continues to be below the pre-COVID-19 levels, which continues to negatively impact demand for many of our business lines other than nursing, certain allied disciplines, language interpretation services and our vendor management technology solutions. With the increase in unemployment, related economic concerns, healthcare professional “burnout” and the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the extent and duration to which demand for our businesses will continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In our nurse and allied solutions segment, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to recruit enough nurses to meet the then-current demand levels was impacted by the tight labor market and modest bill rate increases. Demand for nurses in specialties including ICU, telemetry, and medical surgical nurses is particularly strong, and needs are high across the country. With the higher demand, and urgent need to quickly fill positions, bill rates and wages for these nurses are currently well above prior year levels. Demand for nurses peaked in December 2020, and has declined along with COVID-19 hospitalizations. Bill rates also remain well above historic levels, though recently have started to trend down along with the demand decline. Although the number of nurses on travel assignments has been increasing each month since July 2020, our ability to adequately meet the high client demand is constrained by the tight labor market along with nurse burnout and other issues related to the pandemic. In addition, as a result of the significant increase in COVID-19 infection and hospitalization rates throughout the third quarter and into October, our workers’ compensation insurance costs have increased.
The demand in our allied staffing division significantly varies by discipline. We have seen a significant increase in demand for respiratory therapists and lab technicians due to the high COVID-19 infections and hospitalizations across the country. Like nursing, the demand for respiratory therapy has declined from its peak as COVD-19 hospitalizations have declined, but still remains at elevated levels. Demand for our imaging and lab specialties has steadily recovered and is now well above prior year levels. For speech language therapists contracted to work with schools, the uneven levels of in-person education has slowed in growth, but this slowdown in growth has been partially mitigated by the fact that many therapists have been able to deliver care through the adoption of our teletherapy platform.
Prior to the COVID-19 public health crisis, our allied staffing division experienced a decline in demand for physical therapists from skilled nursing facility and home health clients resulting from Medicare reimbursement changes. This decline in demand was further exacerbated by the impact of COVID-19 in March. Although the utilization of physical therapists has been slowly increasing with the general recovery in healthcare, demand and placements for this discipline are still well below prior year.
In our physician and leadership solutions segment, our locum tenens division started 2020 well, with recruiter productivity and revenue increasing after disruptions resulting from process and technology changes made during 2018. However, in mid-March, as a result of COVID-19, our locum tenens business experienced a significant increase in order cancellations and a decrease in overall demand due to the suspension of elective procedures and non-essential healthcare services. In the latter half of the year, locum tenens experienced a spike in demand related to COVID-19, although this has more recently declined along with lower hospitalizations. Although the placements for locum tenens has been slowly improving along with increases in general healthcare utilization, the recovery is inconsistent across specialties.
For our interim leadership division, demand decreased as providers reacted to lower patient volumes and focused on cost containment. More recently, demand for our interim leadership services surged due to both needs related to increased COVID-19 hospitalizations and an increased level of burnout and turnover of healthcare leadership roles. Our physician permanent placement and healthcare executive search businesses experienced a decline in overall search demand as many clients suspended filling open roles due to uncertainty from the COVID-19 public health crisis. Since June, demand for permanent placement services has improved from their lowest levels, but clients remain cautious in hiring in this uncertain environment.
In our technology and workforce solutions segment, our VMS technologies initially experienced increased growth following the outbreak of the COVID-19 public health crisis as clients utilized our technologies to effectively manage their increased demand for nurses. As demand for nurses declined during the second quarter, utilization of the VMS technologies also declined. However, more recently, orders, placements and bill rates in the technologies have risen significantly, and new clients are also adopting the platforms to engage with contingent labor.
In early March, the utilization in our language interpretation business declined as a result of the COVID-19-related suspension or restriction of elective and “non-essential” healthcare services. However, utilization started to increase in late April as many of these restrictions were lifted and healthcare utilization resumed more normal activities. By mid-June, weekly interpretation minutes utilized were above pre-COVID-19 levels and have continued to steadily increase from both existing and new clients.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a delay in discussions with clients regarding new contracts or expansions. As clients have recently begun to resume normal operations, we have contracted for several new managed services programs and service line expansions. As a result of our ongoing focus on these types of strategic MSP relationships, the percentage of our staffing revenue derived from our MSP clients continues to increase.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented new service offerings such as contact tracing services and return to work healthcare workforce solutions to support non-healthcare clients and the communities we serve. Through these services, we help clients ensure the health and well-being of their employees and take necessary steps to implement new safety protocols such as COVID-19 screening, testing, temperature checks, on-site clinical support and contact tracing. More recently, we have been providing staffing and management services related to vaccination sites, and expect this support will continue through all or the majority of 2021.
In response to the reduced demand for services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, throughout the second quarter, we took actions to reduce our selling, general and administrative expenses. Cost reduction actions taken included, among other things, suspending employer contributions under our 401(k) retirement savings plan and deferred compensation plan, reducing our workforce to correspond to reduced demand, and reducing variable compensation, travel, professional services and marketing expenses. As our businesses continue to recover, we have been increasing our workforce to support our clients’ needs, increasing spending in certain areas and have fully restored our retirement matching benefits.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain statements of operations data as a percentage of revenue. Our results of operations include three reportable segments: (1) nurse and allied solutions, (2) physician and leadership solutions, and (3) technology and workforce solutions. The acquisitions during 2020, 2019 and 2018 impact the comparability of the results between the years presented. See additional information in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (2), Acquisitions.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of our results of operations to be expected in the future.
Comparison of Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. Revenue increased 8% to $2,393.7 million for 2020 from $2,222.1 million for 2019, primarily attributable to additional revenue of $194.2 million from our Stratus Video, Advanced, b4health, and Silversheet acquisitions and higher organic revenue in our nurse and allied solutions segment, partially offset by lower revenue in our physician and leadership solutions segment. Excluding the additional revenue from acquisitions, revenue decreased 1%.
Nurse and allied solutions segment revenue increased 9% to $1,699.3 million for 2020 from $1,562.6 million for 2019. The $136.7 million increase was primarily attributable to additional revenue of $72.2 million in connection with the Advanced acquisition. Excluding the impact from the Advanced acquisition, the increase was also attributable to an approximately 15% increase in the average bill rate, partially offset by a 12% decrease in the average number of healthcare professionals on assignment and an approximately $29.0 million decrease in labor disruption revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Physician and leadership solutions segment revenue decreased 17% to $466.6 million for 2020 from $562.8 million for 2019. The $96.1 million decrease was primarily attributable to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the segment’s businesses. The locum tenens business experienced a 13% decrease in the number of days filled and a 1% decrease in the revenue per day filled during 2020. In addition, revenue in our interim leadership and permanent placement businesses declined collectively by approximately 20% during 2020 due to a decrease in overall demand as some clients cancelled searches and placed new searches on hold due to the public health crisis.
Technology and workforce solutions segment revenue increased 135% to $227.8 million for 2020 from $96.8 million for 2019. Of the $131.0 million increase, $122.0 million was attributable to additional revenue from our Stratus Video, b4health, and Silversheet acquisitions, with the remainder primarily attributable to growth in our organic VMS business during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For 2020 and 2019, revenue under our MSP arrangements comprised approximately 50% and 45% of our consolidated revenue, 65% and 57% for nurse and allied solutions segment revenue and 17% and 20% for physician and leadership solutions segment revenue, respectively.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased 6% to $791.8 million for 2020 from $743.5 million for 2019, representing gross margins of 33.1% and 33.5%, respectively. The decline in in consolidated gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a lower gross margin in our nurse and allied solutions segment, driven primarily by lower bill-to-pay spreads and higher workers’ compensation insurance expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the change in sales mix resulting from our Stratus Video and b4health acquisitions and their higher margins as compared to our staffing
businesses. Gross margin by reportable segment for 2020 and 2019 was 27.4% and 28.5% for nurse and allied solutions, 36.7% and 37.0% for physician and leadership solutions, and 67.9% and 92.8% for technology and workforce solutions, respectively. The year-over-year gross margin decline in the technology and workforce solutions segment was primarily due to the change in sales mix resulting from the addition of lower margin Stratus Video as compared to our SaaS-based technologies within the segment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses were $549.7 million, representing 23.0% of revenue, for 2020, as compared to $508.0 million, representing 22.9% of revenue, for 2019. The increase in SG&A expenses was primarily due to $31.3 million of additional SG&A expenses from the Stratus Video, Advanced, b4health, and Silversheet acquisitions and a $31.0 million increase related to acquisition, integration, changes in the fair value of earn-out liabilities from acquisitions, restructuring, and extraordinary legal expenses, which included a $20.0 million increase in legal accruals during the fourth quarter of 2020. The overall increase was partially offset by cost reduction measures that were initiated during the second quarter of 2020, which was also the primary driver of the decrease in the physician and leadership solutions segment. The increase in the technology and workforce solutions segment was primarily driven by $22.2 million of additional expenses from the Stratus Video, b4health, and Silversheet acquisitions. The increase in unallocated corporate overhead was primarily attributable to higher acquisition, integration, changes in the fair value of earn-out liabilities from acquisitions, restructuring, and extraordinary legal expenses. SG&A expenses broken down among the reportable segments, unallocated corporate overhead, and share-based compensation are as follows:
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Amortization expense increased 75% to $63.8 million for 2020 from $36.5 million for 2019, primarily attributable to additional amortization expenses related to the intangible assets acquired in the Advanced, b4health, and Stratus Video acquisitions, the shortened useful life of tradename intangible asset acquired in the MedPartners acquisition during the third quarter of 2019, and the shortened useful lives of the tradename intangible assets during the third quarter of 2020. Depreciation expense increased 31% to $28.9 million for 2020 from $22.0 million for 2019, primarily attributable to an increase in purchased and developed hardware and software placed in service for our ongoing information technology investments to support our total talent solutions initiatives and to optimize our internal front and back office systems. Additionally, $1.4 million of depreciation expense for Stratus Video, which was acquired in February 2020, is included in cost of revenue for 2020.
Interest Expense, Net, and Other. Interest expense, net, and other, was $57.7 million for 2020 as compared to $28.4 million for 2019. The increase is primarily due to (1) a higher average debt outstanding balance during 2020, which resulted from (a) borrowings under our Amended Credit Agreement (as defined below in this Item 7) used to finance the Stratus Video and Advanced acquisitions, (b) the issuance of our Existing 2027 Notes (as defined below in this Item 7) in October 2019, (c) the issuance of our New 2027 Notes (as defined below in this Item 7) in August 2020, and (d) the issuance of our 2029 Notes (as defined below in this Item 7) in October 2020, (2) $8.3 million premium payment associated with the redemption of the 2024 Notes (as defined below in this Item 7) in November 2020, and (3) $5.0 million of write-offs of unamortized financing fees during 2020. The proceeds from the issuances of the higher interest bearing senior notes were used to repay, in whole in the fourth quarter of 2019 and in part in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, our indebtedness under the lower interest bearing Credit Facilities (as defined below in this Item 7).
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense was $20.9 million for 2020 as compared to $34.5 million for 2019, reflecting effective income tax rates of 22.8% and 23.2% for these periods, respectively. The decrease in the effective income tax rate was partially attributable to the recognition of discrete tax benefits of $4.7 million and $7.3 million in relation to income before income taxes of $91.5 million and $148.5 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. See additional information in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (7), Income Taxes, and Note (1), Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
Comparison of Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue. Revenue increased 4% to $2,222.1 million for 2019 from $2,136.1 million for 2018, primarily attributable to additional revenue of $117.6 million from our Advanced, MedPartners, PDA, LFT, and Silversheet acquisitions and higher organic revenue in our nurse and allied solutions segment, partially offset by lower organic revenue in our physician and leadership solutions segment. Excluding the additional revenue from acquisitions, revenue decreased 1%.
Nurse and allied solutions segment revenue increased 9% to $1,562.6 million for 2019 from $1,431.0 million for 2018. The $131.6 million increase was primarily attributable to additional revenue of $110.8 million in connection with the Advanced and MedPartners acquisitions. Excluding the impact from acquisitions, the increase was also attributable to an approximately 1% increase in the average bill rate during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Physician and leadership solutions segment revenue decreased 9% to $562.8 million for 2019 from $617.5 million for 2018. The $54.7 million decrease was primarily attributable to a 17% decrease in the number of days filled in our locum tenens business, which was partially offset by additional revenue of $5.7 million in connection with the PDA and LFT acquisition and growth in our permanent placement and organic interim leadership businesses.
Technology and workforce solutions segment revenue increased 10% to $96.8 million for 2019 from $87.6 million for 2018. The $9.2 million increase was primarily attributable to growth in our VMS business during the year ended December 31, 2019.
For 2019 and 2018, revenue under our MSP arrangements comprised approximately 45% and 42% of our consolidated revenue, 57% and 57% for nurse and allied solutions segment revenue and 20% and 15% for physician and leadership solutions segment revenue, respectively.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased 7% to $743.5 million for 2019 from $696.4 million for 2018, representing gross margins of 33.5% and 32.6%, respectively. Gross margin by reportable segment for 2019 and 2018 was 28.5% and 27.7% for nurse and allied solutions, 37.0% and 35.5% for physician and leadership solutions, and 92.8% and 91.4% for technology and workforce solutions, respectively. The year-over-year gross margin increase in the physician and leadership solutions segment was primarily due to the change in sales mix resulting from the addition of higher margin PDA and LFT as compared to our locum tenens business within the segment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. The year-over-year increase in SG&A expenses in the nurse and allied solutions segment was primarily driven by $17.1 million of additional expenses from the Advanced and MedPartners acquisitions and other expenses associated with the revenue growth. SG&A expenses broken down among the reportable segments, unallocated corporate overhead, and share-based compensation are as follows:
We describe in further detail the comparison of results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Comparison of Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018” of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In summary, our cash flows were:
Historically, our primary liquidity requirements have been for acquisitions, working capital requirements, and debt service under our credit facilities and senior notes. We have funded these requirements through internally generated cash flow and funds borrowed under our credit facilities and senior notes. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we redeemed the entire outstanding $325.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.125% senior notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”). At December 31, 2020, (1) the total of our Additional Term Loan (as defined below) outstanding (including both current and long-term portions) was $21.9 million, (2) zero was drawn with $378.1 million of available credit under the Senior Credit Facility (as defined below), (2) the aggregate principal amount of our 2027 Notes (as defined below) outstanding equaled $500.0 million, and (3) the aggregate principal amount of our 2029 Notes (as defined below) outstanding equaled $350.0 million. We repaid in full our indebtedness under the Additional Term Loan in January 2021. We describe in further detail our Amended Credit Agreement (as defined below), under which our Senior Credit Facility is governed, the 2027 Notes, and the 2029 Notes in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (8), Notes Payable and Credit Agreement.”
We believe that cash generated from operations and available borrowings under our Senior Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our operations, including expected capital expenditures, for the next 12 months and beyond. We intend to finance potential future acquisitions with cash provided from operations, borrowings under our Senior Credit Facility, or other borrowings under our Amended Credit Agreement, bank loans, debt or equity offerings, or some combination of the foregoing. The following discussion provides further details of our liquidity and capital resources.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $256.8 million, $224.9 million and $227.0 million, respectively. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 from 2019 was primarily attributable to (1) an increase in other liabilities between periods of $47.7 million, and a corresponding decrease in income tax receivable between periods of $4.1 million, primarily due to our election to defer employer payroll taxes in accordance with the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and an increase in accruals established in connection with a legal matter during the fourth quarter of 2020, which was partially offset by the contingent consideration earn-out payment for the Advanced acquisition (in excess of its acquisition-date fair value, which is noted below in financing activities), and (2) a decrease in other assets between periods of $16.0 million due to lower long-term prepayments and deposits. The overall increase was partially offset by (1) a decrease in accrued compensation and benefits between periods of $6.9 million primarily due to higher distributions under the deferred compensation plan as compared to the prior year and (2) an increase in accounts receivable and subcontractor receivable between periods of $14.3 million due to improved collections in 2019 as compared to 2018, which stabilized in 2020, and a higher average receivable balance in the current year due to an increase in revenue. Our Days Sales Outstanding was 55 and 55 days at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $538.2 million, $291.8 million and $279.3 million, respectively. The year-over-year increase from 2019 to 2020 in net cash used in investing activities was primarily attributable to (1) $476.5 million used for acquisitions in 2020 as compared to $247.9 million in 2019 and (2) a net purchase of restricted investments related to our captive insurance company of $15.5 million during 2020, as compared to net proceeds of $5.8 million during 2019. The overall increase was partially offset by $5.3 million less payments made to fund the deferred compensation plan during 2020 as compared to 2019. Capital expenditures were $37.7 million, $35.2 million and $35.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our capital expenditures in recent years were primarily to information technology investments to support our total talent solutions initiatives and efforts to optimize our internal front and back office systems.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $211.5 million, $136.6 million and $37.5 million, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 was primarily due to (1) gross proceeds received in connection with the issuances of the New 2027 Notes (as defined below) and the 2029 Notes (as defined below) of $552.0 million and (2) borrowings of $245.0 million under the Senior Credit Facility (as defined below) and $250.0 million under the Additional Term Loan (as defined below), partially offset by (1) the repayments of $245.0 million under the Senior Credit Facility and $228.1 million under the Additional Term Loan, (2) $333.3 million of payments related to the redemption of the 2024 Notes (as defined below), (3) $11.5 million of financing costs paid in connection with the Amended Credit Agreement (as defined below) and the issuances of the 2027 Notes and the 2029 Notes, (4) $10.6 million of prior acquisition contingent consideration earn-out payments, and (5) $6.9 million in cash paid for shares withheld for payroll taxes resulting from the vesting of employee equity awards.
Amended Credit Agreement
On February 9, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement (the “New Credit Agreement”) with several lenders to provide for a $400.0 million secured revolving credit facility (the “Senior Credit Facility”) to replace our then-existing credit agreement. On June 14, 2019, we entered into the first amendment to the New Credit Agreement (the “First Amendment”) to provide for, among other things, a $150.0 million secured term loan credit facility (the “Term Loan”). In connection with our issuance of the Existing 2027 Notes (as defined below), we used a portion of the proceeds to repay our entire indebtedness under the Term Loan during the fourth quarter of 2019.
On February 14, 2020, we entered into the second amendment to the New Credit Agreement (the “Second Amendment”) to provide for, among other things, a $250.0 million secured term loan credit facility (the “Additional Term Loan” and, together with the Senior Credit Facility, the “Credit Facilities”). The Second Amendment (together with the New Credit Agreement and the First Amendment, collectively, the “Amended Credit Agreement”) extended the maturity date of the Senior Credit Facility to be coterminous with the Additional Term Loan. The Senior Credit Facility includes a $75.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and a $75.0 million sublimit for swingline loans. Our obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets. The terms of the Amended Credit Agreement, including maturity dates, payment and interest terms, are described in further detail in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (8), Notes Payable and Credit Agreement.”
4.625% Senior Notes Due 2027
On August 13, 2020, AMN Healthcare, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, completed the issuance of an additional $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior notes due 2027 (the “New 2027 Notes”), which were issued at a price of 101.000% of the aggregate principal amount. The New 2027 Notes were issued pursuant to the existing indenture, dated as of October 1, 2019, under which we previously issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior notes due 2027 (the “Existing 2027 Notes” and together with the New 2027 Notes, the “2027 Notes”). The New 2027 Notes will be treated as a single series with the Existing 2027 Notes and will have the same terms (other than issue price, issue date and the date from which interest accrues) as those of the Existing 2027 Notes. The 2027 Notes will mature on October 1, 2027. Interest on the 2027 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on April 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing October 1, 2020 with respect to the New 2027 Notes. The 2027 Notes are fully and unconditionally and jointly guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by us and all of our subsidiaries that guarantee the Amended Credit Agreement.
On and after October 1, 2022, we may redeem all or a portion of the 2027 Notes upon not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ notice, at the redemption prices (expressed in percentages of principal amount on the redemption date) set forth below, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to (but excluding) the redemption date, if redeemed during the twelve month period commencing on October 1 of the years set forth below:
Prior to October 1, 2022, we may also redeem 2027 Notes with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2027 Notes issued, at a redemption price (expressed as a percentage of principal amount) of 104.625% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to (but excluding) the applicable redemption date.
In addition, we may redeem some or all of the 2027 Notes prior to October 1, 2022 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2027 Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any, to (but excluding) the applicable redemption date, plus a “make-whole” premium based on the applicable treasury rate plus 50 basis points.
Upon the occurrence of specified change of control events as defined in the indenture governing the 2027 Notes, we must offer to repurchase the 2027 Notes at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to (but excluding) the purchase date.
The indenture governing the 2027 Notes contains covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to:
•sell assets,
•pay dividends or make other distributions on capital stock, make payments in respect of subordinated indebtedness or make other restricted payments,
•make certain investments,
•incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock,
•create certain liens,
•enter into agreements that restrict dividends or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries,
•consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of our assets,
•engage in transactions with affiliates, and
•create unrestricted subsidiaries.
These covenants are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications. The indenture governing the 2027 Notes contains affirmative covenants and events of default that are customary for indentures governing high yield securities. The 2027 Notes and the guarantees are not subject to any registration rights agreement.
We used the proceeds from the issuance and sale of the Existing 2027 Notes to (1) repay $149.1 million of our indebtedness under the Term Loan, (2) repay $146.0 million under our Senior Credit Facility, and (3) pay fees and expenses related to the transaction during the fourth quarter of 2019. We used the proceeds from the issuance of the New 2027 Notes to repay $200.0 million of our indebtedness under the Additional Term Loan during the third quarter of 2020.
4.000% Senior Notes Due 2029
On October 20, 2020, AMN Healthcare, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, completed the issuance of $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.000% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”). The 2029 Notes will mature on April 15, 2029. Interest on the 2029 Notes will be payable semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing April 15, 2021.
At any time and from time to time on and after April 15, 2024, we will be entitled at our option to redeem all or a portion of the 2029 Notes upon not less than 10 nor more than 60 days’ notice, at the redemption prices (expressed in percentages of principal amount on the redemption date) set forth below, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to (but excluding) the redemption date (subject to the right of holders of record of the 2029 Notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on the relevant interest payment date), if redeemed during the twelve month period commencing on April 15 of the years set forth below:
At any time and from time to time prior to April 15, 2024, we may also redeem 2029 Notes with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Notes issued, at a redemption price (expressed as a percentage of principal amount) of 104.000% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to (but excluding) the applicable redemption date.
In addition, we may redeem some or all of the 2029 Notes at any time and from time to time prior to April 15, 2024 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2029 Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any, to (but excluding) the applicable redemption date, plus a “make-whole” premium based on the applicable treasury rate plus 50 basis points.
Upon the occurrence of specified change of control events as defined in the indenture governing the 2029 Notes, we must offer to repurchase the 2029 Notes at 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to (but excluding) the purchase date.
The indenture governing the 2029 Notes contains covenants that, among other things, restricts our ability to:
•sell assets;
•pay dividends or make other distributions on capital stock, make payments in respect of subordinated indebtedness or make other restricted payments;
•make certain investments;
•incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock;
•create certain liens;
•enter into agreements that restrict dividends or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us;
•consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of their assets;
•enter into transactions with affiliates; and
•create unrestricted subsidiaries.
These covenants are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications. The indenture governing the 2029 Notes contains affirmative covenants and events of default that are customary for indentures governing high yield securities. The 2029 Notes and the guarantees are not subject to any registration rights agreement.
We used the proceeds from the issuance of the 2029 Notes, along with cash generated from operations, to redeem all of our outstanding $325.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2024 Notes on November 4, 2020, (2) pay the associated redemption premium and all accrued and unpaid interest on the 2024 Notes, (3) repay $40.0 million under the Senior Credit Facility, and (4) pay fees and expenses related to the transaction.
Letters of Credit
At December 31, 2020, we maintained outstanding standby letters of credit totaling $24.1 million as collateral in relation to our workers compensation insurance agreements and a corporate office lease agreement. Of the $24.1 million of outstanding letters of credit, we have collateralized $2.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and the remaining $21.9 million is collateralized by the Senior Credit Facility. Outstanding standby letters of credit at December 31, 2019 totaled $19.8 million.
Off-Balance Sheet and Other Financing Arrangements
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangement that has or is reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material to investors.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Amounts represent contractual amounts due under (a) the 2027 Notes and 2029 Notes, including interest based on the fixed rates of 4.625% and 4.000%, respectively, and (b) the Additional Term Loan, which was repaid in full during the first quarter of 2021.
(2)Amounts represent contractual amounts to be repaid under the Senior Credit Facility for borrowings made during the first quarter of 2021, including interest based on the rate in effect at December 31, 2020.
(3)Amounts represent minimum contractual amounts with initial lease terms in excess of one year, including any leases that were signed, but not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020 that create significant obligations. We have assumed no escalations in rent other than as stipulated in lease agreements.
In addition to the above disclosed contractual obligations, the unrecognized income tax benefits, including interest and penalties, was $5.4 million at December 31, 2020. See additional information in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (7), Income Taxes.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our critical accounting policies are described in Note (1) to our audited consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Critical accounting policies are those that we believe are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and base them on the information that is currently available to us and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could vary from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
Our business acquisitions typically result in the recording of goodwill and other intangible assets. The determination of the fair value of such intangible assets involves the use of appropriate valuation techniques and requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect our consolidated financial statements. Significant judgments required to estimate the fair values include estimated future cash flows, growth rates, customer attrition rates, brand awareness and discount rates. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each intangible asset. Management may engage independent third-party specialists to assist in determining the fair values. For intangible assets purchased in a business acquisition, the estimated fair values of the assets received are used to establish their recorded values, which may become impaired in the future.
In accordance with accounting guidance on goodwill and other intangible assets, we perform annual impairment analysis to assess the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. We assess the impairment of goodwill of our reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test is unnecessary. If the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market and discounted cash flow approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. Valuation techniques consistent with the market approach and income approach are used to measure the fair value of each reporting unit. Significant judgments are required to estimate the fair value of reporting units including estimating future cash flows, and determining appropriate discount rates, growth rates, company control premium and other assumptions. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit. We perform our annual impairment test on October 31 of each year.
Intangible assets with estimable useful lives are required to be amortized over their respective estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. An impairment evaluation is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level at which cash flows of the long-lived assets are largely independent of other groups of assets and liabilities. We assess potential impairments to intangible assets when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recovered. Our judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators and future cash flows related to intangible assets are based on operational performance of our businesses, market conditions and other factors. Although there are inherent uncertainties in this assessment process, the estimates and assumptions we use, including estimates of future cash flows, volumes, market penetration and discount rates, are consistent with our internal planning. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record an impairment charge on all or a
portion of our long-lived intangible assets. Furthermore, we cannot predict the occurrence of future impairment-triggering events nor the impact such events might have on our reported asset values. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that long-lived intangible assets associated with our acquired businesses are impaired.
Professional Liability Reserve
We maintain an accrual for professional liability that we include in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other long-term liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. We determine the adequacy of this accrual by evaluating our historical experience and trends, loss reserves established by our insurance carriers, management and third-party administrators, and our independent actuarial studies. We obtain actuarial studies on a semi-annual basis that use our historical claims data and industry data to assist us in determining the adequacy of our reserves each year. For periods between the actuarial studies, we record our accruals based on loss rates provided in the most recent actuarial study and management’s review of loss history.
Contingent Liabilities
We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations, and proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business. These matters typically relate to professional liability, tax, compensation, contract, competitor disputes and employee-related matters and include individual and class action lawsuits, as well as inquiries and investigations by governmental agencies regarding the Company’s employment and compensation practices. Additionally, some of our clients may also become subject to claims, governmental inquiries and investigations and legal actions relating to services provided by our healthcare professionals. From time to time, and depending upon the particular facts and circumstances, we may be subject to indemnification obligations under our contracts with such clients relating to these matters.
Certain of the above-referenced matters may include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. In assessing the probability of loss and the estimated amount, we consider the following factors, among others: (a) the nature of the matter and any related facts, circumstances and data; (b) the progress of the case; (c) the opinions or views of legal counsel and other advisers; (d) our experience, and the experience of other entities, in similar cases; (e) how we intend to respond to the matter; and (f) reasonable settlement values based on the foregoing factors. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount. Where a range of loss can be reasonably estimated with no best estimate in the range, we record the minimum estimated liability. We review these provisions at least quarterly and adjust these provisions accordingly to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. We believe that the amount or estimable range of reasonably possible loss beyond that accruals that we have established, will not, either individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on our business, consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows with respect to loss contingencies for legal and other contingencies as of December 31, 2020. However, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. Therefore, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, our results of operations and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period, could be materially adversely affected.
Income Taxes
We evaluate our unrecognized tax benefits in accordance with the guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” The standard is expected to reduce cost and complexity related to accounting for income taxes. The new guidance eliminates certain exceptions and clarifies and amends existing guidance to promote consistent application among reporting entities. This standard is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. Depending on the amendment, adoption may be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective or prospective basis. We have adopted this standard effective January 1, 2021 and do not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-01, “Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815.” The new guidance clarifies the interactions between accounting standards that apply to equity investments without readily determinable fair values. Specifically, it addresses the accounting for the transition into and out of the equity method. This standard is effective on a prospective basis for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after
December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We have adopted this standard effective January 1, 2021 and do not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
There have been no other new accounting pronouncements issued but not yet adopted that are expected to materially affect our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.