Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the “Forward-Looking Statements,” our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes that follow and the “Consolidated Five-Year Summary of Selected Financial Data” and the “Risk Factors” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to “Ameriprise Financial,” “Ameriprise,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to Ameriprise Financial, Inc. exclusively, to our entire family of companies, or to one or more of our subsidiaries.
Overview
Ameriprise is a diversified financial services company with a 125-year history of providing financial solutions. We are a long-standing leader in financial planning and advice with $1.1 trillion in assets under management and administration as of December 31, 2020. We offer a broad range of products and services designed to achieve individual and institutional clients’ financial objectives. For additional discussion of our businesses, see Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The coronavirus disease 2019 (‘‘COVID-19’’) pandemic presents ongoing significant economic and societal disruption and market volatility, which has had and will continue to have ongoing impacts to our business and operating environment driven by a low interest rate environment, significant volatility in the equity markets and the potential associated implications to client behavior. There are no reliable estimates of how long the pandemic will last, how many people are likely to be affected by it, or its impact on the overall economy.
We continue to implement comprehensive strategies to navigate the operating environment spurred by the pandemic. During the first quarter, we implemented a work-from-home protocol for virtually all of our employee population, restricted business travel, and provided resources for complying with the guidance from the World Health Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and governments. We have begun a thoughtful phased reopening of our office locations while complying with applicable health agencies’ guidelines and governmental orders. We continue to operate successfully and satisfy elevated customer service volumes in this unique time - client service and the health and safety of our clients, advisors and employees remain our priorities while our employees and advisors have various work arrangements. The pandemic strategy we have employed is flexible and scalable, recognizing this pandemic is widespread and occurs in multiple waves, affecting different communities at different times with varying levels of severity.
There was significant economic volatility during 2020 and our results of operations continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. There is still uncertainty surrounding the magnitude, duration, speed and reach of the ongoing global pandemic, success of worldwide vaccination efforts, as well as the impact of actions that have been or could be taken by governmental authorities, clients or other third parties. While we have successfully adapted to a virtual work environment and deployed numerous adaptive business strategies so far this year, we believe the pandemic and its accompanying impact on the global financial markets and on our operations and financial results may cause results not to be comparable to previous years. The results presented in this report are not necessarily indicative of future operating results. For further information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any potentially material effects, see Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K - “Risk Factors”.
The products and services we provide retail clients and, to a lesser extent, institutional clients, are the primary source of our revenues and net income. Revenues and net income are significantly affected by investment performance and the total value and composition of assets we manage and administer for our retail and institutional clients as well as the distribution fees we receive from other companies. These factors, in turn, are largely determined by overall investment market performance and the depth and breadth of our individual client relationships.
Financial markets and macroeconomic conditions have had and will continue to have a significant impact on our operating and performance results. In addition, the business, political and regulatory environments in which we operate are subject to elevated uncertainty and substantial, frequent change. Accordingly, we expect to continue focusing on our key strategic objectives and obtaining operational and strategic leverage from our core capabilities. The success of these and other strategies may be affected by the factors discussed in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K - “Risk Factors” - and other factors as discussed herein.
Equity price, credit market and interest rate fluctuations can have a significant impact on our results of operations, primarily due to the effects they have on the asset management and other asset-based fees we earn, the value of deferred acquisition costs (“DAC”) and deferred sales inducement costs (“DSIC”) assets, the values of liabilities for guaranteed benefits associated with our variable annuities and the values of derivatives held to hedge these benefits and the “spread” income generated on our fixed deferred annuities, fixed insurance, fixed portion of variable annuities and variable insurance contracts and deposit products.
Earnings, as well as adjusted operating earnings, will be negatively impacted by the ongoing low interest rate environment should it continue. In addition to continuing spread compression in our interest sensitive product lines, a sustained low interest rate environment may result in increases to our reserves and changes in various rate assumptions we use to amortize DAC and DSIC, which may negatively impact our adjusted operating earnings. For additional discussion on our interest rate risk, see