Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financings, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and advancement of immunology-based therapies for prevalent inflammatory conditions. We have not generated operating revenue to date, and our operations have been substantially funded through equity raises, which have occurred from time to time since inception.
The pharmaceutical market is a highly competitive industry with strict regulations that are unpredictable in nature, time intensive and costly. We are committed to offering a compelling therapeutic option for patients most in need of new treatments for inflammatory conditions, including, but not limited to OAK and the treatment of serious complications arising from COVID-19, including ARDS and ALI.
Moving forward, we will continue to place a disciplined focus on maintaining our business operations in a manner that is streamlined and efficient while continuing to allocate a requisite level of our liquidity, human capital and other operational resources towards the advancement of key immunology-based therapies with the ultimate goal of achieving FDA marketing approval and subsequent commercialization of Ampion for these conditions.
Discussion regarding our business is contained in Part I, Item 1. Business.
Recent Financing Activities
Information regarding our Recent Financing Activities is contained in Note 11 to the Financial Statements.
Known Trends or Future Events; Outlook
We are a pre-revenue stage biopharmaceutical company that has incurred an accumulated deficit of $200.5 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to generate continued operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the ongoing development and advancement of immunological-based therapies with the ultimate goal of achieving FDA marketing approval and subsequent commercialization of Ampion for the indications noted above. In addition, while working in parallel with the continued advancement of immunology-based therapies for Ampion, we continue to actively explore synergistic licensing and other partnering opportunities with both domestic and global-based organizations in order to further leverage and maximize the value of Ampion to our stockholders.
As COVID-19 cases continue to be reported, we have determined that the AP-013 study will remain paused until the safety of our patients, clinical, and monitoring staff is no longer jeopardized. The continued state and local shelter-in-place orders and our policies may continue to negatively impact productivity, and have adverse effects on the Company’s business, operations, financial condition and results of operations, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct our ongoing business operations.
While we continue to maintain an ongoing dialog with the FDA to explore all viable options to complete the AP-013 study under an amended SPA agreement as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the adverse impact on the study, it remains possible that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may prevent completion of the study over the near term or at all. The spread of COVID-19, which has caused a broad impact globally, may materially affect the Company economically in other ways. While the potential economic impact brought by and the duration of COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, a widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise requisite financing to support our business operations, which would adversely impact the value of our common stock.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $17.3 million of cash and cash equivalents. In April 2020, we received PPP proceeds of $544,000 and we are currently awaiting a response from the SBA on their decision regarding our loan forgiveness application despite several attempts to contact the SBA for a status update. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 32.1 million shares pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which yielded gross proceeds of $26.2 million; offset by offering related costs of $1.4 million. We anticipate the continued use of the ATM equity offering program in a disciplined manner based on near-term liquidity needs and may seek to supplement the funds raised with separate private/public equity offering(s). Based on our current cash position, projection of operations and expected access to equity financing, we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to fund operations through the first quarter of 2022. This projection is based on many assumptions that may prove to be incorrect. For example, despite the historically successful use of the ATM equity offering program, due to the inherent uncertainties associated with raising capital in the public markets, our management is unable to conclude that it is probable that future capital will be available to satisfy our future liquidity needs in a manner that will be sufficient to fund operations. As such, it is possible that the Company could exhaust its available cash and cash equivalents earlier than presently anticipated. In addition, as the global COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, its effect on the Company’s operations and ability to raise capital through the ATM equity offering program, or otherwise, remains uncertain and subject to change. These existing and on-going factors continue to raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern (see Note 3 to the Financial Statements).
Our shelf registration statement, which was declared effective by the SEC in May 2020, provides us with the ability to sell up to an aggregate amount of $100.0 million of shares of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units, or any combination thereof, less any sales from the ATM equity offering program that occurred prior to May 6, 2020, which was the effective date of the shelf registration statement. We had $77.3 million remaining under the shelf registration statement as of December 31, 2020 (see Note 11 to the Financial Statements). However, we cannot be certain that we will be able to secure additional financing or that any funding, or securities offered pursuant to the shelf registration statement or otherwise, will be adequate to execute our business strategy. Even if we are able to obtain additional financing, such additional financing may be costly and may require us to agree to covenants or other provisions that favor new investors over existing stockholders.
Even though the Company has 88.4 million shares of common stock authorized and available for future issuance, the Company’s ability to raise additional funds by issuing securities pursuant to its current shelf registration statement is limited by the $77.3 million remaining on such shelf registration statement.
Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses incurred during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to recoverability of long-lived assets, and the ability for the Company to continue as a going concern. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The methods, estimates, and judgments used by us in applying these most critical accounting policies have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. Additional information regarding our Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates is contained in Notes 2, 3 and 8 to the Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recently issued and relevant accounting standards (adopted and not adopted as of December 31, 2020) is contained in Note 2 to the Financial Statements.
Results of Operations-Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
We recognized a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 (the “2020 period”) of $15.9 million compared to the net loss recognized of $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 (the “2019 period”). The net loss during fiscal 2020 was attributable to operating expenses of $15.8 million and the non-cash derivative loss of $0.5 million, partially offset by the receipt of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) proceeds of $0.5 million. The net loss during fiscal 2019 was attributable to operating expenses of $18.6 million, offset by the recognition of a non-cash derivative gain of $4.9 million. The exercise of outstanding warrants for 17.3 million shares of common stock during fiscal 2019 caused the valuation of the warrant liability to decrease, resulting in a non-cash derivative gain. This non-cash derivative gain was slightly offset by the increase in our stock price from $0.39 as of December 31, 2018 to $0.58 as of December 31, 2019, which caused the valuation of the warrant liability to increase. Operating expenses decreased $2.7 million from the 2019 period to the 2020 period primarily due to a $3.4 million decrease in research and development costs, which was partially offset by a $0.7 million increase in general and administrative costs, both of which are further explained below.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are summarized as follows and exclude an allocation of general and administrative expenses:
2020 Period Compared to 2019 Period
Research and development costs decreased approximately $3.4 million, or 27.3%, for the 2020 period compared to the 2019 period. Research and development costs with variances above $150,000 and/or 10% compared with the previous year are further explained below.
Clinical trial and sponsored research expenses
The clinical trial and sponsored research expense decreased $3.4 million or 47.9%, primarily due to the AP-013 study being temporarily paused in April 2020 due to stay-at-home mandate(s) issued by state and federal governments in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and travel restrictions implemented by the Company’s contracted CRO, partially offset by $1.0 million of expenses associated with the inhaled Ampion safety study, the AP-014 study and the AP-016 study which were all initiated during the 2020 period.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation increased $312,000, or 350.6%, due to the issuance of discretionary stock options to certain employees and an option repricing program undertaken by the Company related to previously awarded stock options to an executive officer. The option repricing program contributed $84,000 to the increase in stock-based compensation.
Laboratory
Laboratory expenses decreased $151,000, or 29.7%, as we finalized a quality control project related to the manufacturing of Ampion during the 2019 period.
Regulatory/FDA
Regulatory/FDA expenses decreased $158,000, or 53.7%, as the preparation of the BLA filing was postponed as a result of pausing the AP-013 study.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses are summarized as follows:
2020 Period Compared to 2019 Period
General and administrative costs increased $708,000, or 11.9%, for the 2020 period compared to the 2019 period. General and administrative costs with variances above $150,000 and/or 10% compared with the previous year are further explained below.
Professional fees
Professional fees decreased $215,000, or 8.7%, due primarily to a decrease in legal fees related to litigation and other matters; partially offset by legal costs associated with intellectual property protection attributable to new delivery methods for Ampion. During the 2020 period, the securities class action was dismissed with prejudice and the plaintiffs did not appeal, and, as such, the case was closed. In addition, the derivative cases were dismissed without prejudice. The decrease in legal fees was partially offset by expenses we incurred related to a strategic advisory firm to evaluate strategic opportunities for the Company, which was terminated in August 2020.
Insurance
Insurance expense increased $449,000, or 54.4%, due primarily to an increase in our D&O insurance premiums covering our prior two policy renewals in June 2019 and June 2020, which were significantly higher than the policy renewal in June 2018 resulting in lower expense for the first half of the 2019 period. The consecutive year increases are consistent with increases experienced by the overall market for public biopharmaceutical companies.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation increased $560,000, or 141.4%, due to the issuance of discretionary stock options to certain employees and an option repricing program undertaken by the Company related to previously awarded stock options to non-employee directors and executive officers during the 2020 period. The option repricing program contributed $277,000 to the increase in stock-based compensation.
Cash Flows
Cash flows for the respective periods are as follows:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the 2020 period our operating activities used approximately $14.7 million in cash, which was less than our net loss of $15.9 million primarily as a result of the non-cash charges related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, warrant derivative and issuance of common stock for services totaling $3.1 million; partially offset by an increase in working capital totaling $2.0 million, resulting primarily from the decrease in accounts payable/accrued liabilities attributable to the pause of the AP-013 study in April 2020.
During the 2019 period our operating activities used approximately $15.4 million in cash, which was more than our net loss of $13.6 million primarily as a result of the non-cash adjustment for the warrant derivative of $4.9 million; partially off-set by non-cash charges related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and issuance of common stock for services totaling $1.8 million, along with the increase in working capital of $1.3 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the 2020 period, $63,000 in cash was used to acquire manufacturing machinery and equipment.
During the 2019 period, $22,000 in cash was used to acquire manufacturing machinery and equipment.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
During the 2020 period, we received gross proceeds of $26.2 million from the sale of 32.1 million shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which was partially offset by offering related costs of $1.4 million. In addition, we also received proceeds of $785,000 from investor warrant exercises representing 1,962,500 shares of common stock.
During the 2019 period, we received gross proceeds from the sale of common stock in a public offering of $12.0 million,
which was partially offset by offering related costs of $1.2 million. In addition, we also received gross proceeds of $3.9 million from investor warrant exercises representing 17,266,667 shares of common stock, which was partially offset by related offering costs of $277,000.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Information regarding Contractual Obligations and Commitments is contained in Note 8 to the Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have not generated operating revenue or profits. Our primary activities since inception have been focused on research and clinical development activities for the advancement of Ampion towards multiple BLA submissions, which has required raising capital. As of December 31, 2020, we do not have a fixed and determinable committed source of liquidity to meet our expected obligations for the next twelve months. Specifically, we had $17.3 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020.
In January 2021, we received gross proceeds of $2.7 million from the sale of 1.8 million shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM equity offering program, which was offset by offering related costs of $0.1 million.
We anticipate using the ATM equity offering program to raise additional funds in the near term, as needed, and may seek to supplement the funds raised with separate private or public equity offering(s). Based on our current cash position, projection of operating expenses and expected access to the ATM and/or other equity financing programs, we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to fund operations through the first quarter of 2022. Our projection is based on many assumptions that may prove to be incorrect. For example, despite the historically successful use of the ATM equity offering program, due to the inherent uncertainties associated with raising capital in the public markets and the fact that the ATM equity offering program is not deemed a fixed and determinable committed source of liquidity, our management is unable to conclude that it is probable that future capital will be available to satisfy our future liquidity needs as they arise and in a manner that will be sufficient to fund operations. As such, it is possible that we could exhaust our available cash and cash equivalents earlier than presently anticipated. In addition, as the global COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve, its effect on our business operations, financial condition and results of operations is highly uncertain and subject to change. We anticipate that we will seek to raise additional capital investments in both the near and long-term to enable us to primarily support (i) clinical development of Ampion, (ii) BLA preparation and submission, (iii) existing base business operations and (iv) commercial development activities for Ampion. We intend to continue our close evaluation of the overall capital markets to determine the appropriate timing for any such capital raising activity, which will primarily depend on our stock price and existing market conditions relative to our need for funds at such time.
The audit report on our financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 contains an explanatory paragraph indicating that there was substantial doubt about our ability continue as a going concern. In order to address the going concern, we have prepared a projection through December 31, 2021. Our projection reflects cash requirements for fixed, recurring base business expenses such as payroll, legal and accounting, patents and overhead, and incremental costs supporting our current and projected clinical development programs. We continue to closely monitor and assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the COVID-19 cases in the United States, on the AP-013 study, and, as such, we are not currently in a position to project the required liquidity needs for completion of the study.
In May 2020, the shelf registration statement was declared effective by the SEC and, as of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $77.3 million available for issuance under the shelf registration statement with 88.4 million authorized shares of common stock remaining available for issuance (see Note 11 of the Financial Statements). The continued volatility in the financial markets has adversely affected the market capitalizations of many pre-revenue stage biopharmaceutical companies, particularly small capitalization companies such as Ampio, and generally has made equity and debt financing difficult to obtain in a manner that is not significantly detrimental to the business and without significant dilution to existing stockholders. This volatility, along with the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors, may limit our access to additional financing.
If we cannot obtain funding through capital raises and/or partnering/licensing transactions in the future when deemed necessary, we will likely be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate our development, manufacturing and/or regulatory programs for Ampion and/or our future commercialization efforts and/or suspend operations for a period of time until we are able to secure additional funding. If we are not successful in raising sufficient funds to pay for further development and licensing of Ampion, we may choose to license or otherwise relinquish greater, or all rights to Ampion, at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. This could lead to impairment or other charges, which could materially affect our balance sheet and operating results.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “variable interest entities.”
Impact of Inflation
In general, we believe that our operating expenses can be negatively impacted by increases in the cost of clinical trials due to inflation and rising health care costs.