ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Forward-Looking Statements
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our results and the timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors.
Non- GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that presenting non-GAAP financial measures provides management and investors useful measures to evaluate performance and trends of the total company and its businesses. This includes adjustments in recent periods to GAAP financial measures to increase period-to-period comparability following actions to strengthen our overall financial position and how we manage our business.
Business Overview
Amplitech designs, engineers and assembles micro-wave component-based amplifiers that meet individual customer specifications. Our products consist of RF amplifiers and related subsystems, operating at multiple frequencies from 50kHz to 44GHz, including low noise amplifiers, medium power amplifiers, cryogenic amplifiers, and custom assembly designs for the aerospace, governmental, defense and commercial satellite markets. We also offer non-recurring engineering services on a project-by-project basis, for a predetermined fixed contractual amount, or on a time plus material basis.
Specialty designs and manufactures passive microwave components and related subsystems for use in satellite communication ground networks that meet individual customer specifications for both domestic and international customers.
Our plans for the next year include new product development, expansion of existing product line and targeting mergers and acquisitions.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant worldwide disruption throughout the course of 2020 and resulted in the imposition of various public and private sector measures to try to contain the virus, on a local, state, national and international level, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place/stay-at-home and social distancing orders, and shutdowns. These measures have temporarily impacted our workforce and operations and some of the operations of our customers, and vendors, suppliers, and partners. The ultimate impact and efficacy of government measures and potential future measures is currently unknown.
There is uncertainty regarding the business impacts from such measures and potential future measures. While we have been able to continue our operations through a combination of work-from-home and social distancing policies implemented to protect employees, these measures have resulted in reduced workforce availability. Accordingly, we resumed operations on May 5, 2020, with the CDC safeguard guidelines in place. Difficulties in communicating with our customers’ employees and delivery delays due to COVID-19 may impact our ability to meet customer demand, and thus decrease revenue into 2021 and negatively impact our financial condition and results of operations.
On April 20, 2020, the Company entered into a Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note (“PPP Note”) in the principal amount of $232,200 (“PPP Loan”) from BNB Bank (“PPP Loan Lender”). The PPP Loan was obtained pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) administered by the U.S Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The PPP Loan was disbursed by the PPP Loan Lender on April 20, 2020 (the “Disbursement Date”). The PPP Loan bears an interest at 1.00% per annum and may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. The Company is in the process of applying for PPP loan forgiveness. The Company may qualify for full loan forgiveness if during the 8 to 24 week covered period following the loan disbursement, the loan proceeds were used by the Company for payroll costs, mortgage interest payments, rent and utilities. This has helped to offset some of the adverse effects of this pandemic and allowed us to serve our customers at a reduced capacity but without experiencing any cancellation of our open orders.
On February 17, 2021, Amplitech Group Inc., common stock and warrants under the symbols “AMPG” and “AMPGW”, respectively, commenced trading on NASDAQ. A reverse split of the outstanding common stock at a 1-for-20 ratio became effective February 17, 2021 as of 12:01 a.m., Eastern Time. All per share amounts and number of shares in the consolidated financial statements and related notes have been retroactively restated to reflect the reverse stock split. In connection with the public offering, 1,371,428 units at an offering price of $7.00 per unit were sold. Each unit issued in the offering consisted of one share of common stock and one warrant. Maxim Group LLC acted as sole book-running manager for the offering and partially exercised its overallotment option to purchase 205,714 warrants at the public offering price. The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $9.6 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
On February 24, 2021, Maxim exercised its overallotment option to purchase an additional 205,714 shares of common stock, bringing the total gross proceeds of the public offering to approximately $11.0 million.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a working capital of $741,606 and an Accumulated Deficit of $1,868,372. The Company recorded a net loss of $1,025,559 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and income of $5,945 for the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively.
For Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenues
Sales increased from $3,122,630 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3,458,081 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $335,451 or approximately 10.74%. While the acquisition of Specialty Microwave has increased sales in satellite communications, the mandatory shutdown in New York as a result of COVID 19 has created uncertainty and disruption with some of our key customers and suppliers. While we have been able to continue our operations through a combination of work-from-home and social distancing policies implemented to protect employees, these measures have resulted in reduced productivity and our ability to meet customer demand temporarily.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Cost of Goods Sold increased to $2,203,844 in 2020 from $1,556,654 in 2019, an increase of $647,190 or approximately 41.58%. This increase was the result of the increase in sales for the year as well as an increase in our outsourcing costs and raw materials. As our products become more customer specific, the cost of engineering support, assembly labor and custom parts, specifically for our cryogenic amplifiers, have increased as well. In addition, we hired a new engineer and assemblers as well as acquiring the employees of SMW. 2020 represents a full year of expenses relating to the acquisition of SMW and new hires. As a result, the gross profit was $1,254,237 for 2020 compared to $1,565,976 for 2019, a decrease of $311,739 or 19.91%. Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased to 36.27% from 50.15% as a result of the product mix with some of our products that are being outsourced having a lower gross profit margin and the increase in cost for labor and materials. Our operating performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 has been negatively impacted by the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although there is still uncertainty as to when the economy will return to normal, we expect to continue our business efforts and not shut down unless otherwise mandated by federal and state regulations, and/or more severe pandemic repercussions.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $2,170,183 in 2020 from $1,483,979 in 2019, an increase of $686,204, or approximately 46.24%. The Company experienced an increase in parent company expenses, such as consulting fees, legal fees and stock compensation expense relating to the issuance of warrants. The Company also hired a new director of sales and a marketing associate to promote and expand existing and new product lines. With the acquisition of Specialty Microwave, payroll, employee benefits, insurance and facility costs have increased as well as other general and administrative costs due to the integration of both companies.
Other Income (Expenses)
Interest expense increased by $33,561, or 44.13%, when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the additional borrowing on the Company’s line of credit and the additional financing associated with the acquisition of Specialty Microwave and the financing of equipment purchases.
Net Income
The Company reported a net loss of $1,025,559 in 2020 and net income of $5,945 in 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $521,485 resulting primarily from the net loss and the operating changes in prepaid expenses, accounts payable and customer deposits and the operating lease liability.
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $20,015 resulting primarily from net income and the operating changes in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses, accounts payable as well as customer deposits and the operating lease liability.
Investing Activities
The net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $71,619
and $681,286, respectively. The Company purchased equipment and paid cash for the acquisition of Specialty Microwave.
Financing Activities
The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $217,928, a result of proceeds received from notes payable and the line of credit offset by their repayments and the repayment of the finance lease.
The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $833,915 a result of proceeds received from notes payable offset by the repayment of the line of credit and finance lease.
We have historically financed our operations through net income, debt from third party lenders, notes issued to various private individuals and personal funds advanced from time to time by the majority shareholder, who is also the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $199,536, a working capital of $741, 606 and an accumulated deficit of $1,868,372.
We intend to continue to finance our internal growth with cash on hand, cash provided from operations, borrowings, debt or equity offerings, or some combination thereof. We believe that our cash provided from operations and cash on hand will provide enough working capital to fund our operations for the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Assumptions
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and those that require significant judgments and estimates.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates including the allowance for doubtful accounts, the salability and recoverability of inventory, income taxes and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We cannot predict what future laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes in laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our financial statements when we deem it necessary.
Basis of Accounting
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared using the accrual basis of accounting.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers deposits that can be redeemed on demand and investments that have original maturities of less than three months, when purchased, to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents were deposited in two financial institutions.
Accounts Receivable
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the net invoice value and are not interest bearing.
The Company provides an allowance for doubtful accounts equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts. The Company’s estimate is based on historical collection experience and a review of the current status of accounts receivable. It is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts will change in the future. An allowance of $125,400 and $0 has been recorded at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Inventories
Inventories, which consists primarily of raw materials, work in progress and finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out basis) or market (net realizable value).
Inventory quantities and related values are analyzed at the end of each fiscal quarter to determine those items that are slow moving and obsolete. An inventory reserve is recorded for those items determined to be slow moving with a corresponding charge to cost of goods sold. Inventory items that are determined obsolete are written off currently with a corresponding charge to cost of goods sold.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation is provided over the estimated useful lives of the related assets using the straight-line method for financial statement purposes. Amortization of leasehold improvements is computed using the straight-line method over the shorter of the remaining lease term or the estimated useful lives of the improvements.
Property and equipment are depreciated as follows:
Long-lived assets
Long lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to; significant decrease in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life.
Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount of fair value less costs to sell and would no longer be depreciated. The depreciable basis of assets that are impaired and continue in use is their respective fair values.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include goodwill, trademarks, intellectual property and customer base acquired through the asset purchase of Specialty Microwave. The Company accounts for Other Intangible Assets under the guidance of ASC 350, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other.” Under the guidance, other intangible assets with definite lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives Intangible assets with indefinite lives are tested annually for impairment. Goodwill is not amortized. We test goodwill balances for impairment annually at December 31 or whenever impairment indicators arise.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842),” which requires leases with durations greater than twelve months to be recognized on the balance sheet. We adopted this standard using the modified retrospective approach with an effective date as of the beginning of January 2019. Prior year financial statements were not restated under the new standard. We lease property and equipment under finance and operating leases. For leases with terms greater than 12 months, we record the related asset and obligation at the present value of lease payments over the lease term. The Company has elected not to separate lease and non-lease components for all property leases for the purpose of calculating ROU assets and lease liabilities. Many of our leases include rental escalation clauses, renewal options and/or termination options that are factored into our determination of lease payments when appropriate. When available, we use the rate implicit in the lease to discount lease payments to present value; however, most of our leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit rate. Therefore, we must estimate our incremental borrowing rate to discount the lease payments based on information available at lease commencement. The incremental borrowing rate is the rate of interest that a lessee would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis considering such factors as lease term and economic environment risks.
Revenue Recognition
We sell our products through a combination of a direct sales force in the United States and independent sales representatives in international markets. Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods based on the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for these goods. This core principle is achieved through the following steps:
Identify the contract with the customer. A contract with a customer exists when (i) we enter into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the goods to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these goods, (ii) the contract has commercial substance and, (iii) we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration. We do not have significant costs to obtain contracts with customers. For commissions on product sales, we have elected the practical expedient to expense the costs as incurred.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract. Generally, our contracts with customers do not include multiple performance obligations to be completed over a period. Our performance obligations generally relate to delivering single-use products to a customer, subject to the shipping terms of the contract. Limited warranties are provided, under which we typically accept returns and provide either replacement parts or refunds.
We do not have significant returns. We do not typically offer extended warranty or service plans.
Determine the transaction price. Payment by the customer is due under customary fixed payment terms, and we evaluate if collectability is reasonably assured. None of our contracts as of December 31, 2020 contained a significant financing component. Revenue is recorded at the net sales price, which includes estimates of variable consideration such as product returns, rebates, discounts, and other adjustments. The estimates of variable consideration are based on historical payment experience, historical and projected sales data, and current contract terms. Variable consideration is included in revenue only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Taxes collected from customers relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenues.
Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract. We typically do not have multiple performance obligations in our contracts with customers. As such, we generally recognize revenue upon transfer of the product to the customer’s control at contractually stated pricing.
Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. We generally satisfy performance obligations at a point in time upon either shipment or delivery of goods, in accordance with the terms of each contract with the customer. We do not have significant service revenue.
Reserves are recorded as a reduction in net sales and are not considered material to our consolidated statements of income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenditures are charged to operations as incurred. The major components of research and development costs include consultants, outside service, and supplies. Research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $61,953 and $56,507.
Income Taxes
The Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of certain assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified according to the financial statement classification of the assets and liabilities generating the differences. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The ASC prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The ASC provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no material unrecognized tax benefits.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) are determined by dividing the net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted EPS is determined by dividing net earnings by the weighted average number of common shares used in the basic EPS calculation plus the number of common shares that would be issued assuming conversion of all potentially dilutive securities outstanding under the treasury stock method.
Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A fair value hierarchy is used to prioritize the quality and reliability of the information used to determine fair values. Categorizing within fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The fair value hierarchy is defined in the following categories:
Level 1. Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities. Cash and cash equivalents are valued using inputs in Level 1.
Level 2. Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, including quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability (e.g., interest rates); and inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
Level 3. Inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable. These inputs rely on management’s own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability. The unobservable inputs are developed based on the best information available in the circumstances and may include the Company’s own data.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. Equity instruments issued to employees and the cost of the services received as consideration are measured and recognized based on the fair value of the equity instruments issued and are recognized over the employees required service period, which is generally the vesting period.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the company to concentration of credit risk consist primarily of accounts receivable. The Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and maintains allowances for potential credit losses. Therefore, management does not believe significant credit risks exist at December 31, 2020. Sales to the Company’s two largest customers represented approximately 8.18% and 7.91% of total sales for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, “Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement.” ASU 2018-13 modifies the fair value measurements disclosures with the primary focus to improve effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to the financial statements that is most important to the users. The new guidance modifies the required disclosures related to the valuation techniques and inputs used, uncertainty in measurement, and changes in measurements applied. The adoption of this standard became effective for us on January 1, 2020 and did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. This ASU removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This ASU is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact of this standard on our combined financial statements.
We do not expect the adoption of these or other recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our results of operation, financial position or cash flow.
Off Balance Sheet Transactions
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.