ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 13, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or assets, which we refer to throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K as our business combination. We completed our Initial Public Offering on December 15, 2020.
Since completing our Initial Public Offering, we have reviewed, and continue to review, a number of opportunities to enter into a business combination with an operating business, including entering into discussions with potential target businesses, but we are not able to determine at this time whether we will complete a business combination with any of the target businesses that we have reviewed or had discussions with or with any other target business. Although we may pursue an acquisition in any industry or geography, we intend to capitalize on the ability of our management team and the broader CBRE platform to identify, acquire and operate a business that may provide opportunities for attractive risk-adjusted returns. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our common stock, debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Results of Operations
For the period from October 13, 2020 to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $295,743. As of December 31, 2020, we had neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities prior to December 31, 2020 have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our business combination, at the earliest. Since completing our Initial Public Offering, we generate non-operating income on cash and funds held in the trust account in the form of interest income on cash and funds invested in specified U.S. government treasury obligations or in specified money market funds which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our last audited financial statements. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our business combination will be successful.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, our activities mainly consisted of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates for a business combination. We believe that we have sufficient funds available to complete our efforts to effect a business combination with an operating business by December 15, 2022 (or March 15, 2023 if we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for our business combination by December 15, 2022 but have not completed our business combination by such date). However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 13, 2020, our Sponsor purchased 100 shares of undesignated common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $100, or $1.00 per share. On November 6, 2020, our Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 2,300,000 shares of our Class B common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000, or approximately $0.01 per share. On November 27, 2020, 287,500 of such shares were forfeited by the holder thereof. Prior to the initial investment in the Company of $25,000 by our Sponsor, the Company had no assets, tangible or intangible.
On October 21, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 by the issuance of an unsecured promissory note to be used for a portion of the expenses related to the organization of our company and our Initial Public Offering. As of December 15, 2020 the outstanding balance on the loan was $215,316. This loan was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due at the earlier of June 30, 2021, and the closing of our Initial Public Offering. The loan was repaid in full upon the consummation of our Initial Public Offering out of the $1,500,000 of offering proceeds that had been allocated for the payment of offering expenses (other than underwriting commissions) not held in the trust account.
On December 15, 2020 we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 40,250,000 SAILSM, including the issuance of 5,250,000 SAILSM securities as a result of the underwriter’s exercise of its over-allotment option. Each SAILSM security consists of one share of Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value per share (the “Class A common stock”), and one-fourth of one redeemable warrant (the “Public Warrants”), each whole Public Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.00 per share. The SAILSM securities were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per SAILSM security, generating gross proceeds of $402,500,000, including the proceeds from the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option. In connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the issuance and sale of the SAILSM securities, we consummated the private placement of 7,366,667 warrants (the “private placement warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.00 per share, generating total proceeds of approximately $11,050,000. After deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions (excluding the deferred underwriting discount held in the trust account, which amount will be payable upon the consummation of our business combination, if consummated) and the estimated offering expenses, the total net proceeds from our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants was $402,500,000 (or
$10.00 per SAILSM security sold in the Initial Public Offering), which was placed in the trust account in the United States maintained by the Trustee. The amount of proceeds not deposited in the trust account was $1,500,000 at the closing of our Initial Public Offering. Funds will remain in the trust account except for the withdrawal of interest earned on the funds that may be released to the us to pay taxes.
At December 31, 2020, we had $402,501,008 in the trust account and we had $625,916 in cash and cash equivalents outside the trust account, which is available to fund our working capital requirements. On February 16, 2021, we entered into a second amended and restated promissory note (the “second amended and restated promissory note”) with our sponsor, with borrowing capacity up to $3,000,000. in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended Business Combination. The note is non-interest bearing and the unpaid principal balance of the promissory note shall be payable on the earlier of: (i) the consummation of a Business Combination and (ii) December 31, 2022. The principal amount of such loans may be convertible into private placement warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of our sponsor. These warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. No amounts have been borrowed under the note by the Company as of March 31, 2021.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes, if any. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding to be approximately $10,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Off-balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We had no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We had not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We did not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities at December 31, 2020. In connection with the Initial Public Offering, we entered into an administrative services agreement to pay monthly recurring expenses of $10,000 to CBRE, Inc., an affiliate of our Sponsor, for office space, administrative and support services. The administrative services agreement terminates upon the earlier of the completion of a business combination or the liquidation of the Company. The underwriter is entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2.0% ($8,050,000) was paid at the IPO Closing Date, and 3.5% ($14,087,500) was deferred. The deferred underwriting commission will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriter is not entitled to any interest accrued on the deferred underwriting discount.
A portion of the deferred underwriting commission, not to exceed 20% of the total amount of the deferred underwriting commissions held in the Trust Account, may be re-allocated or paid (a) to any underwriter from our Initial Public Offering in an amount (at the sole discretion of the Company’s management team) that is disproportionate to the portion of the aggregate deferred underwriting commission payable to such underwriter based on their participation in Initial Public Offering and/or (b) to third parties that did not participate in our Initial Public Offering (but who are members of FINRA) that assist the Company in consummating a Business
Combination. The election to re-allocate or make any such payments to third parties will be solely at the discretion of the Company’s management team, and such third parties will be selected by the management team in their sole and absolute discretion. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and pursuant to the accounting and disclosure rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), and reflect all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, which are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair presentation of the Company’s financial position at December 31, 2020 and the results of operations and cash flows for the period presented. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We believe that the following critical accounting policies represent the areas where more significant judgments and estimates are used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemptions
The Company accounts for its common stock as subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Loss per Share of Common Stock
Net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, plus to the extent dilutive, the incremental number of shares of common stock to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method. The Company has not considered the effect of the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 7,366,667 Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted loss per share of common stock is the same as basic loss per share of common stock for the period.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income (loss) per common stock, basic and diluted for Class A common stock, is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, by the weighted average number of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net
income (loss) per common stock, basic and diluted for Class B common stock, is calculated by dividing net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period presented.
The Company’s net loss is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to Class A common stock subject to redemption as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account (less applicable taxes) and not income or losses of the Company.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense associated with the Company’s equity awards is measured at fair value upon the grant date and recognized over the requisite service period. To the extent a stock-based award is subject to a performance condition, the amount of expense recorded in a given period, if any, reflects an assessment of the probability of achieving such performance condition, with compensation recognized once the event is deemed probable to occur. The fair value of equity awards has been estimated using Monte Carlo and Binomial simulations. Forfeitures are recognized as incurred.
The Company sold an aggregate of 2,300,000 alignment shares to the Sponsor on November 6, 2020. On November 27, 2020, the Sponsor sold 201,250 alignment shares to certain of the Company’s directors, or their respective designees, and an officer of the Company and forfeited 287,500 Alignment Shares due to an adjustment pursuant to the Initial Public Offering. See “Note 3-Initial Public Offering-Alignment Shares” for additional details. As of December 31, 2020, 2,012,500 alignment shares were issued and outstanding.
On December 10, 2020, the Company sold an aggregate of 7,366,667 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant to the Sponsor in a private placement that occurred simultaneously with the completion of the Initial Public Offering. See “Note 3-Initial Public Offering-Private Placement Warrants” for additional details.
The Company determined that the incremental fair value over the price paid for the alignment shares and private placement warrants would qualify as stock-based compensation within scope of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”) as a result of the services the Sponsor and directors and officers are providing to the Company through the date of a business combination.
Under ASC 718, stock-based compensation associated with equity-classified awards is measured at fair value upon the grant date and recognized over the requisite service period. The alignment shares and private placement warrants were granted subject to a performance condition (i.e., the occurrence of a business combination ), as well as various market conditions (i.e., stock price targets after consummation of the business combination). The various market conditions are considered in determining the grant date fair value of these instruments using Monte Carlo simulation. Compensation expense related to the alignment shares and private placement warrants is recognized only when the performance condition is probable of occurrence. As of December 31, 2020, the Company determined that a business combination is not considered probable, and, therefore, no stock-based compensation expense has been recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. Unrecognized stock-based compensation expense in excess of $250 million would be recognized at the date a business combination is considered probable (i.e., upon consummation).
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements based on current operations of the Company. The impact of any recently issued accounting standards will be re-evaluated on a regular basis or if a business combination is completed where the impact could be material.