ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” contained herein. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are discussed in “Risk Factors” contained in Part I, Item 1A. of this report. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. See “Forward-Looking Statements” in the front of this annual report.
Overview
We operate in one reportable segment engaged in the acquisition, development, exploitation and production of oil and natural gas properties. Our management evaluates performance based on the reportable business segment as the economic environments are not different within the operation of our oil and natural gas properties. Our business activities are conducted through OLLC, our wholly owned subsidiary, and its wholly owned subsidiaries. Our assets consist primarily of producing oil and natural gas properties located in Oklahoma, the Rockies, federal waters offshore Southern California, East Texas/North Louisiana and Eagle Ford. Most of our oil and natural gas properties are located in large, mature oil and natural gas reservoirs.
The Company’s properties consist primarily of operated and non-operated working interests in producing and undeveloped leasehold acreage and working interests in identified producing wells. As of December 31, 2020:
•
Our total estimated proved reserves were approximately 113.8 MMBoe, of which approximately 41% were oil and 85% were classified as proved developed reserves;
•
We produced from 2,448 gross (1,354 net) producing wells across our properties, with an average working interest of 55%, and the Company is the operator of record of the properties containing 92% of our total estimated proved reserves; and
•
Our average net production for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was 26.3 MBoe/d, implying a reserve-to-production ratio of approximately 12 years.
Industry Trends
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic related to the proliferation of COVID-19. The impact of COVID-19 and efforts to mitigate its spread have caused significant volatility in U.S. and international markets and a substantial reduction in global and domestic demand for oil and natural gas. Actions by governmental authorities to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, such as imposing mandatory closures of all non-essential business facilities, seeking voluntary closures of business facilities, and imposing restrictions on, or advisories with respect to, travel, business operations and public gatherings or interactions, have further exacerbated the economic impact of the pandemic.
As a result of the pandemic, there has also been a sharp reduction in the demand for oil and natural gas and a precipitous decline in commodity prices, which were further impacted by disputes over production levels among oil-producing countries, the significant increase in production levels by such countries and limited storage capacity for natural gas, oil and refined products.
In response to the unprecedented and extremely low commodity prices, the Company executed several liquidity enhancement initiatives to better position the Company through the downturn, including significant decreases to operating and G&A expenses, substantial reductions to capital programs, the monetization of a portion of the Company’s 2021 in-the-money crude oil hedges, the receipt of loan proceeds from the federal government’s Paycheck Protection Program, royalty relief at the Company’s Beta Properties and the suspension of the quarterly dividend, among other things. The successful realization and execution of our liquidity enhancing initiatives, coupled with a disciplined commodity hedging program, have substantially mitigated the impact of the pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial results and demonstrated the sustainable value of our long-lived, low-decline assets.
Despite the gradual recovery in commodity prices in the second half of 2020 and the expectation of a successful phased rollout of a vaccine in 2021, we have continued our commitment to operating in a disciplined, capital efficient manner, and we remain committed to the responsible stewardship of our assets and to continue focusing on maximizing cash flows, further reducing debt, delivering low-cost capital efficient operations, and generating shareholder value. We will continue to monitor developments regarding the pandemic, the distribution of the vaccination and changes in market conditions as we pursue our business and strategic objectives.
Recent Developments
Appointment of Chief Executive Officer and Director
On January 19, 2021, the Company appointed Mr. Martyn Willsher as the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer and member of the Board. Mr. Willsher, had served as the Company’s Interim Chief Executive Officer since April 3, 2020 and Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer since April 27, 2018.
Appointment of Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
On January 19, 2021, the Company appointed Mr. Jason McGlynn as the Company’s Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Mr. McGlynn, had served as the Company’s Vice President of Business Development since February 3, 2020.
Resignation of Chairman of the Board of Directors
On January 19, 2021, Mr. David H. Proman announced his resignation from his position as Chairman of the board of directors of the Company. Mr. Proman retained his seat as a member of the board of directors.
Appointment of Chairman of the Board of Directors
Concurrently with Mr. Proman’s resignation, the board of directors unanimously approved and appointed Mr. Christopher W. Hamm as the Company’s new Chairman of the board of directors.
Appointment of Director to the Board of Directors
On February 10, 2021, Ms. Patrice Douglas was appointed as a member of the Company’s board of directors and will also serve on the Company’s audit committee.
Secondary Public Offering of Common Stock for Selling Stockholders
On December 11, 2020, certain selling stockholders of the Company (the “Selling Stockholders”), Roth Capital Partners, LLC (the “Underwriter”) and the Company entered into an underwriting agreement, pursuant to which the Selling Stockholders agreed to sell to the Underwriter, and the Underwriter agreed to purchase from the Selling Stockholders, subject to and upon the terms and conditions set forth therein, an aggregate of 8,548,485 shares of Common Stock. The offering closed on December 15, 2020. The Company did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of Common Stock in the offering.
The offering was made pursuant to effective shelf registration statements (File No. 333-233677, effective October 11, 2019, and 333-215602, effective May 1, 2018) and prospectuses filed by the Company with the SEC. The offering of these securities was made only by means of a prospectus and prospectus supplement.
Borrowing Base Redetermination
On November 18, 2020, as part of the Company’s fall 2020 semiannual borrowing base redetermination, the borrowing base and lender commitments under the Company’s Revolving Credit Facility reaffirmed the borrowing base at $260.0 million, with the next such redetermination scheduled for spring 2021. The Revolving Credit Facility is a reserve-based revolving credit facility with a maturity date of November 2, 2023, and semiannual borrowing base redeterminations.
Notice of Non-Compliance with NYSE Continued Listing Standards
On August 31, 2020, the Company, received the Market Cap Notice from the NYSE that the Company no longer satisfied the continued listing compliance standards set forth under Section 802.01B of the Manual because the average global market capitalization of the Company was less than $50,000,000 over a consecutive 30 trading-day period that ended on August 28, 2020 and, at the same time, the Company’s stockholders’ equity was less than $50,000,000 (the “Market Cap Deficiency”).
Under NYSE procedures, the Company had 45 days from its receipt of the Market Cap Notice to submit a plan to the NYSE demonstrating how it intends to regain compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing standards within 18 months. The Company submitted its plan to regain compliance with the listing standards within the required timeframe.
In addition, on October 13, 2020, the Company received the Share Price Notice from the NYSE that the Company no longer satisfied the continued listing compliance standards set forth under Section 802.01C of the Manual because the average closing price of the Company’s Common Stock was below $1.00 over a 30 consecutive trading-day period that ended October 12, 2020. Under the NYSE’s rules, the Company had six months following receipt of the Share Price Notice to regain compliance with the minimum share price requirement.
The Company notified the NYSE of its intent to cure the Share Price Deficiency and return to compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing requirements. On January 4, 2021, the Company received written notification from the NYSE that the Company regained compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing standards. The Company regained compliance after its average closing price for the 30 trading-day period ended December 31, 2020 and its closing price on December 31, 2020 both exceeded $1.00 per share.
Under NYSE rules, the Common Stock, will continue to be listed on the NYSE during the cure period related to the Market Cap Deficiency, subject to the Company’s compliance with other continued listing requirements. The Common Stock’s trading symbol “AMPY” was assigned a “.BC” indicator by the NYSE to signify that the Company currently is not in compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing requirements. If the Company fails to regain compliance with Sections 802.01B of the Manual during the cure period, the Common Stock will be subject to the NYSE’s suspension and delisting procedures.
Business Environment and Operational Focus
We use a variety of financial and operational metrics to assess the performance of our oil and natural gas operations, including: (i) production volumes; (ii) realized prices on the sale of our production; (iii) cash settlements on our commodity derivatives; (iv) lease operating expense; (v) gathering, processing and transportation; (vi) general and administrative expense; and (vii) Adjusted EBITDA.
Production Volumes
Production volumes directly impact our results of operations. For more information about our volumes, see “- Results of Operations” below.
Realized Prices on the Sale of Oil and Natural Gas
We market our oil and natural gas production to a variety of purchasers based on regional pricing. The relative prices of oil and natural gas are determined by the factors impacting global and regional supply and demand dynamics, such as economic conditions, production levels, weather cycles and other events. In addition, realized prices are heavily influenced by product quality and location relative to consuming and refining markets.
Natural Gas. The NYMEX-Henry Hub future price of natural gas is a widely used benchmark for the pricing of natural gas in the United States. The actual prices realized from the sale of natural gas can differ from the quoted NYMEX-Henry Hub price as a result of quality and location differentials. Quality differentials to NYMEX-Henry Hub prices result from: (1) the Btu content of natural gas, which measures its heating value, and (2) the percentage of sulfur, CO2 and other inert content by volume. Natural gas with a high Btu content (“wet” natural gas) sells at a premium to natural gas with low Btu content (“dry” natural gas) because it yields a greater quantity of NGLs. Natural gas with low sulfur and CO2 content sells at a premium to natural gas with high sulfur and CO2 content because of the added cost required to separate the sulfur and CO2 from the natural gas to render it marketable. Wet natural gas may be processed in third-party natural gas plants, where residue natural gas as well as NGLs are recovered and sold. At the wellhead, our natural gas production typically has an average energy content greater than 1,000 Btu. The dry natural gas residue from our properties is generally sold based on index prices in the region from which it is produced.
Location differentials to NYMEX-Henry Hub prices result from variances in transportation costs based on the produced natural gas’ proximity to the major consuming markets to which it is ultimately delivered. Historically, these index prices have generally been at a discount to NYMEX-Henry Hub natural gas prices.
Oil. The NYMEX-WTI futures price is a widely used benchmark in the pricing of domestic and imported oil in the United States. The ICE Brent futures price is a widely used global price benchmark for oil. The actual prices realized from the sale of oil can differ from the quoted NYMEX-WTI price as a result of quality and location differentials. Quality differentials result from the fact that crude oils differ from one another in their molecular makeup, which plays an important part in their refining and subsequent sale as petroleum products. Among other things, there are two characteristics that commonly drive quality differentials: (1) the oil’s American Petroleum Institute (“API”) gravity and (2) the oil’s percentage of sulfur content by weight. In general, lighter oil (with higher API gravity) produces a larger number of lighter products, such as gasoline, which have higher resale value and, therefore, normally sells at a higher price than heavier oil. Oil with low sulfur content (“sweet” oil) is less expensive to refine and, as a result, normally sells at a higher price than high sulfur-content oil (“sour” oil).
Location differentials result from variances in transportation costs based on the produced oil’s proximity to the major consuming and refining markets to which it is ultimately delivered. Oil that is produced close to major consuming and refining markets, such as near Cushing, Oklahoma, is in higher demand as compared to oil that is produced farther from such markets. Consequently, oil that is produced close to major consuming and refining markets normally realizes a higher price (i.e., a lower location differential).
The oil produced from our onshore properties is a combination of sweet and sour oil, varying by location. This oil is typically sold at the NYMEX-WTI price, adjusted for quality and transportation differential, depending primarily on location and purchaser. The oil produced from our Beta Properties is heavy and sour oil. Oil produced from our Beta Properties is currently sold based on refiners’ posted prices for California Midway-Sunset deliveries in Southern California, adjusted primarily for quality and a negotiated market differential.
Price Volatility. In the past, oil and natural gas prices have been extremely volatile, and we expect this volatility to continue. The following table shows the low and high commodity future index prices for the periods indicated:
Commodity Derivative Contracts. Our hedging activities are intended to support oil, natural gas and NGL prices at targeted levels and to manage our exposure to commodity price fluctuations. We intend to enter into commodity derivative contracts at times and on terms desired to maintain a portfolio of commodity derivative contracts covering at least 30% - 60% of our estimated production from proved developed producing reserves over a one-to-three-year period at any given point of time. Additionally, to satisfy the hedging covenants in our Revolving Credit Facility, we are expected to hedge 65% and 45% of our estimated production from total proved developed reserves for calendar years 2021 and 2022, respectively. We may, however, from time to time hedge more or less than this approximate range. Additionally, we may take advantage of opportunities to modify our commodity derivative portfolio to change the percentage of our hedged production volumes when circumstances suggest that it is prudent to do so. The current market conditions may also impact our ability to enter into future commodity derivative contracts.
Principal Components of Cost Structure
•
Lease operating expense. These are the day to day costs incurred to maintain production of our natural gas, NGLs and oil. Such costs include utilities, direct labor, water injection and disposal, the cost of CO2 injection, chemicals, materials and supplies, compression, repairs and workover expenses. Cost levels for these expenses can vary based on supply and demand for oilfield services and activities performed during a specific period.
•
Gathering, processing and transportation. These are costs incurred to deliver production of our natural gas, NGLs and oil to the market. Cost levels of these expenses can vary based on the volume of natural gas, NGLs and oil production.
•
Exploration expense. These are geological and geophysical costs and include certain seismic costs, costs of unsuccessful exploratory dry holes and unsuccessful leasing efforts. Exploration expense also include rig contract termination fees.
•
Taxes other than income. These consist of production, ad valorem and franchise taxes. Production taxes are paid on produced natural gas, NGLs and oil based on a percentage of market prices and at fixed per unit rates established by federal, state or local taxing authorities. We take advantage of credits and exemptions in the various taxing jurisdictions where we operate. Ad valorem taxes are generally tied to the valuation of the oil and natural gas properties. Franchise taxes are privilege taxes levied by states that are imposed on companies, including limited liability companies and partnerships, which gives the businesses the right to be chartered or operate within that state.
•
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) includes the systematic expensing of the capitalized costs incurred to acquire, exploit and develop oil and natural gas properties. As a “successful efforts” company, all costs associated with acquisition and development efforts and all successful exploration efforts are capitalized, and these costs are depleted using the units of production method.
•
Impairment expense. Proved properties are impaired whenever the net carrying value of the properties exceed their estimated undiscounted future cash flows. Unproved properties are impaired based on time or geologic factors.
•
General and administrative expense. These costs include overhead, including payroll and benefits for employees, costs of maintaining headquarters, costs of managing production and development operations, compensation expense associated with certain long-term incentive-based plans, audit and other professional fees and legal compliance expenses.
•
Accretion expense. Accretion expense is recognized over time as the discounted liabilities are accreted to their expected settlement value.
•
Interest expense. Historically, we financed a portion of our working capital requirements, capital development and acquisitions with borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility. As a result, we incur substantial interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and financing decisions. We expect to continue to incur significant interest expense.
•
Income tax expense. We are a corporation subject to federal and certain state income taxes. We are subject to the Texas margin tax for activities in the State of Texas.
Outlook
Based on our current plans, our capital expenditure program for the full year 2021 is expected to be approximately $28.0 million to $39.0 million. The charts below detail the allocation of capital across our asset base and by investment type based on the midpoint of our 2021 capital expenditure range.
As has been our historical practice, we will periodically review our capital expenditures throughout the year and may adjust the budget based on commodity prices and other factors. We anticipate funding our 2021 capital program from internally generated cash flow. Borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and/or debt or equity financings may provide incremental financial flexibility.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Significant estimates include, but are not limited to, oil and natural gas reserves; depreciation, depletion and amortization of proved oil and natural gas properties; future cash flows from oil and natural gas properties; impairment of long-lived assets; fair value of derivatives; fair value of equity compensation; fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations and asset retirement obligations.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Oil and natural gas exploration, development and production activities are accounted for in accordance with the successful efforts method of accounting. Under this method, costs of acquiring properties, costs of drilling successful exploration wells and development costs are capitalized. The costs of exploratory wells are initially capitalized pending a determination of whether proved reserves have been found. At the completion of drilling activities, the costs of exploratory wells remain capitalized if a determination is made that proved reserves have been found. If no proved reserves have been found, the costs of each of the related exploratory wells are charged to expense. In some cases, a determination of proved reserves cannot be made at the completion of drilling, requiring additional testing and evaluation of the wells. The costs of such exploratory wells are expensed if a determination of proved reserves has not been made within a twelve-month period after drilling is complete. Exploration costs such as geological, geophysical, and seismic costs attributable to unproved locations are expensed as incurred.
As exploration and development work progresses and the reserves on these properties are proven, capitalized costs attributed to the properties are subject to depreciation and depletion. Depletion of capitalized costs is provided using the units-of-production method based on proved oil and gas reserves related to the associated field. Capitalized drilling and development costs of producing oil and natural gas properties are depleted over proved developed reserves and leasehold costs are depleted over total proved reserves. Support equipment and facilities, which are primarily related to our Rockies and California assets, are depreciated using the straight-line method generally based on estimated useful lives of fifteen to forty years.
On the sale or retirement of a complete or partial unit of a proved property or pipeline and related facilities, the cost and related accumulated depreciation, depletion, and amortization are eliminated from the property accounts, and any gain or loss is recognized.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
The estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves utilized in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements are estimated in accordance with the rules established by the SEC and the FASB. These rules require that reserve estimates be prepared under existing economic and operating conditions using a trailing 12-month average price with no provision for price and cost escalations in future years except by contractual arrangements. The development of the Company’s oil and natural gas reserve quantities require management to make significant estimates and assumptions related to the intent and ability to complete undeveloped proved reserves within a five-year development period, as prescribed by SEC guidelines. Additionally, none of our PUDs are scheduled to be developed on a date more than five years from the date the reserves were initially booked as PUD as prescribed by the SEC guidelines. PUDs are converted from undeveloped to developed as applicable wells begin production. We engaged CG&A, our independent reserve engineers, to prepare our reserves estimates for all of our proved reserves at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Reserve estimates are inherently imprecise. Accordingly, the estimates are expected to change as more current information becomes available. It is possible that, because of changes in market conditions or the inherent imprecision of reserve estimates, the estimates of future cash inflows, future gross revenues, the amount of oil and natural gas reserves, the remaining estimated lives of oil and natural gas properties, or any combination of the above may be increased or decreased. Increases in recoverable economic volumes generally reduce per unit depletion rates while decreases in recoverable economic volumes generally increase per unit depletion rates.
Impairments
Proved oil and natural gas properties are reviewed for impairment when events and circumstances indicate the carrying value of such properties may not be recoverable. This may be due to a downward revision of the reserve estimates, less than expected production or drilling results, higher operating and development costs, or lower commodity prices. The estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected in connection with the property are compared to the carrying value of the property to determine if the carrying amount is recoverable. If the carrying value of the property exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, the carrying amount of the property is reduced to its estimated fair value using Level 3 inputs. The factors used to determine fair value include, but are not limited to, estimates of proved and probable reserves, future commodity prices, the timing of future production and capital expenditures and a discount rate commensurate with the risk reflective of the lives remaining for the respective oil and gas properties.
Unproved oil and natural gas properties are reviewed for impairment based on time or geologic factors. Information such as drilling results, reservoir performance, seismic interpretation or future plans to develop acreage is also considered. When unproved property investments are deemed to be impaired, the expense is reported in impairment expenses.
Asset Retirement Obligations
An asset retirement obligation associated with retiring long-lived assets is recognized as a liability on a discounted basis in the period in which the legal obligation is incurred and becomes determinable, with an equal amount capitalized as an addition to oil and natural gas properties, which is allocated to expense over the useful life of the asset. Generally, oil and gas producing companies incur such a liability upon acquiring or drilling a well. Accretion expense is recognized over time as the discounted liabilities are accreted to their expected settlement value. Upon settlement of the liability, a gain or loss is recognized in net income (loss) to the extent the actual costs differ from the recorded liability.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the sale of oil and natural gas is recognized when title passes, net of royalties due to third parties. Oil and natural gas revenues are recorded using the sales method. Under this method, revenues are recognized based on actual volumes of oil and natural gas sold to purchasers, regardless of whether the sales are proportionate to our ownership in the property. An asset or a liability is recognized to the extent there is an imbalance in excess of the proportionate share of the remaining recoverable reserves on the underlying properties.
Derivative Instruments
Commodity derivative financial instruments (e.g., swaps, collars and puts) are used to reduce the impact of natural gas and oil price fluctuations. Every derivative instrument is recorded in the balance sheet as either an asset or liability measured at its fair value. Changes in the derivative’s fair value are recognized currently in earnings as we have not elected hedge accounting for any of our derivative positions.
Business Combinations
Accounting for the acquisition of a business requires the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired to be recorded at fair value. The most significant assumptions in a business combination include those used to estimate the fair value of the oil and gas properties acquired. The fair value of proved natural gas properties is determined using a risk-adjusted after-tax discounted cash flow analysis based upon significant assumptions including commodity prices; projections of estimated quantities of reserves; projections of future rates of production; timing and amount of future development and operating costs; projected reserve recovery factors; and a weighted average cost of capital.
The Company utilizes a market approach to estimate the fair value of unproved properties acquired in a business combination which requires the Company to use judgment in considering the value per undeveloped acre in recent comparable transactions to estimate the value of unproved properties.
The Company believes that the accounting estimates related to business combinations are “critical accounting estimates” because the Company must, in determining the fair value of assets acquired, make assumptions about future commodity prices; projections of estimated quantities of reserves; projections of future rates of production; projections regarding the timing and amount of future development and operating costs; and projections of reserve recovery factors, per acre values of undeveloped property, replacement cost of and future cash flows from midstream assets, cash flow from customer relationships and non-compete agreements and the pre and post modification value of stock based awards. Different assumptions may result in materially different values for these assets which would impact the Company’s financial position and future results of operations.
Results of Operations
The results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, have been derived from our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of the Historical Financial Results
The comparability of the results of operations among the periods presented is impacted by the Merger between Legacy Amplify and Midstates in August 2019.
As a result, the historical results of operations and period-to-period comparisons of these results and certain financial data may not be comparable or indicative of future results.
The table below summarizes certain of the results of operations and period-to-period comparisons for the periods indicated.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net losses of $464.0 million and $35.2 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Oil, natural gas and NGL revenues were $200.9 million and $274.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Average net production volumes were approximately 27.8 MBoe/d and 25.4 MBoe/d for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in production volumes was primarily related to the Merger of Midstates in 2019. The average realized sales price was $19.71 per Boe and $29.67 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in the average realized sales price was primarily due to lower commodity prices during 2020.
Lease operating expense was $119.7 million and $123.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in lease operating expense was primarily due to cost savings initiatives implemented during 2020 offset by an increase in production due to the Merger. On a per Boe basis, lease operating expense was $11.75 and $13.39 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in lease operating expense on a per Boe basis was primarily related to the implementation of cost savings initiatives during 2020 offset by an increase in production due to the Merger.
Gathering, processing and transportation expenses were $20.5 million and $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in gathering, processing and transportation expenses was primarily driven by the Merger and increased fees to satisfy the minimum volume requirement. On a per Boe basis, gathering, processing and transportation expenses were $2.02 and $2.00 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Taxes other than income was $12.9 million and $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. On a per Boe basis, taxes other than income were $1.27 and $2.02 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in taxes other than income on a per Boe basis was primarily due to a decrease in commodity prices.
DD&A expense was $40.3 million and $55.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in DD&A expense was primarily due to impairments which reduced depletable oil and gas property.
Impairment expense was $476.9 million and $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We recognized $427.6 million of impairment expense on proved properties for the year ended December 31, 2020. The estimated future cash flows expected from these properties were compared to their carrying values and determined to be unrecoverable primarily as a result of declining commodity prices. We recognized $49.3 million of impairment expense on unproved properties for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was related to expiring leases and the evaluation of qualitative and quantitative factors related to the current decline in commodity prices. The $2.2 million of impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to certain unproved leasehold costs in Oklahoma. This was primarily due to changes in development plans in the areas of Alfalfa, Major and Woods Counties in Oklahoma.
General and administrative expense was $27.8 million and $55.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in general and administrative expense is primarily attributable to a decrease in acquisition and divestiture expense of $16.2 million related to the Merger, which consisted of a decrease of general acquisition expense and severance of $6.2 million, a decrease in professional services of $4.8 million, a decrease of legal services of $3.6 million, and a decrease in director & officer liability insurance of $2.1 million. The Merger acquisition expenses are non-recurring and are not expected to impact future expenses. Additional in connection with the Merger, we converted our unvested Legacy Amplify restricted stock units into newly issued restricted stock units which reflected a decrease in stock compensation expense of $2.6 million.
Net gains on commodity derivative instruments of $60.7 million were recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of $19.7 million decrease in the fair value of open positions offset by $62.4 million of cash settlements received on expired positions and $18.0 million of cash settlements received on terminated positions. Net losses on commodity derivative instruments of $6.7 million were recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of $10.9 million decrease in the fair value of open positions offset by $4.2 million of cash settlements received on expired positions.
Given the volatility of commodity prices, it is not possible to predict future reported unrealized mark-to-market net gains or losses and the actual net gains or losses that will ultimately be realized upon settlement of the hedge positions in future years. If commodity prices at settlement are lower than the prices of the hedge positions, the hedges are expected to mitigate the otherwise negative effect on earnings of lower oil, natural gas and NGL prices. However, if commodity prices at settlement are higher than the prices of the hedge positions, the hedges are expected to dampen the otherwise positive effect on earnings of higher oil, natural gas and NGL prices and will, in this context, be viewed as having resulted in an opportunity cost.
Interest expense, net was $20.5 million and $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in interest expense is primarily due to being in a loss position for interest rate swaps of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to being in a gain position of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, we had an increase of $2.1 million in the amortization and write-off of deferred financing costs offset by a $2.6 million reduction in interest expense due to lower outstanding borrowings for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Average outstanding borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility were $279.1 million and $264.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loss on Lease was $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was related to the Midstates corporate office lease. The office was vacated in mid-November 2019. Due to excess sublease inventory in the local market, a liability had been accrued for rent and other operating expenses based upon the term and provisions of the lease.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018
Information related to the comparison of our operating results between the years 2019 and 2018 is included in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2019 Form 10-K filed with the SEC and is incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adjusted EBITDA
We include in this report the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted EBITDA and provide our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net cash flow from operating activities, our most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure that is used by management and external users of our consolidated financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of net income or cash flows as determined by GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss):
Plus:
•
Interest expense, including gains or losses on interest rate derivative contracts;
•
Income tax expense;
•
DD&A;
•
Impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets (including oil and natural gas properties);
•
Accretion of asset retirement obligations (“AROs”);
•
Loss on commodity derivative instruments;
•
Cash settlements received on expired commodity derivative instruments;
•
Losses on sale of assets and other, net;
•
Share-based compensation expenses;
•
Exploration costs;
•
Acquisition and divestiture related expenses;
•
Amortization of gain associated with terminated commodity derivatives;
•
Restructuring related costs;
•
Reorganization items, net;
•
Severance payments;
•
Bad debt expense; and
•
Other non-routine items that we deem appropriate.
Less:
•
Interest income;
•
Income tax benefit;
•
Gain on extinguishment of debt
•
Gain on expired commodity derivative instruments;
•
Cash settlements paid on expired commodity derivative instruments;
•
Gains on sale of assets and other, net; and
•
Other non-routine items that we deem appropriate.
We are required to comply with certain Adjusted EBITDA-related metrics under our Revolving Credit Facility.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful because it allows us to more effectively evaluate our operating performance and compare the results of our operations from period to period without regard to our financing methods or capital structure.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income or cash flows from operating activities as determined in accordance with GAAP or as an indicator of our operating performance or liquidity. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company's financial performance, such as a company's cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are components of Adjusted EBITDA. Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a widely followed measure of operating performance and may also be used by investors to measure our ability to meet debt service requirements.
In addition, management uses Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate actual cash flow, develop existing reserves or acquire additional oil and natural gas properties.
The following tables presents a reconciliation of the Company’s net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA, as well as a reconciliation of cash flows from operating activities to Adjusted EBITDA, our most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, for each of the periods indicated.
Reconciliation of Net Income (Loss) to Adjusted EBITDA
Reconciliation of Net Cash from Operating Activities to Adjusted EBITDA
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview. Our ability to finance our operations, including funding capital expenditures and acquisitions, to meet our indebtedness obligations, to refinance our indebtedness or to meet our collateral requirements will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future. Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources have historically been cash flows generated by operating activities, borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, and equity and debt capital markets. As we pursue reserve and production growth, we plan to monitor which capital resources, including equity and debt financings, are available to us to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditure activities and liquidity requirements. Based on our current oil and natural gas price expectations, we believe our cash flows provided by operating activities and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility will provide us with the financial flexibility necessary to meet our cash requirements, including normal operating needs, and to pursue our currently planned 2021 development activities. However, future cash flows are subject to a number of variables, including the level of our oil and natural gas production and the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production, and significant additional capital expenditures will be required to more fully develop our properties. We cannot assure you that operations and other needed capital will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. We anticipate funding our 2021 capital program from internally generated cash flow. Borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and/or debt or equity financings may provide incremental financial flexibility.
Capital Markets. We do not currently anticipate any near-term capital markets activity, but we will continue to evaluate the availability of public debt and equity for funding potential future growth projects and acquisition activity.
Hedging. Commodity hedging has been and remains an important part of our strategy to reduce cash flow volatility. Our hedging activities are intended to support oil, NGL and natural gas prices at targeted levels and to manage our exposure to commodity price fluctuations. We intend to enter into commodity derivative contracts at times and on terms desired to maintain a portfolio of commodity derivative contracts covering at least 30% - 60% of our estimated production from total proved developed producing reserves over a one-to-three-year period at any given point of time. Additionally, to satisfy the hedging covenants in our Revolving Credit Facility, we are expected to hedge 65% and 45% of our estimated production from total proved developed reserves for calendar years 2021 and 2022, respectively. We may, however, from time to time, hedge more or less than this approximate amount. Additionally, we may take advantage of opportunities to modify our commodity derivative portfolio to change the percentage of our hedged production volumes when circumstances suggest that it is prudent to do so. The current market conditions may also impact our ability to enter into future commodity derivative contracts.
We evaluate counterparty risks related to our commodity derivative contracts and trade credit. Should any of these financial counterparties not perform, we may not realize the benefit of some of our hedges under lower commodity prices. We sell our oil and natural gas to a variety of purchasers. Non-performance by a customer could also result in losses.
Capital Expenditures. Our total capital expenditures were approximately $29.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which were primarily related non-operated drilling activity in the Eagle Ford and, capital workovers and capital facilities expenditures located in the Rockies and California.
Working Capital. Working capital is the amount by which current assets exceed current liabilities. Our working capital requirements are primarily driven by changes in accounts receivable and accounts payable as well as the classification of our debt outstanding. These changes are impacted by changes in the prices of commodities that we buy and sell. In general, our working capital requirements increase in periods of rising commodity prices and decreases in periods of declining commodity prices. However, our working capital needs do not necessarily change at the same rate as commodity prices because both accounts receivable and accounts payable are impacted by the same commodity prices. In addition, the timing of payments received by our customers or paid to our suppliers can also cause fluctuations in working capital because we settle with most of our larger customers on a monthly basis and often near the end of the month. We expect that our future working capital requirements will be impacted by these same factors.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of less than $0.1 million primarily as the result of (i) an accounts receivable balance of $30.9 million, (ii) prepaid expenses and other current assets balance of $15.6 million and (iii) a cash balance of $10.4 million less (i) a revenue payable balance of $22.6 million, (ii) an accrued liabilities balance of $22.7 million and (iii) a short-term derivative liability balance of $10.8 million.
Debt Agreements
Revolving Credit Facility. On November 2, 2018, OLLC as borrower, entered into the Revolving Credit Facility (as amended and supplemented to date) with Bank of Montreal, as administrative agent. At December 31, 2020, our borrowing base under our Revolving Credit Facility was subject to redetermination on at least a semi-annual basis primarily based on a reserve engineering report with respect to our estimated natural gas, oil and NGL reserves, which takes into account the available natural gas, oil and NGL prices at such time, as adjusted for the impact of our commodity derivative contracts. The borrowing base as of December 31, 2020, was $260.0 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all the financial (current ratio and total leverage ratio) and other covenants associated with our Revolving Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $5.0 million of available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility.
On April 24, 2020, we received a $5.5 million loan under the Paycheck Protection Program. The Paycheck Protection Program was established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act to provide loans to qualifying businesses. The loans and accrued interest are potentially forgivable provided that the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes. At this time, the Company anticipates that a substantial majority of the loan proceeds will be forgiven under the program.
For additional information regarding the Revolving Credit Facility, see Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report for additional information.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated. The cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, have been derived from our Consolidated Financial Statements. For information regarding the individual components of our cash flow amounts, see the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows included under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” contained herein.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities. Key drivers of net operating cash flows are commodity prices, production volumes and operating costs. For year ended December 31, 2020 we had a net loss of $464.0 million compared to a net loss of $35.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net loss position is primarily driven by an impairment expense of $477.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a $2.2 million impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 included $61.1 million of cash receipts on expired derivative instruments and $18.0 million of cash receipts on terminated derivative instruments compared to $4.3 million of cash receipts on expired derivative instruments for 2019. For 2020, we had net gains on derivative instruments of $60.7 million compared to net losses of $6.7 million for 2019. Production volumes increased to 27.8 MBoe/d in 2020 from 25.4 MBoe/d in 2019 and the average realized sales price decreased to $19.71 per Boe in 2020 from $29.67 per Boe in 2019. The changes in production and average realized sales price were primarily related to decreased drilling activities and lower commodity prices, partially offset by the Merger in 2019.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $35.9 million and $35.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During 2020, we used $34.8 million for additions to oil and gas properties and $1.1 million for additions to other property and equipment. During 2019, we used $72.7 million for additions to oil and gas properties partially offset by $19.3 million related to cash acquired from the Merger with Midstates.
Various restricted investment accounts fund certain long-term contractual and regulatory asset retirement obligations and collateralize certain regulatory bonds associated with our offshore Southern California oil and natural gas properties. Withdrawal of restricted investment was $90.0 million at December 31, 2019, which related to the Company receiving funds from the trust account (the “Beta Decommissioning Trust Account”). See Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information regarding our restricted investments.
Financing Activities. The Company had net repayments of $30.0 million and $9.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company received a $5.5 million loan under the Paycheck Protection Program on April 24, 2020.
The Company paid out dividends of $3.8 million in dividends on March 30, 2020 to stockholders on record at the close of business on March 16, 2020. The board of directors subsequently suspended quarterly dividends. Future dividends, if any, are subject to debt covenants under our Revolving Credit Facility and discretionary approval by the board of directors. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company paid dividends of $15.9 million in aggregate.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company paid $76.6 million related to the repayment of Midstates’ existing reserve-based revolving credit facility which was terminated upon the closing of the Merger. Additionally the Company spent $26.2 million related to the Common Stock repurchased and retired under the share repurchase program, which was terminated on December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31,2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018
Information related to the comparison of our discussion of the cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, is included in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources” of our 2019 Form 10-K filed with the SEC and is incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Requirements
See “- Outlook” for additional information regarding our capital spending program for 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that will affect us, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”