Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in Item 8 of this Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis are set forth elsewhere in this Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Ameresco helps organizations meet energy saving and energy management challenges with an integrated comprehensive approach to energy efficiency and renewable energy. Leveraging budget neutral solutions, including ESPCs and power purchase agreements (“PPAs”), we aim to eliminate the financial barriers that traditionally hamper energy efficiency and renewable energy projects.
Drawing from decades of experience, Ameresco develops tailored energy management projects for its customers in the commercial, industrial, local, state and federal government, K-12 education, higher education, healthcare and public housing sectors.
We provide solutions primarily throughout North America and the U.K. and our revenues are derived principally from energy efficiency projects, which entail the design, engineering and installation of equipment and other measures that incorporate a range of innovative technology and techniques to improve the efficiency and control the operation of a facility’s energy infrastructure; this can include designing and constructing a central plant or cogeneration system for a customer providing power, heat and/or cooling to a building, or other small-scale plant that produces electricity, gas, heat or cooling from renewable sources of energy. We also derive revenue from long-term O&M contracts, energy supply contracts for renewable energy operating assets that we own, integrated-PV, and consulting and enterprise energy management services.
Key Factors and Trends
COVID-19
Fiscal year 2020 was marked with unrivaled global challenges, including the public health and economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the first half of 2020, after COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization, we experienced some delays in our project award conversions and some construction slowdowns due to shelter-in-place restrictions, however, the opportunities to reduce emissions and limit the effects of climate change remained. We responded to the pandemic by ensuring the health and safety of our employees. We implemented a seamless transition to remote operations for many months, and, while following all CDC guidelines, continued front-line work at our essential facilities and the impact to our results of operations and liquidity for the year ended December 31, 2020 was not material.
Although the overall impact to our results of operations and liquidity for the year ended December 31, 2020 was not material, the impact to our future results remains uncertain and will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and its impact on our customers.
The Energy Act of 2020
On December 27, 2020, the President signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 into law, a legislative package that included the Energy Act of 2020, reauthorizing a number of U.S. Department of Energy programs, with a $2.3 trillion spending bill containing appropriations for fiscal year 2021, COVID-19 relief funds, and extensions of a number of expiring tax incentives important to the energy sector. It includes $35 billion in energy research and development programs, a two-year extension of the 26% Investment Tax Credit (“ITC”) rate for solar power that will retain the current 26% credits for solar projects that begin construction through the end of 2022. The 26% rate for ITC for solar projects was set to expire at the end of 2020. The Energy Act of 2020 also includes a one-year extension of the Production Tax Credit for wind power projects and an extension for offshore wind tax credits through 2025. In addition, the Section 179D Energy Efficient Commercial Building Deduction was made permanent under the tax code.
Effects of Seasonality
We are subject to seasonal fluctuations and construction cycles, particularly in climates that experience colder weather during the winter months, such as the northern United States and Canada, or at educational institutions, where large projects are typically carried out during summer months when their facilities are unoccupied. In addition, government customers, many of which have
fiscal years that do not coincide with ours, typically follow annual procurement cycles and appropriate funds on a fiscal-year basis even though contract performance may take more than one year. Further, government contracting cycles can be affected by the timing of, and delays in, the legislative process related to government programs and incentives that help drive demand for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. As a result, our revenues and operating income in the third and fourth quarter are typically higher, and our revenues and operating income in the first quarter are typically lower, than in other quarters of the year. As a result of such fluctuations, we may occasionally experience declines in revenues or earnings as compared to the immediately preceding quarter, and comparisons of our operating results on a period-to-period basis may not be meaningful.
Our annual and quarterly financial results are also subject to significant fluctuations as a result of other factors, many of which are outside our control. See “Our business is affected by seasonal trends and construction cycles, and these trends and cycles could have an adverse effect on our operating results” in Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Report.
Backlog and Awarded Projects
Backlog is an important metric for us because we believe strong order backlogs indicate growing demand and a healthy business over the medium to long term, conversely, a declining backlog could imply lower demand.
The following table presents our backlog:
Total project backlog represents energy efficiency projects that are active within our sales cycle. Our sales cycle begins with the initial contact with the customer and ends, when successful, with a signed contract, also referred to as fully-contracted backlog. Our sales cycle recently has been averaging 18 to 42 months. Awarded backlog is created when a potential customer awards a project to Ameresco following a request for proposal. Once a project is awarded but not yet contracted, we typically conduct a detailed energy audit to determine the scope of the project as well as identify the savings that may be expected to be generated from upgrading the customer’s energy infrastructure. At this point, we also determine the subcontractor, what equipment will be used, and assist in arranging for third party financing, as applicable. Recently, awarded projects have been taking an average of 12 to 24 months to result in a signed contract and convert to fully-contracted backlog. It may take longer, as it depends on the size and complexity of the project. Historically, approximately 90% of our awarded backlog projects have resulted in a signed contract. After the customer and Ameresco agree to the terms of the contract and the contract becomes executed, the project moves to fully-contracted backlog. The contracts reflected in our fully-contracted backlog typically have a construction period of 12 to 36 months and we typically expect to recognize revenue for such contracts over the same period.
Our O&M backlog represents expected future revenues under signed multi-year customer contracts for the delivery of O&M services, primarily for energy efficiency and renewable energy construction projects completed by us for our customers.
We define our 12-month backlog as the estimated amount of revenues that we expect to recognize in the next twelve months from our fully-contracted backlog. See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for our revenue recognition policies. “We may not recognize all revenues from our backlog or receive all payments anticipated under awarded projects and customer contracts” and “In order to secure contracts for new projects, we typically face a long and variable selling cycle that requires significant resource commitments and requires a long lead time before we realize revenues” in Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Report.
Assets in Development
Assets in development, which represents the potential estimated design/build construction value of small-scale renewable energy plants that have been awarded or for which we have secured development rights, was $1,021.8 million as of December 31, 2020
and $681.0 million as of December 31, 2019. This is another important metric because it helps us gauge our future capacity to generate electricity or deliver renewable gas fuel which contributes to our recurring revenue stream.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data from the consolidated statements of income for the periods indicated (1):
Our results of operations for the year-ended December 31, 2020 reflect outstanding year-over-year growth in terms of revenues, operating income, and net income attributable to common shareholders. Our strong operating results are due to the following:
•Revenue: total revenues increased primarily due to a $153.5 million, or 25%, increase in our project revenue attributed to strong execution of our contracted backlog, and a $20.2 million, or 21%, increase in our energy asset revenue attributed to increased assets in operations and improved output and pricing related to certain of our non-solar distributed generation assets in operation, partially offset by a $8.8 million, or 18%, decrease in our integrated-PV revenue resulting from weakened sales to our oil and gas customers and a $5.2 million decrease in other revenue.
•Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit: the increase in cost of revenues is primarily due to the increase in project revenues. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of revenue is primarily due to a higher proportion of lower margin projects as part of the revenue mix.
•Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: the decrease is primarily due to a decrease in net salaries and benefits of $4.8 million resulting from higher utilization and a decrease in travel expense of $1.9 million attributed primarily to COVID-19-related restrictions, partially offset by higher project development costs of $2.0 million, an impairment charge of $1.0 million recorded in 2020 related to one of our landfill gas to energy assets, higher bad debt expenses of $0.5 million attributed to a reserve recorded on a single large trade receivable being disputed, and the impact of a $2.2 million gain recognized in 2019 on the deconsolidation of a variable interest entity.
•Other Expenses, Net: Other expenses, net, includes gains and losses from derivatives transactions, foreign currency transactions, interest expense, interest income, amortization of deferred financing costs and certain government incentives. Other expenses, net increased primarily due to higher interest expenses of $1.4 million related to increased levels of non-recourse project debt and higher amortization of deferred financing costs of $0.5 million, partially offset by government incentives of $1.9 million received which were recorded as other income.
•Income before Income Taxes: the increase is due to reasons described above.
•Income Tax Benefit: the benefit for income taxes is based on various rates set by federal, state, provincial and local authorities and is affected by permanent and temporary differences between financial accounting and tax reporting requirements. The effective tax benefit rate was lower in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the inclusion in 2019 of the benefit from the 2018 and 2019 Section 179D deduction which was retroactively extended in December 2019. The tax benefit rate for 2020 was favorable, which was affected by the release of a previously established valuation allowance on the Canadian tax assets and the benefit of employee stock option compensation. We additionally
realized tax rate benefits associated with net operating loss carrybacks made possible by the passing of the CARES Act on March 27, 2020 and tax basis adjustments on certain partnership flip transactions.
•Net Income and Earnings Per Share: Net income attributable to common shareholders increased due to reasons described above. Basic earnings per share for 2020 was $1.13 an increase of $0.18 per share compared to the same period of 2019. Diluted earnings per share for 2020 was $1.10, an increase of $0.17 per share, compared to the same period of 2019.
Business Segment Analysis
Our reportable segments for the year ended December 31, 2020 are U.S. Regions, U.S. Federal, Canada and Non-Solar DG. These segments do not include results of other activities, such as corporate operating expenses not specifically allocated to the segments. See Note 20 “Business Segment Information” for additional information about our segments.
Revenues
•U.S. Regions: the increase is primarily due to an increase in project revenues attributable to the timing of revenue recognized as a result of the phase of active projects versus the prior year and an increase in revenue from the growth of our energy assets in operation.
•U.S. Federal: the increase is primarily due to an increase in project revenue attributable to the timing of revenue recognized as a result of the phase of active projects compared to the prior year.
•Canada: the increase is primarily due to an increase in project revenues related to the progression of certain active projects and an increase in revenue from the growth of our energy assets in operation.
•Non-Solar DG: the increase is primarily due to an increase in project revenues related to the progression of certain active projects and an increase in energy and incentive revenue.
•All Other: the increase is primarily due to an increase in project revenues related to an increase in volume and progression of certain active projects partially offset by a decrease in our integrated-PV revenues, which is a result of weakened sales to our oil and gas customers.
Income before Taxes and Unallocated Corporate Activity
•U.S. Regions: the increase is primarily due to the increase in revenues described above, a decrease in operating expenses attributed to lower salary and benefit costs of $4.6 million resulting from lower headcount and higher utilization, and an increase in government incentives of $1.9 million recorded as other income, partially offset by higher project development costs of $2.0 million and higher bad debt expenses of $0.5 million attributed to a reserve recorded on a single large trade receivable being disputed.
•U.S. Federal: the increase is due to the increase in revenues described above and a decrease in salaries and benefits of $0.9 million resulting from increased utilization, partially offset by an increase in interest expense of $0.9 million.
•Canada: the increase is primarily due to the increase in revenues described above.
•Non-Solar DG: the increase is primarily due to the increase in project revenues described above and higher margin energy and incentive revenue attributed to higher pricing realized from the sale of certain environmental attributes, partially offset by an impairment charge of $1.0 million in 2020 related to one of our landfill gas to energy assets.
•All Other: the increase is due to higher revenues noted above, a decrease in operating expenses attributed to lower salary and benefit costs of $1.3 million resulting from lower headcount and higher utilization, offset by a mix of revenue from projects with lower gross margins.
•Unallocated corporate activity includes all corporate level selling, general and administrative expenses and other expenses not allocated to the segments. We do not allocate any indirect expenses to the segments. Corporate activity increased primarily due to higher salaries and benefit costs, higher professional fees and increased insurance costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Since inception, we have funded operations primarily through cash flow from operations, advances from Federal ESPC projects, our senior secured credit facility and various forms of other debt. See below and Note 9 “Debt and Financing Lease Liabilities” for more information about our debt.
Working capital requirements, which can be susceptible to fluctuations during the year due to seasonal demands, generally result from revenue growth, our solar equipment purchase patterns, the timing of funding under various contracts, and payment terms for receivables and payables.
We expect to incur additional expenditures in connection with the following activities:
•equity investments, project asset acquisitions and business acquisitions that we may fund time to time
•capital investment in current and future energy assets
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs, however, we continue to evaluate and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business can continue to operate during these uncertain times. This includes limiting discretionary spending across the organization and re-prioritizing our capital projects amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) which includes modifications to the limitation on business interest expense and net operating loss provisions, and provides a payment delay of employer payroll taxes during 2020 after the date of enactment. The payment of $4,532 of employer payroll taxes otherwise due in 2020 has been delayed with 50% due by December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% by December 31, 2022. The CARES Act permits net operating losses from the 2018, 2019, and 2020 tax years to be carried back to the previous five tax years (beginning with the earliest year first). We estimate the discrete benefit associated with the net operating loss provisions of the CARES Act to be approximately $2,000, an estimated refund of taxes paid in prior years of approximately $1,700, and the carryback also provides an additional refund of approximately $3,200 related to Alternative Minimum Tax credits.
Senior Secured Credit Facility - Revolver and Term Loan
In March 2020, we amended this credit facility which increased the total funded debt to EBITDA covenant ratio to a maximum of 3.75 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which reverts back to 3.25 on March 31, 2021. The amendment also increased the Eurocurrency rate floor from 0% to 1%. The total commitment under the amended credit facility remains unchanged at $185.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, our senior secured credit facility outstanding was $110.8 million, and we had funds of $50.0 million available under the revolving credit facility.
Project Financing
Construction and Term Loans
We have entered into a number of construction and term loan agreements for the purpose of constructing and owning certain renewable energy plants. The physical assets and the operating agreements related to the renewable energy plants are generally owned by wholly owned, single member “special purpose” subsidiaries of Ameresco. These construction and term loans are structured as project financings made directly to a subsidiary, and upon commercial operation and achieving certain milestones in the credit agreement, the related construction loan converts into a term loan. While we are required under GAAP to reflect these loans as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets, they are generally non-recourse and not direct obligations of Ameresco. As of December 31, 2020, our construction and term loans outstanding were $224.9 million.
Our project financing facilities contain various financial and other covenant requirements which include debt service coverage ratios and total funded debt to EBITDA, as defined. Any failure to comply with the financial or other covenants of our project financings would result in inability to distribute funds from the wholly-owned subsidiary to Ameresco or constitute an event of default in which the lenders may have the ability to accelerate the amounts outstanding, including all accrued interest and unpaid fees. As of December 31, 2020, we were in default on one of our term loans for failure to maintain a projected consolidated debt service coverage ratio equal to or exceeding 1.20 to 1.00, however, a limited waiver was received in January 2021.
Federal ESPC Liabilities
We have arrangements with certain third-parties to provide advances to us during the construction or installation of projects for certain customers, typically federal governmental entities, in exchange for our assignment to the lenders of our rights to the long-term receivables arising from the ESPCs related to such projects. These financings totaled $440.2 million in principal amounts as of December 31, 2020 and $245.0 million as of December 31, 2019. Under the terms of these financing arrangements, we are required to complete the construction or installation of the project in accordance with the contract with our customer, and the liability remains on our consolidated balance sheets until the completed project is accepted by the customer.
We are the primary obligor for financing received, but only until final acceptance of the work by the customer. At this point recourse to us ceases and the ESPC receivables are transferred to the investor. The transfers of receivables under these agreements do not qualify for sales accounting until final customer acceptance of the work, so the advances from the investors are not classified as operating cash flows. Cash draws that we received under these ESPC agreements were $248.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and are recorded as financing cash inflows. The use of the cash received under these arrangements is to pay project costs classified as operating cash flows and totaled $227.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Due to the manner in which the ESPC contracts with the third-party investors are structured, our reported operating cash flows are materially impacted by the fact that operating cash flows only reflect the ESPC contract expenditure outflows and do not reflect any inflows from the corresponding contract revenues. Upon acceptance of the project by the federal customer the ESPC receivable and corresponding ESPC liability are removed from our consolidated balance sheets as a non-cash settlement. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, to our consolidated financial statements in this Report.
Sale-Leaseback and Financing Liabilities
We have entered into sale-leaseback arrangements for solar PV energy assets with multiple investors and in accordance with Topic 842, Leases, all sale-leaseback transactions that occurred after December 31, 2018, were accounted for as failed sales and the proceeds received from the transactions were recorded as long-term financing facilities. See Notes 8 “Leases” and 9 “Debt and Financing Lease Liabilities” for additional information on these financing facilities. As of December 31, 2020, our financing leases and financing liabilities outstanding were $56.1 million, and $111.9 million remained available under these lending commitments, although this full amount is not expected to be used.
While we are required under GAAP to reflect these lease payments as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets, they are generally non-recourse and not direct obligations of Ameresco, except that we have guaranteed certain obligations relating to taxes and project warranties, operation and maintenance.
Other
We issue letters of credit and performance bonds, from time to time, with our third-party lenders, to provide collateral.
Selected Measures of Liquidity and Capital Resources
We regularly monitor and assess our ability to meeting funding requirements. We believe that cash and cash equivalents, working capital and availability under our revolving senior secured credit facility, combined with our access to credit markets, will be sufficient to fund our operations through at least March 2022 and thereafter.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our changes in cash and cash equivalents:
Our service offering also includes the development, construction, and operation of small-scale renewable energy plants. Small-scale renewable energy projects, or energy assets, can either be developed for the portfolio of assets that we own and operate or designed and built for customers. Expenditures related to projects that we own are recorded as cash outflows from investing activities. Expenditures related to projects that we build for customers are recorded as cash outflows from operating activities as cost of revenues.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flow from operating activities in 2020 improved over 2019 primarily due to a 38.5% increase in our operating income. This is a result of increased revenue and a 1% decrease in expenses as a percentage of revenue. In addition, the changes in our operating assets and liabilities improved 23% primarily due to a decrease in unbilled revenue (costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings) and an increase in deferred revenue (billings in excess of cost and estimated earnings). Further, non-cash items, which include non-cash compensation, depreciation, amortization, deferred income taxes and other non-cash items this year totaled $52.1 million, compared to $36.5 million last year.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During 2020, we made capital investments, net of grant proceeds, of $178.7 million related to the development and acquisition of renewable energy plants, a $44.7 million increase over the last year. This includes the purchases of solar PV projects in development for $1.3 million, of which $1 million was paid with cash, compared to $8.5 million, of which $2.5 million was paid with cash last year. We also spent $2.2 million related to purchases of other property and equipment, which is $4.5 million less than last year.
We currently plan to invest approximately $200.0 million to $250.0 million in capital investments in 2021, principally for the construction or acquisition of new renewable energy plants.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Our primary sources of financing during 2020 were proceeds of $250.3 million from advances on Federal ESPC projects and energy assets and long-term debt financings of $116.1 million. These proceeds were partially offset by repayments of long-term debt totaling $73.6 million.
During 2019, proceeds from Federal ESPC projects and energy assets provided $201.6 million in cash. We also received senior secured credit facility net proceeds of $73.3 million, long-term debt financing proceeds of $43.9 million and contributions from redeemable non-controlling interests of $21.4 million. These proceeds were partially offset by repayments of long-term debt totaling $28.4 million.
We currently plan additional financings of $150.0 million to $200.0 million in 2021 to fund the construction or acquisition of new renewable energy plants as discussed above.
We may also, from time to time, finance our operations through issuance or offering of equity or debt securities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP involves us making estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, net sales and expenses, and related disclosures in the accompanying notes at the date of our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, industry and market trends, and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. However, by their nature, estimates are subject to various
assumptions and uncertainties, and changes in circumstances could cause actual results to differ from these estimates, sometimes materially.
We believe that our policies and estimates that require our most significant judgments are considered our critical accounting policies and are discussed below. In addition, refer to Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further details.
Revenue Recognition
As described in Note 2, we recognize revenue from the installation or construction of projects over time using the cost-based input method. We use the total costs incurred on the project relative to the total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. When the estimate on a contract indicates a loss or claims against costs incurred reduce the likelihood of recoverability of such costs, we record the entire estimated loss in the period the loss becomes known.
To the extent a contract is deemed to have multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract.
Billings in excess of cost and estimated earnings represents advanced billings on certain construction contracts. Costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings represent certain amounts under customer contracts that were earned and billable but not invoiced.
Significant judgement is required to estimate the total expected costs of projects that have a construction period of 12 to 36 months. Any increase or decrease in estimated costs to complete a performance obligation without a corresponding change to the contract price could impact the calculation of cumulative revenue to date and gross profit on the project. Factors that may result in a change to our estimates include unforeseen engineering problems, construction delays, the performance of contractors and major material suppliers, and unusual weather conditions, among others.
We have a long history of working with multiple types of projects and preparing cost estimates, and we rely on the expertise of key personnel to prepare what we believe are reasonable best estimates given available facts and circumstances. Due to the nature of the work involved, however, judgment is involved to estimate the costs to complete and the amounts estimated could have a material impact on the revenue we recognize in each accounting period. We cannot estimate unforeseen events and circumstances which may result in actual results being materially different from previous estimates.
Project Development Costs
We capitalize project development costs incurred in connection with the development of energy efficiency and renewable energy projects, only after the point in time when the realization of related revenue becomes probable. These costs primarily include direct labor, interest costs, outside contractor services, consulting fees, legal fees and associated travel. Project development costs incurred prior to the probable realization of revenues are expensed as incurred. The estimate of determining when revenue is probable requires judgement and if the required permitting is not obtained in a timely manner, or at all, or other unforeseen events occur, we may decide to abandon a project, at which time we would be required to write-off capitalized project development costs for that particular project.
Impairment Assessments
We evaluate our long-lived assets, including goodwill and intangible assets, for impairment as events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of these assets may not be fully recoverable, and at least annually (December 31st) for goodwill and intangible assets that have indefinite lives. Examples of such triggering events applicable to our assets include a significant decrease in the market price of a long-lived asset or asset group or a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset or asset group.
We evaluate recoverability of long-lived assets and intangible assets by estimating the undiscounted future cash flows associated with the expected uses and eventual disposition of those assets. When these comparisons indicate that the carrying value of those assets is greater than the undiscounted cash flows, we recognize an impairment loss for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value.
The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill requires significant judgment. We regularly monitor current business conditions and other factors including, but not limited to, adverse industry or economic trends, restructuring actions and projections of future results. We estimate the reporting unit’s fair value and compare it with the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. If the fair value is greater than the carrying value of its reporting unit, no impairment is recorded. Fair value is determined using both an income approach and a market approach. The estimates and assumptions used in our
calculations include revenue growth rates, expense growth rates, expected capital expenditures to determine projected cash flows, expected tax rates and an estimated discount rate to determine present value of expected cash flows. These estimates are based on historical experiences, our projections of future operating activity and our weighted-average cost of capital. Unforeseen events and changes in circumstances or market conditions could adversely affect these estimates, which could result in an impairment charge.
Based on our goodwill impairment assessment, all of our reporting units with goodwill had estimated fair values that exceeded their carrying values by at least 67% as of December 31, 2020 and 15% as of December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a long-lived asset impairment charge of $1.0 million on one of our energy asset groups. See Note 7 “Energy Assets” for additional information.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We account for our interest rate swaps, commodity swaps and our make-whole provisions as derivative financial instruments which are carried on our consolidated balance sheets at fair value.
The fair value of our interest rate and commodity swaps are determined based on observable market data in combination with expected cash flows for each instrument. Among the key drivers of value are interest rates, since the future floating rates are unknown. The value of our interest rate swaps will change in subsequent periods as counterparty credit risk and forward expectations of the floating rate change. Therefore, depending on how the yield curve changes in subsequent measuring periods, a swap can become an asset or a liability for us. In addition, model inputs used in swap analyses can also substantially affect the fair value of the swaps.
Our make-whole provisions fulfill the requirements of embedded derivative instruments that were required to be bifurcated from the host agreement. The fair value of these make-whole provisions are determined based on available market data and a with and without model. There are several assumptions and estimates used in the calculation of the fair value of derivatives, such as discount rate and risk premium.
Any changes in the fair value of our derivatives designated as hedging instruments are recorded as adjustments to other comprehensive income and any changes in fair value of our derivatives not designated hedging instruments are recorded in other expense, net in our consolidated statements of income. See Note 19 “Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” for more information.
Redeemable Non-controlling Interests
We utilize the hypothetical liquidation at book value (“HLBV”) methodology for attributing income and loss to the redeemable non-controlling interests each period, which is a balance sheet approach. Under the HLBV method, the amounts of income and loss attributed to the redeemable non-controlling interests in the consolidated statements of income reflect changes in the amounts the investors would hypothetically receive at each balance sheet date under the liquidation provisions of the contractual agreements, assuming the net assets of this funding structure were liquidated at recorded amounts. The investors’ non-controlling interest in the results of operations of this funding structure is determined as the difference in the non-controlling interest’s claim under the HLBV method at the start and end of each reporting period, after taking into account any capital transactions, such as contributions or distributions, between our subsidiaries and the investors. The use of the HLBV methodology to allocate income to the redeemable non-controlling interest holders may create volatility in our consolidated statements of income as the application of HLBV can drive changes in net income available and loss attributable to the redeemable non-controlling interests from quarter to quarter. The HLBV method computes the hypothetical taxable gain or loss based on the difference between the GAAP net book value and tax basis of the partnership flip entity, which involves a number of assumptions and estimates such as appraisals, forecasted contributions and distributions, and tax depreciation method used.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
Our stock-based compensation expense results from the issuances of shares of restricted common stock and grants of stock options to employees, directors, outside consultants and others. We follow the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718 which requires that all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, modifications to existing stock options and employee stock purchases related to our Employee Stock Purchase Plan, be recognized in the consolidated statements of income based on their fair values, using the prospective-transition method. Certain option grants have performance conditions that must be achieved prior to vesting and are expensed based on the expected achievement at each reporting period. This estimate involves judgment regarding future expectations of various financial performance measures. If there are changes in our estimate of the level of financial performance measures expected to be achieved, the related stock-based compensation expense may be significantly increased or reduced in the period that our estimate changes.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the weighted-average fair value of options granted and record stock-based compensation expense utilizing the straight-line method. The determination of the fair value of stock-based payment awards utilizing the Black-Scholes model is affected by the stock price and a number of assumptions, including expected volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The compensation expense is included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and five foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and uncertain tax positions. The underlying assumptions are also highly susceptible to change from period to period.
We accrue for the estimated additional tax and interest that may result from tax authorities disputing uncertain tax positions. We believe we have made adequate provisions for income taxes for all years that are subject to audit based upon the latest information available. We operate within multiple taxing jurisdictions and are subject to tax audits in these jurisdictions. These audits can involve complex issues and may require an extended period of time to resolve. We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We adjust these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences may affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have an impact on our results of operations.
On a quarterly basis, we assess our current and projected earnings by jurisdiction to determine whether or not our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in a particular jurisdiction in the future, a valuation allowance to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. This valuation allowance is maintained for deferred tax assets that we estimate are more likely than not to be unrealizable based on available evidence at the time the estimate is made. In 2020 we determined that it was more likely than not that the non-capital net operating loss carryforwards at our Canadian parent company would be realized before they expire. In 2020 we reversed the previously established valuation allowance on the tax assets associated with the carryforwards. The determination of whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is appropriate is subject to considerable judgment and requires an evaluation of all positive and negative evidence, including our historical financial results, the source and consistency of those results, whether they should be adjusted for certain one-time or nonrecurring items, whether losses cumulatively exceed income over a reasonable period of time, the availability of tax planning strategies, availability of carryback and carryforward periods, and other factors, including our expectations of future taxable income. Adjustments to income tax expense to the extent we establish a valuation allowance or adjust this allowance in a period could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for a discussion of recent accounting standards.