ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT PURSUANT TO THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995
This Annual Report on Form 10-K ("Form 10-K") contains statements that are considered forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements give the Company's current expectations and forecasts of future events. All statements other than statements of current or historical fact contained in this Annual Report, including statements regarding the Company's future financial position, business strategy, budgets, projected costs and plans, and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” and similar expressions, as they relate to the Company, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are based on the Company's current plans, and the Company's actual future activities and results of operations may be materially different from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the statements made. Any or all of the forward-looking statements in this Annual Report may turn out to be inaccurate. The Company has based these forward-looking statements largely on its current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that it believes may affect its financial condition, results of operations, business strategy, and financial needs. The forward-looking statements can be affected by inaccurate assumptions or by known or unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The Company undertakes no obligation to publicly revise these forward-looking statements to reflect events occurring after the date hereof. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to the Company or persons acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained in this Form 10-K.
In addition to the risks and uncertainties that may ordinarily influence our business, the Company remains exposed to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has caused significant disruption in the financial markets both globally and in the United States. The resulting macroeconomic events have contributed to an increase in the business conducted by the Company, but also pose certain risks and uncertainties for the Company. The Company does not know how long the COVID-19 pandemic will continue, the extent to which the effects that the Company has experienced from the pandemic thus far will persist, or whether other effects on the Company and its businesses will materialize in the short or long term.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those factors discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in “Risk Factors.”
INTRODUCTION
Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided as a supplement to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes to aid in the understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. Our discussion is organized as follows:
•
Executive overview. This section provides a general description of our business, as well as significant transactions and events that we believe are important in understanding the results of operations.
•
Results of operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations presented in the accompanying consolidated statements of income by comparing the results for the respective periods presented. Included in our analysis is a discussion of six performance metrics: (i) ounces of gold and silver sold, (ii) Wholesale Sales ticket volume, (iii) Direct-to-Consumer ticket volume, (iv) number of Direct-to-Consumer customers, (v) inventory turnover ratio, and (vi) number of secured loans at period-end.
•
Segment results of operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations presented for our three segments:
o
Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
o
Direct-to-Consumer, and
o
Secured Lending
for the comparable periods.
•
Non GAAP Measures. In addition to certain key operational metrics to assess the performance of our business, management uses the financial performance measure “adjusted net income before provision for taxes” that is not prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”)
•
Liquidity and financial condition. This section provides an analysis of our cash flows, as well as a discussion of our outstanding debt as of June 30, 2021, sources of liquidity and the amount of financial capacity available to fund our future commitments and other financing arrangements.
•
Critical accounting policies. This section discusses critical accounting policies that are considered both important to our financial condition and results of operations and require management to make significant judgment and estimates. All of our significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies are also summarized in Note 2 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
•
Recent accounting pronouncements. This section discusses new accounting pronouncements, dates of implementation and their expected impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Our Business
We conduct our operations in three reportable segments: (i) Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services (formerly known as Wholesale Trading & Ancillary Services), (ii) Direct-to-Consumer (formerly known as Direct Sales) and (iii) Secured Lending.
Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services Segment
The Company operates its Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment through A-Mark Precious Metals, Inc., and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, A-Mark Trading AG (“AMTAG”), Transcontinental Depository Services, LLC ("TDS" or “Storage”), A-M Global Logistics, LLC (“AMGL” or "Logistics"), and AM&ST Associates, LLC ("AMST" or "SilverTowne" or the "Mint").
The Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment operates as a full-service precious metals company. We offer gold, silver, platinum, and palladium in the form of bars, plates, powder, wafers, grain, ingots, and coins. Our Industrial unit services manufacturers and fabricators of products utilizing or incorporating precious metals. Our Coin and Bar unit deals in over 1,000 coin and bar products in a variety of weights, shapes, and sizes for distribution to dealers and other qualified purchasers. We have a marketing support office in Vienna, Austria, and a trading center in El Segundo, California. The trading center, for buying and selling precious metals, is available to receive orders 24 hours every day, even when many major world commodity markets are closed. In addition to Wholesale Sales activity, A-Mark offers its customers a variety of ancillary services, including financing, storage, consignment, logistics, and various customized financial programs. As a U.S. Mint-authorized purchaser of gold, silver, platinum, and palladium coins, A-Mark purchases product directly from the U.S. Mint and other sovereign mints for sale to its customers.
Through its wholly-owned subsidiary, AMTAG, the Company promotes A-Mark's products and services to the international market. Through our wholly-owned subsidiary TDS, we offer a variety of managed storage options for precious metals products to financial institutions, dealers, investors, and collectors around the world.
The Company's wholly-owned subsidiary AMGL is based in Las Vegas, Nevada, and provides our customers an array of complementary services, including receiving, handling, inventorying, processing, packing, and shipping of precious metals and custom coins on a secure basis.
Through its wholly-owned subsidiary, AMST, the Company designs and produces minted silver products. Our mint operations allow us to provide greater product selection to our customers and greater pricing stability within the supply chain, as well as to gain increased access to silver during volatile market environments, which have historically created higher demand for precious metals products.
Direct-to-Consumer
The Company operates its Direct-to-Consumer segment through its wholly-owned subsidiaries JM Bullion, Inc. (“JMB”), Goldline, Inc. (“Goldline”), AMIP, LLC ("AMIP"), and through its 50%-owned subsidiary Precious Metals Purchasing Partners, LLC ("PMPP").
JMB is a leading e-commerce retailer providing access to a broad array of gold, silver, copper, platinum, and palladium products through its websites and marketplaces. Currently, JMB operates five separately branded, company-owned websites targeting specific niches within the precious metals retail market. The Company acquired the 79.5% interest in JMB that it did not previously own in March 2021. See Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the acquisition of JMB.
The Company acquired Goldline in August 2017 through an asset purchase transaction with Goldline, LLC, which had been in operation since 1960. Goldline is a direct retailer of precious metals to the investor community, and markets its precious metal products on television, radio, and the internet, as well as through customer service outreach.
AMIP, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Goldline, manages its intellectual property.
The Company formed and capitalized PMPP in fiscal 2019, a 50%-owned subsidiary of Goldline, pursuant to terms of a joint venture agreement, for the purpose of purchasing precious metals from the partners' retail customers, and then reselling the acquired products back to affiliates of the partners. PMPP commenced its operations in fiscal 2020.
Acquisition of JMB
On March 19, 2021, we completed the acquisition of the 79.5% of the stockholder interest in JM Bullion, Inc. (“JMB”) that we did not previously own. JMB is a leading e-commerce retailer providing access to a broad array of gold, silver, copper, platinum, and palladium products through its own websites and marketplaces. JMB owns and operates five separately branded websites, including JMBullion.com, ProvidentMetals.com, Silver.com, GoldPrice.org, and SilverPrice.org.
By acquiring JMB, we have substantially both expanded our e-commerce channel for precious coin and metals sales and increased the diversification of our business between wholesale and retail distribution. We believe that the acquisition will enable us to:
•
apply JMB’s proven online marketing strategies to other aspects of our direct-to-consumer business;
•
more effectively tailor our merchandising and pricing strategies to target multiple customer demographics across our combined six (including Goldline) unique consumer-facing brands;
•
enhance our program under which we repurchase product from our customers;
•
expand our logistics footprint by adding JMB’s centrally located distribution hub in Dallas, Texas;
•
offer JMB’s customers proprietary precious metal products developed by us, as well as additional services, including distribution, storage, and logistics;
•
leverage the increased size of the combined businesses to achieve more favorable pricing and financing terms; and
•
provide JMB with opportunities for geographic expansion through our international presence.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, JMB had revenues of approximately $673.3 million. This compares with the Company’s total revenues of approximately $7,613.0 million, and the revenues of the Company’s direct-to-consumer segment of approximately $874.3 million. The aforementioned results include JMB’s activity from March 20, 2021 through June 30, 2021.
The following table compares the number of JMB’s new customers, active customers, and total customers to the corresponding number of customers associated with the other subsidiary in our Direct-to-Consumer segment for the year ended June 30, 2021.
(1)
Includes JMB’s customer data from March 20, 2021 through June 30, 2021.
In the following table we estimate, on a pro forma basis, the revenue and net income of the Company had the acquisition of JMB, and certain other transactions occurred on July 1, 2019.
These estimates are based on the historical results of the Company and JMB during this period and take into account various transaction accounting adjustments. This pro forma information is not necessarily indicative of what the combined company’s results
of operations would have been had the acquisition of JMB been completed as of July 1, 2019, nor is it meant to be indicative of any anticipated future results of operations that the combined company will experience.
Secured Lending
The Company operates its Secured Lending segment through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Collateral Finance Corporation, LLC. ("CFC"), AM Capital Funding, LLC (“AMCF”), and CFC Alternative Investments (“CAI”).
CFC is a California licensed finance lender that originates and acquires commercial loans secured by bullion and numismatic coins. CFC's customers include coin and precious metal dealers, investors, and collectors. As of June 30, 2021, CFC and AMCF had, in the aggregate, approximately $113.0 million in secured loans outstanding, of which approximately 65.4% were acquired from third-parties (some of which may be customers of A-Mark) and approximately 34.6% were originated by CFC.
AMCF, a wholly-owned subsidiary of CFC, was formed for the purpose of securitizing eligible secured loans of CFC. AMCF issued, administers, and owns Secured Senior Term Notes: Series 2018-1, Class A, with an aggregate principal amount of $72.0 million and Secured Subordinated Term Notes, Series 2018-1, Class B in the aggregate principal amount of $28.0 million. The Class A Notes bear interest at a rate of 4.98%, and the Class B Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.98% (collectively referred to as the "Notes"). The Notes have a maturity date of December 15, 2023. See Note 14 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for additional information
CAI is a holding company that has an equity method interest in Collectible Card Partners, LLC (“CCP”). The purpose of CCP is to provide capital to fund commercial loans secured by graded sport cards and sports memorabilia. Formed in April 2021, CCP had no operations in fiscal 2021.
Our Strategy
The Company was formed in 1965 and has grown into a significant participant in the bullion and coin markets, with approximately $7.6 billion in revenues for fiscal year 2021. Our strategy continues to focus on growth, including the volume of our business, our geographic presence, and the scope of complementary products, services, and technological tools that we offer to our customers. With our recent acquisition of JMB, we have substantially expanded our e-commerce channel for precious coin and metals sales and increased the diversification of our business between wholesale and retail distribution.
We intend to continue to grow by leveraging off the strengths of our existing integrated operations:
•
our expertise in e-commerce and marketing;
•
our expansive retail distribution network;
•
the depth of our customer relationships;
•
our access to market makers, suppliers, and sovereign and private mints;
•
our trading systems in the U.S. and Europe;
•
our network of precious metals dealers;
•
our depository relationships around the world;
•
our knowledge of secured lending;
•
our design and production of minted silver products;
•
our logistics capabilities; and
•
the quality and experience of our management team.
Our Customers
Our customers include financial institutions, bullion retailers, industrial manufacturers and fabricators, sovereign mints, refiners, coin and metal dealers, investors, collectors, and e-commerce and other retail customers. The Company makes a two-way market in its wholesale operations, which results in many customers also operating as our suppliers in that segment. This diverse base of wholesale customers purchases a variety of products from the Company in a multitude of grades, primarily in the form of coins and bars. Our Direct-to-Consumer segment sells to (and, through JMB and PMPP, buys from) retail customers, with JMB focusing on e-commerce operations and Goldline marketing through various traditional channels to the investor community. The Direct-to-Consumer segment offers these customers a variety of gold, silver, copper, platinum, and palladium products.
Factors Affecting Revenues, Gross Profit, Interest Income, and Interest Expense
Revenues. The Company enters into transactions to sell and deliver gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and rhodium to industrial and commercial users, coin and bullion dealers, mints, and financial institutions. The metals are investment or industrial grade and are sold in a variety of shapes and sizes.
The Company also sells and delivers gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and copper products directly to customers and the investor community through its Direct-to Consumer segment. Customers may place orders over the phone or online at one of the Company’s websites.
The Company also sells precious metals on forward contracts at a fixed price based on current prevailing precious metal spot prices with a certain delivery date in the future (up to six months from inception date of the forward contract). The Company also uses other derivative products (primarily futures contracts) or combinations thereof to hedge commodity risks. We enter into these forward and future contracts as part of our hedging strategy to mitigate our price risk of holding inventory; they are not entered into for speculative purposes.
Forward sales contracts by their nature are required to be included in revenues, unlike futures contracts which do not impact the Company’s revenue. The decision to use a forward contract versus another derivative type of product (e.g., a futures contract) for hedging purposes is based on the economics of the transaction. Since the volume of hedging can be significant, the movement in and out of forwards can substantially impact revenues, either positively or negatively, from period to period. For this reason, the Company believes ounces sold (excluding ounces sold on forward sales contracts) is a meaningful metric to assess our top line performance.
In addition, the Company earns revenue by providing storage solutions for precious metals and numismatic coins for financial institutions, dealers, investors and collectors worldwide and by providing storage and order-fulfillment services to our retail customers. The Company also earns revenue from advertisements placed on our Direct-to-Consumer websites. These revenue streams represent less than 1% of the Company’s consolidated revenues.
The Company operates in a high volume/low margin industry. Revenues are impacted by three primary factors: product volume, market prices, and market volatility. A material changes in any one or more of these factors may result in a significant change in the Company’s revenues. A significant increase or decrease in revenues can occur simply based on changes in the underlying commodity prices and may not be reflective of an increase or decrease in the volume of products sold.
Gross Profit. Gross profit is the difference between our revenues and the cost of our products sold. Since we quote prices based on the current commodity market prices for precious metals, we enter into a combination of forward and futures contracts to affect a hedge position equal to the underlying precious metal commodity value, which substantially represents inventory subject to price risk. We enter into these derivative transactions solely for the purpose of hedging our inventory, and not for speculative purposes. Our gross profit includes the gains and losses resulting from these derivative instruments. However, the gains and losses on the derivative instruments are substantially offset by the gains and losses on the corresponding changes in the market value of our precious metals inventory. As a result, our results of operations generally are not materially impacted by changes in commodity prices.
Volatility also affects our gross profit. Greater volatility typically causes the premium spreads to widen resulting in an increase in the gross profit. Product supply constraints during extended periods of higher volatility have historically resulted in a heightening of wider premium spreads resulting in further improvement in the gross profit.
Interest Income. The Company enters into secured loans and secured financing structures with its customers under which it charges interest. CFC acquires loan portfolios and originates loans that are secured by precious metal bullion and numismatic material owned by the borrowers and held by the Company for the term of the loan. Additionally, AMCF acquires certain loans from CFC that are secured by precious metal bullion to meet the collateral requirements of the Notes. Also, the Company offers a number of secured financing options to its customers to finance their precious metals purchases including consignments and other structured inventory finance products whereby the Company earns a fee based on the underlying value of the precious metal ("repurchase arrangements with customers").
Interest Expense. The Company incurs interest expense associated with its: lines of credit, notes, product financing agreements for the transfer and subsequent re-acquisition of gold, silver, and platinum at a fixed price with a third-party finance company ("product financing arrangements"), and short-term precious metal borrowing arrangements with our suppliers ("liabilities on borrowed metals").
Performance Metrics
In addition to financial statement indicators, management also utilizes certain key operational metrics to assess the performance of our business.
Gold and Silver Ounces Sold and Delivered to Customers. We look at the number of ounces of gold and silver sold and delivered to our customers (excluding ounces recorded on forward contracts). These metrics reflect our business volume without regard to changes in commodity pricing, which also impacts revenue, but can mask actual business trends.
The primary purpose of entering into forward sales transactions is to hedge commodity price risk. Although the revenues realized from these forward sales transactions are often significant, they generally have negligible impact to gross margins. As a result, the
Company excludes the ounces recorded on forward contracts from its performance metrics, as the Company does not enter into forward sales transactions for speculative purposes.
Wholesale Sales Ticket Volume. Another measure of our business that is unaffected by changes in commodity pricing, is ticket volume (or number of orders processed). Ticket volume for the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment measures the total number of wholesale orders processed during the period. In periods of higher volatility, there is generally increased trading in the commodity markets, causing increased demand for our products, resulting in higher business volume. Generally, the ounces sold on a per-ticket basis is substantially higher for orders placed telephonically compared to those placed on our online portal platform. During periods of heightened demand order size per ticket may increase.
Direct-to-Consumer Ticket Volume. Ticket volume for the Direct-to-Consumer segment measures the total number of retail orders processed during the period. In periods of higher volatility, there is generally increased consumer demand for our products, resulting in higher business volume.
Direct-to-Consumer Customers. We are focused on attracting new customers and retaining existing customers to drive revenue growth. We use the following three metrics as revenue growth indicators when assessing our customer base:
•
New Direct-to-Consumer Customers means the number of customers that have registered or setup a new account or made a purchase for the first time.
•
Active Direct-to-Consumer Customers means the number of customers that have made a purchase during the period.
•
Total Direct-to-Consumer Customers means the aggregate number of customers that have registered or set up an account or have made a purchase in the past.
Inventory Turnover. Inventory turnover is another performance measure on which we are focused and is calculated as the cost of sales divided by the average inventory during the relevant period. Inventory turnover is a measure of how quickly inventory has moved during the period. A higher inventory turnover ratio, which we typically experience during periods of higher volatility when trading is more robust, typically reflects a more efficient use of our capital.
The period of time that inventory is held by the Company varies depending upon the nature of our inventory commitments with customers and suppliers. (See Note 6 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for a description of our classifications of inventory by type.) When management analyzes inventory turnover on a period over period basis, consideration is given to each inventory type and its corresponding impact on the inventory turnover calculation. For example:
•
The Company enters into various structured borrowing arrangements that commit the Company's inventory (such as product financing arrangements or liabilities on borrowed metals) for an unspecified period of time. While the Company is able to obtain access to this inventory on demand, this type of inventory tends not to turn over as quickly as other types of inventory.
•
The Company enters into repurchase arrangements with customers under which A-Mark holds precious metals which are subject to repurchase for an unspecified period of time. While the Company has legal title to this inventory, the Company is required to hold this inventory (or like-kind inventory) for the customer until the arrangement is terminated or the material is repurchased by the customer. As a result, this type of inventory tends not to turn over as quickly as other types of inventory.
Additionally, our inventory turnover ratio can be affected by hedging activity, as the period over period change of the inventory turnover ratio may be significantly impacted by a period over period change in hedging volume. For example, if trading activity were to remain constant over two periods, but there were significantly higher forward sales in the current period compared to a prior period, the calculated inventory turnover ratio would increase notwithstanding the constancy of the trading volume.
Number of Secured Loans. Finally, as a measure of the size of our Secured Lending segment, we look at the number of outstanding secured loans to customers that are primarily collateralized by precious metals at the end of each quarter. Typically, the number of loans increases during periods of increasing precious metal pricing and decreases during periods of declining precious metal prices.
The Company calculates a loan-to-value ("LTV") ratio for each loan as the principal amount of the loan divided by the liquidation value of the collateral, which is based on daily spot market prices of precious metal bullion. When the market price of the pledged collateral decreases and thereby increases the LTV ratio of a loan above a prescribed maximum ratio, usually 85%, the Company has the option to make a margin call on the loan. As a result, a decline of precious metal market prices may cause a decrease in the number of loans outstanding in a period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to certain key operational metrics to assess the performance of our business, management uses financial performance measures that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP. One of these non-GAAP measures is “Adjusted net income before provision for income taxes”. We believe this non-GAAP measure provides useful information that can be used to evaluate our performance. Non-GAAP measures do not have standardized definitions and should not be relied upon in isolation or as a substitute for measures prepared
in accordance with GAAP. For a reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure to the amounts included in our Statements of Income for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, and certain limitations inherent in such measures, refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 outbreak has caused significant disruption in the financial markets both globally and in the United States. The resulting macroeconomic events contributed to an increase in the business conducted by the Company, but also pose certain risks and uncertainties for the Company. It is challenging to predict how long the COVID-19 pandemic will continue, the extent to which the effects that the Company has experienced from the pandemic thus far will persist, or whether other effects on the Company and its businesses will materialize in the short or long term.
Macroeconomic events have positively affected the Company’s trading revenues and gross profit as the volatility of the price of precious metals and numismatics resulted in a material increase in the spread between bid and ask prices on these products. We also experienced substantially increased demand for products in each of our coin and bar, industrial and retail businesses. We attribute this to certain customers, particularly in Goldline and our recently acquired JMB retail units, seeking to assure a supply of precious metals necessary for the operation of their businesses, and other customers’ seeking the safety of investments in precious metals. In response to the heightened demand, in certain cases prices for the products we sell have also risen.
We also experienced certain negative effects in the precious metals market during fiscal year 2020. Through our CFC finance subsidiary, we make loans to our customers secured by coins and precious metals. Numerous CFC loans were paid off in March 2020 when the market experienced a temporary drop in precious metal prices, which reduced collateral coverage. This had the effect of decreasing the size of our loan portfolio and the interest earned on the portfolio. It also required us to substitute cash and our own precious metals inventory as collateral under our AMCF securitization program, as the pool of loans securing the program declined. While we did not experience any related losses, there is no assurance that this might not occur in the future. In the year that followed, precious metal prices increased and the Company experienced growth in its loan portfolio, which continued through the end of fiscal year 2021.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year end is June 30 each year. Unless otherwise stated, references to years in this report relate to fiscal years rather than to calendar years.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview of Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Results of Operations
The operating results of our business for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
(1)
See "Results of Segments" for a description of additional metrics not listed above.
(2)
Gold ounces sold represents the ounces of gold product sold and delivered to the customer during the period, excluding ounces of gold recorded on forward contracts.
(3)
Silver ounces sold represents the ounces of silver product sold and delivered to the customer during the period, excluding ounces of silver recorded on forward contracts.
(4)
Inventory turnover ratio is the cost of sales divided by average inventory for the period presented above. This calculation excludes precious metals held under financing arrangements, which are not classified as inventory on the consolidated balance sheets.
(5)
Number of outstanding secured loans to customers that are primarily collateralized by precious metals at the end of the period.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $2,151.9 million, or 39.4% to $7.613 billion from $5.461 billion in 2020. Excluding a decrease of $169.4 million of forward sales, our revenues increased $2.321 billion, which was due to an increase in the total amount of gold and silver ounces sold and higher selling prices of gold and silver.
Gold ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 562,000 ounces, or 25.8%, to 2,743,000 ounces from 2,181,000 ounces in 2020. Silver ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 23,890,000 ounces, or 26.4%, to 114,275,000 ounces from 90,385,000 ounces in 2020. On average, the selling prices for gold increased by 19.0% and selling prices for silver increased by 57.5% during the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to the prior year period.
JMB’s revenue activity represented 8.8% of the Company’s consolidated revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021. JMB’s gold and silver ounces sold represented 7.1% and 7.8%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated total of gold and silver ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021.
A key factor that contributed to the increase in demand for precious metals was the volatility in precious metal prices caused by macroeconomic and other events. A combination of price volatility, increased demand, and supply constraints led to a significant expansion in premium spreads in the precious metals market, having an onset during the second half of fiscal year 2020 and sustaining through the current fiscal year. We are uncertain of the duration of these conditions.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $143.2 million, or 213.9%, to $210.2 million from $67.0 million in 2020. The overall gross profit increase was due to higher gross profits from the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services and Direct-to-Consumer segments.
The Company’s overall gross margin percentage year ended June 30, 2021 increased by 153.5 basis points to 2.761% from 1.226% in 2020. The increase in gross margin percentage was mainly attributable to significantly wider premium spreads due to increased demand, higher trading profits due to increased volatility; and lower forward sales. Forward sales increase revenues but are associated with negligible gross margins that can significantly affect the gross margin percentage. The Company enters into forward contracts to hedge its precious metals price risk exposure and not for speculative purposes.
JMB’s gross profit represented 22.0% of the Company’s consolidated gross profit for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Our inventory turnover rate for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by 8.0%, to 19.0 from 17.6 in 2020. The increase in our inventory turnover ratio was primarily due to higher volume of ounces sold of precious metals, partially offset by lower volume of ounces sold on forward contracts as well as higher average inventory balances related to product financing arrangements, which is a type of inventory that is typically held for longer periods.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $22.1 million, or 60.0%, to $58.8 million from $36.8 million in 2020. The change was primarily due to $14.5 million of expenses incurred by JMB, acquisition costs of $2.6 million associated with our recent incremental acquisition of JMB, increased compensation expense (including performance-based accruals) of $2.4 million, and higher insurance costs of $1.4 million.
JMB’s selling, general, and administrative expenses represented 24.6% of the Company’s consolidated selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $2.8 million, or 13.0%, to $18.5 million from $21.2 million in 2020. The aggregate decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower interest income earned by our Secured Lending Segment, partially offset by higher other finance product income.
The interest income from our Secured Lending segment decreased by $4.1 million or by 33.2% compared with the prior year. The decrease in interest income earned from the segment’s secured loan portfolio was primarily due to lower average monthly loan balances during the current period as compared to the average monthly loan balances for the prior year period.
The number of secured loans outstanding increased by 162.3% to 1,881 as of June 30, 2021, from 717 as of June 30, 2020. Typically, the number of loans increases during periods of increasing precious metal prices and decreases during periods of declining precious metal prices. Silver prices declined significantly in the quarter ended March 31, 2020, resulting in an increase in margin calls and borrower loan liquidations due to a decline in the value of the precious metals collateral. Through the current fiscal year, silver prices increased and the Company experienced growth in the number of loans. The Company did not incur loan losses related to the margin calls or borrower loan liquidations during either the current or the prior year period.
The interest income from our other finance product income increased by $1.2 million in comparison to the same year-ago period.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $1.0 million, or 5.3% to $19.9 million from $18.9 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher interest expense associated with product financing arrangements, higher interest and fees from liability on borrowed metals, partially offset by a reduction in loan servicing fees, and less interest expense related to our Trading Credit Facility. As compared to the same year-ago period, the amount of interest expense that increased by component included: (i) $1.4 million related to product financing arrangements, (ii) $0.5 million from liability on borrowed metals, offset by decreased interest expense of (iii) $0.5 million of loan servicing fees, and (iv) $0.5 million of Trading Credit Facility interest expense (including amortization of debt issuance costs).
Earnings from equity method investments
Earnings from equity method investments for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $10.7 million or 218.7% to $15.5 million from $4.9 million in 2020. The aggregate increase was due to increased net income recognized by each of our unconsolidated equity-method subsidiaries.
The Company’s share of JMB’s earnings in fiscal 2021(through the Acquisition Date) and fiscal 2020 totaled $11.7 million and $4.2 million, respectively.
Other income, net
Other income, net for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $0.7 million, or 210.1% to $1.1 million from $0.3 million in 2020. The aggregate increase was primarily due to an increase of $0.5 million in royalties earned, combined with the impact of $0.2 million of costs recorded as other expense associated with the settlement of our purchase of Goldline that was recognized during 2020.
Remeasurement gain on pre-existing equity interest
The remeasurement gain on pre-existing equity interest was recognized during the Company’s fiscal third quarter in connection with the acquisition of JMB. The Company’s estimated fair value of its 20.5% pre-existing equity interest in JMB was determined to be approximately $33.9 million at the acquisition date. Based on the total consideration paid of $207.4 million, the remeasurement resulted in the recognition of a pretax gain of $26.3 million. For additional information about our most recent acquisition see Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax expense was $31.9 million and $6.4 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective tax rate was approximately 16.5% and 16.9% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ended June 30, 2021, our effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate primarily due to the exclusion of the fair value remeasurement gain of our pre-existing equity investment in JMB, a one-time benefit from the reversal of the previously established deferred tax liability related to our equity investment in JMB, an exclusion of the fiscal 2021 pre-acquisition period JMB equity earnings, the foreign derived intangible income special deduction, and an adjustment made to pre-acquisition deferred taxes related to our investment in AMST, offset by state taxes (net of federal tax benefit), state tax rate change, and other normal course non-deductible expenditures.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Company conducts its operations in three reportable segments: (i) Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services (formerly known as Wholesale Trading & Ancillary Services), (ii) Direct-to-Consumer (formerly known as Direct Sales), and (iii) Secured Lending. Each of these reportable segments represents an aggregation of operating segments that meets the aggregation criteria set forth in the Segment Reporting Topic 280 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”).
The segment name changes of Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services and Direct-to-Consumer had no impact on the Company's historical financial position, results of operations, cash flow or segment level results previously reported.
Results of Operations - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services Segment
The Company operates its Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment through A-Mark Precious Metals, Inc., and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, A-Mark Trading AG (“AMTAG”), Transcontinental Depository Services ("TDS"), and A-M Global Logistics, LLC ("Logistics"), and AM&ST Associates, LLC ("AMST" or "Silver Towne" or the "Mint"). Also, the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment includes the consolidating eliminations of inter-segment transactions and unallocated segment adjustments.
Overview of Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
- Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services Segment
The operating results of our Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
(1)
Gold ounces sold represents the ounces of gold product sold and delivered to the customer during the period, excluding ounces of gold recorded on forward contracts.
(2)
Silver ounces sold represents the ounces of silver product sold and delivered to the customer during the period, excluding ounces of silver recorded on forward contracts.
(3)
Trading ticket volume represents the total number of product orders processed by A-Mark.
Revenues - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
Revenues for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $1.378 billion, or 25.7%, to $6.739 billion from $5.361 billion in 2020. Excluding a decrease of $169.4 million of forward sales, our revenues increased $1.547 billion mainly due to an increase in the total amount of gold and silver ounces sold and higher selling prices of gold and silver.
Gold ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 350,000 ounces, or 16.4%, to 2,486,000 ounces from 2,136,000 ounces in 2020. Silver ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 14,200,000 ounces, or 15.8%, to 103,812,000 ounces from 89,612,000 ounces in 2020. On average, the selling prices for gold increased by 18.7% and selling prices for silver increased by 55.7% during the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to the prior year period.
The Wholesale Sales ticket volume for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by 749 tickets, or 0.5%, to 143,439 tickets from 142,690 tickets in 2020. The current year ticket volume also reflects a higher dollar order size compared with the prior year as customers purchased in larger quantities during fiscal 2021 due to supply constraints.
A key factor that contributed to the increase in demand for precious metals was the volatility in precious metal prices caused by macroeconomic and other events. A combination of price volatility, increased demand, and supply constraints led to a significant expansion in premium spreads in the precious metals market, having an onset during the second half of fiscal year 2020 and sustaining through the current fiscal year. We are uncertain of the duration of these conditions.
Gross Profit - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
Gross profit for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $81.9 million, or 143.9%, to $138.8 million from $56.9 million in 2020. The overall gross profit increase was primarily due to higher sales volumes and increased spreads.
This segment’s profit margin percentage increased by 99.8 basis points to 2.060% from 1.062% in 2020. The increase in gross margin percentage was mainly attributable to significantly wider premium spreads due to increased demand, higher trading profits due to increased volatility, and the impact of decreased forward sales. Forward sales increase revenues but are associated with negligible gross margins. The Company enters into forward contracts to hedge its precious metals price risk exposure and not for speculative purposes.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $6.7 million, or 24.7%, to $33.9 million from $27.2 million in 2020. The change was primarily due to the acquisition costs of $2.6 million associated with the Company’s recent acquisition of JMB, increased compensation expense (including performance-based accruals) of $2.4 million, and higher insurance costs of $1.4 million.
Interest Income - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
Interest income for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $1.3 million, or 14.3%, to $10.3 million from $9.0 million in 2020. The overall increase is primarily due to $1.2 million interest earned from repurchase agreements and $0.2 million of interest income earned from spot deferred trade orders.
Interest Expense - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $1.1 million, or 10.8% to $11.7 million from $10.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher interest expense associated with product financing arrangements of $0.5 million, higher interest and fees from liability on borrowed metals of $0.5 million, and higher interest expense of $0.1 million related to the Trading Credit Facility.
Earnings from equity method investments- Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
Earnings from equity method investments for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $10.7 million, or 218.7% to $15.5 million from $4.9 million in 2020. The increase was due to increased net income recognized by each of our unconsolidated equity-method subsidiaries.
The Company’s share of JMB’s earnings in fiscal 2021(through the Acquisition Date) and fiscal 2020 totaled $11.7 million and $4.2 million, respectively.
Remeasurement gain on pre-existing equity interest - Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services
The remeasurement gain on pre-existing equity interest was recognized during the Company’s fiscal third quarter in connection with the acquisition of JMB. The Company’s estimated fair value of its 20.5% pre-existing equity interest in JMB was determined to be approximately $33.9 million at the acquisition date. Based on the total consideration paid of $207.4 million, the remeasurement resulted in the recognition of a pretax gain of $26.3 million. For additional information about our most recent acquisition see Note 1 to the Company’s the consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations - Direct-to-Consumer Segment
The Company operates its Direct-to-Consumer segment through our wholly-owned subsidiaries: JM Bullion, Inc. (“JMB”), Goldline, Inc. (“Goldline”), and AMIP, LLC ("AMIP"), and through our 50%-owned subsidiary Precious Metals Purchasing Partners, LLC ("PMPP"). As a result of the completion of our acquisition of JMB on March 19, 2021 (see Note 1 of the Company’s consolidated financial statements) we have included JMB’s financial activity, including performance data, since March 20, 2021 in the Direct-to-Consumer segment's fiscal 2021 results.
Overview of Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
- Direct-to-Consumer Segment
The operating results of our Direct-to-Consumer segment for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
(a)
Includes $8.5 million of inter-segment sales from the Direct-to-Consumer segment to the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment.
(b)
Gross profit percentage, excluding inter-segment sales from the Direct-to-Consumer segment to the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment, is 8.226% for the period.
(c)
Includes $26.4 million of inter-segment sales from the Direct-to-Consumer segment to the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment.
(d)
Gross profit percentage, excluding inter-segment company sales from the Direct-to-Consumer segment to the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment, is 12.549% for the period.
(1)
Gold ounces sold represents the ounces of gold product sold during the period.
(2)
Silver ounces sold represents the ounces of silver product sold during the period.
(3)
Number of new customers represents the number of customers that have registered or setup a new account or made a purchase for the first time during the period.
(4)
Number of active customers represents the number of customers that have made a purchase during the period.
(5)
Number of total customers represents the aggregate number of customers that have registered or set up an account or have made a purchase in the past.
(6)
Ticket volume represents the total number of product orders processed by JMB, Goldline, and PMPP during the period.
Segment Results - Direct-to-Consumer
Revenues - Direct-to-Consumer
Revenues for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $774.1 million, or 772.6%, to $874.3 million from $100.2 million in 2020. Excluding inter-segment sales from the Direct-to-Consumer segment to the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment, revenues for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $792.0 million or 1073.2% to $865.8 million from $73.8 million in 2020.
Gold ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 212,000 ounces, or 471.1%, to 257,000 ounces from 45,000 ounces in 2020. Silver ounces sold for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 9,690,000 ounces, or 1253.6%, to 10,463,000 ounces from 773,000 ounces in 2020. On average, the selling prices for gold increased by 9.9% and selling prices for silver increased by 49.5% during the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to the prior year period.
The number of new customers for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 82,400, or 4,336.8% to 84,300 from 1,900 in 2020. The number of active customers for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased 161,500, or 2,604.8% to 167,700 from 6,200 in 2020. The number of total customers as of June 30, 2021 increased 1,545,100, or 977.9% to 1,703,100 from 158,000 as of June 30, 2020. The increases in the customer-based metrics were primarily due to our acquisition of JMB in 2021, inclusive of its customer base.
The Direct-to-Consumer ticket volume for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by 313,123 tickets, or 1688.8%, to 331,664 tickets from 18,541 tickets in 2020. The increase in ticket volume was primarily due to transactions generated by our newly acquired subsidiary, JMB.
A key factor that contributed to the increase in demand for precious metals was the volatility in precious metal prices caused by macroeconomic and other events. A combination of price volatility, increased demand, and supply constraints led to a significant expansion in premium spreads in the precious metals market, having an onset during the second half of fiscal year 2020 and sustaining through the current fiscal year. We are uncertain of the duration of these conditions.
Gross Profit - Direct-to-Consumer
Gross profit for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased by $61.3 million, or 609.2%, to $71.4 million from $10.1 million in 2020. For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company’s profit margin percentage decreased by 188.1 basis points to 8.165% from 10.045% in 2020. Excluding the impact of inter-segment sales from the Direct-to-Consumer segment to the Wholesale Sales & Ancillary Services segment, the Direct-to-Consumer segment's gross profit margin percentage decreased by 432.3 basis points to 8.226% from 12.549% in 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense - Direct-to-Consumer
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $14.7 million, or 190.3%, to $22.4 million from $7.7 million in 2020. The change was primarily due to increased amortization and depreciation costs of $8.6 million, increased advertising expenses of $2.7 million and higher compensation expense (including performance-based accruals) of $2.5 million. JMB’s activity, a company that we recently acquired, accounted for approximately 98.0% of the aggregate change for this segment.
Interest expense - Direct-to-Consumer
Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $0.9 million to $0.9 million from $0.0 million in 2020. The increase related to JMB’s product financing activity with A-Mark.
Other income (expense) - Direct-to-Consumer
There was no activity for the current period. For the year ended June 30, 2020, the other expense activity of $0.2 million related to a one-time charge in connection with the settlement of the purchase price related to the acquisition of Goldline.
Results of Operations - Secured Lending Segment
The Company operates its Secured Lending segment through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Collateral Finance Corporation, LLC. ("CFC"), AM Capital Funding, LLC (“AMCF”), and CFC Alternative Investments (“CAI”).
Overview of Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
- Secured Lending Segment
The operating results of our Secured Lending segment for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
(1)
Number of outstanding secured loans to customers at the end of the period.
Interest Income - Secured Lending
Interest income for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $4.1 million, or 33.2%, to $8.2 million from $12.2 million in 2020. The decrease in interest income earned from the segment’s secured loan portfolio was primarily due to lower average monthly loan balances during the current period as compared to the average monthly loan balances for the prior year period.
The number of secured loans outstanding increased by 162.3% to 1,881 as of June 30, 2021, from 717 as of June 30, 2020. Typically, the number of loans increases during periods of increasing precious metal prices and decreases during periods of declining precious metal prices. Silver prices declined significantly in the quarter ended March 31, 2020, resulting in an increase in margin calls and borrower loan liquidations due to a decline in the value of the precious metals collateral. Through the current fiscal year, silver prices increased and the Company experienced growth in the number of loans.
The Company did not incur loan losses related to the margin calls or borrower loan liquidations during either the current or the prior year period.
Interest Expense - Secured Lending
Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $1.0 million, or 12.4% to $7.3 million from $8.3 million in 2020. The change in interest expense is driven by the value of our secured loan portfolio, which is primarily financed through our notes payable and Trading Credit Facility. As compared to the same year-ago period, loan servicing costs decreased $0.5 million and interest expense related to our notes payable and Trading Credit Facility decreased $0.5 million.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - Secured Lending
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $0.7 million, or 34.7%, to $2.5 million from $1.9 million in 2020. The increase was mainly driven by higher professional fees of $0.3 million, increased marketing expenses of $0.2 million, and higher storage costs of $0.1 million.
Other Income, net - Secured Lending
Other income, net for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $0.5 million, or 87.0% to $1.1 million from $0.6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $0.5 million in royalty income.
NON-GAAP MEASURES
Adjusted net income before provision for income taxes
Overview
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the below non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the financial measure “adjusted net income before provision for income taxes” to present our pre-tax earnings from on-going business operations. This measure is not prepared in accordance with GAAP. The items excluded from this financial measure may have a material impact on our financial results. Certain of those items are non-recurring, while others are non-cash in nature. Accordingly, this non-GAAP financial measure should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, the comparable measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation
In our reconciliation from our reported GAAP “net income before provision for taxes” to our non-GAAP “adjusted net income before provision for taxes,” we eliminate the impact of the following four amounts: (i) remeasurement gains; (ii) acquisition expenses; (iii) amortization expenses related to intangible assets acquired; and (iv) depreciation expense. The following tables reconcile this non-GAAP financial measure to its most closely comparable GAAP measure on our financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Adjustments
Remeasurement gains or losses. This adjustment relates to our acquisition in March 2021 of the 79.5% of the equity interest in JMB that was not previously owned by us. When we acquire control of a business for which we had previously owned a noncontrolling equity interest, we are required to estimate the fair value of our pre-existing equity investment and record the change in its value as a remeasurement gain or loss, which we present on the face of our consolidated statements of income. Remeasurement gains and losses are recorded upon the completion of an acquisition. We exclude these types of remeasurement gains and losses when we evaluate our on-going operational performance and to facilitate comparison of period-to-period operational performance. For additional information about our acquisition of JMB, see Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Acquisition expenses. This adjustment relates as well to the JMB acquisition. We incur expenses for professional services rendered in connection with business combinations, which are included as a component of selling, general, and administrative expenses in the Company’s consolidated statements of income. Acquisition expenses are recorded in the periods in which the costs are incurred, and the services are received. We exclude acquisition expenses when we evaluate our on-going operational performance and to facilitate comparison of period-to-period operational performance.
Amortization of purchased intangibles. Amortization expense of purchased intangibles is included as a component of selling, general, and administrative expenses in the Company’s consolidated statements of income. Such amortization expense varies in amount and frequency and is significantly impacted by the timing and size of our acquisitions. Management finds it useful to exclude these charges from our operating expenses to assist in the review of a measure that more closely corresponds to cash operating income generated from our business. The use of intangible assets such as our existing customer relationships and developed technology contributed to our revenues earned during the periods presented and is expected to contribute to our revenues in future periods. Amortization of purchased intangible assets will recur in future periods. For additional information about the amortization of our purchased intangibles, see Note 8 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Depreciation expense. Depreciation expense is included as a component of selling, general, and administrative expenses in the Company’s consolidated statements of income. Depreciation expense is calculated using a straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the related assets, ranging from three years to twenty-five years. Due to depreciation expense being non-cash in nature, management finds it useful to exclude these charges from our operating expenses to assist in the review of a measure that more closely corresponds to cash operating income generated from our business.
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
Primary Sources and Uses of Cash
Overview
Liquidity refers to the availability to the Company of amounts of cash to meet all of our cash needs. Our sources of liquidity principally include cash from operations, Trading Credit Facility (see “Lines of Credit” below), and product financing arrangements.
A substantial portion of our assets are liquid. As of June 30, 2021, approximately 80.6% of our assets consisted of cash, receivables, derivative assets, secured loans receivables, precious metals held under financing arrangements and inventories, measured at fair value. Cash generated from the sales or financing of our precious metals products is our primary source of operating liquidity. Among other things, these include our product financing arrangements and liabilities on borrowed metals. Typically, the Company acquires its inventory by: (i) purchasing inventory from its suppliers by utilizing our own capital and lines of credit; (ii) borrowing precious metals from its suppliers under short-term arrangements which may bear interest at a designated rate, and (iii) repurchasing inventory at an agreed-upon price based on the spot price on the specified repurchase date.
In addition to selling inventory, the Company generates cash from earning interest income. The Company enters into secured loans and secured financing structures with its customers under which it charges interest. The loans are secured by precious metals and numismatic material owned by the borrowers and held by the Company as security for the term of the loan. The Company also offers a number of secured financing options to its customers to finance their precious metals purchases including consignments and other structured inventory finance products. Furthermore, our customers may enter into agreements whereby the customer agrees to repurchase our precious metals at the prevailing spot price for delivery of the product at a specific point in time in the future; interest income is earned from the contract date until the material is delivered and paid for in full.
We may also raise funds through the public or private offering of equity or debt securities, although there is no assurance that we will be able to do so at the times and in the amounts required. We have an effective universal shelf registration statement, on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission for this purpose, under which we may issue approximately $66.5 million worth of securities at this time.
We continually review our overall credit and capital needs to ensure that our capital base, both stockholders’ equity and available credit facilities, can appropriately support our anticipated financing needs. The Company also continually monitors its current and forecasted cash requirements and draws upon and pays down its lines of credit so as to minimize interest expense. (See Note 14 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.)
Lines of Credit
Effective March 26, 2021, through an amendment and restatement of the applicable credit documents, A-Mark renewed its uncommitted demand borrowing facility ("Trading Credit Facility") with a syndicate of banks. Under the agreements, Coöperatieve Rabobank U.A. acts as lead lender and administrative agent and Macquarie Bank Limited acts as syndication agent. As of June 30, 2021, the Trading Credit Facility provided the Company with access up to $270.0 million, featuring a $220.0 million base, with a $50.0 million accordion option. The maturity date of the credit facility is March 25, 2022. The Trading Credit Facility was initially entered into on March 31, 2016, and the Company has successfully amended and extended the terms of the Trading Credit Facility each year since its inception. The Trading Credit Facility was amended effective July 16, 2021, and now provides for a $330 million credit facility, consisting of a $280 million base and a $50 million accordion feature. (See Note 19 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.)
A-Mark routinely uses funds drawn under the Trading Credit Facility to purchase metals from its suppliers and for other operating cash flow purposes. Our CFC subsidiary also uses the funds drawn under the Trading Credit Facility to finance its lending activities.
Notes Payable
On September 14, 2018, AM Capital Funding, LLC. (“AMCF”), a wholly owned subsidiary of CFC, completed an issuance of Secured Senior Term Notes, Series 2018-1, Class A in the aggregate principal amount of $72.0 million and Secured Subordinated Term Notes, Series 2018-1, Class B in the aggregate principal amount of $28.0 million. The Class A Notes bear interest at a rate of 4.98% and the Class B Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.98%. The Notes have a maturity date of December 15, 2023.
As of June 30, 2021, the consolidated aggregate carrying balance of the Notes was $93.2 million (which excludes the $5.0 million Note that the Company retained), and the remaining unamortized loan cost balance was approximately $1.8 million, which is amortized using the effective interest method through the maturity date. (See Note 14 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.)
Liabilities on Borrowed Metals
We borrow precious metals from our suppliers and customers under short-term arrangements using other precious metal from our inventory or precious metals held under financing arrangements as collateral. Amounts under these arrangements require repayment either in the form of precious metals or cash. Liabilities also arise from unallocated metal positions held by customers in our inventory. Typically, these positions are due on demand, in a specified physical form, based on the total ounces of metal held in the position.
Product Financing Arrangements
The Company has agreements with financial institutions and other third parties that allow the Company to transfer its gold and silver inventory to the third party at an agreed-upon price based on the spot price, which provides alternative sources of liquidity. During the term of the agreement both parties intend for inventory to be returned at an agreed-upon price based on the spot price on the termination (repurchase) date. The third parties charge monthly interest as a percentage of the market value of the outstanding obligation; such monthly charges are classified as interest expense. These transactions do not qualify as sales and therefore are accounted for as financing arrangements and reflected in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets as product financing arrangements. The obligation is stated at the amount required to repurchase the outstanding inventory. Both the product financing arrangements and the underlying inventory (which is entirely restricted) are carried at fair value, with changes in fair value included as a component of cost of sales.
Secured Loans Receivable
CFC is a California licensed finance lender that makes and acquires commercial loans secured by bullion and numismatic coins that affords our customers a convenient means of financing their inventory or collections. (See Note 5 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.) AMCF also purchases and holds secured loans from CFC to meet its collateral requirements related to the Notes (See Note 14 to Company’s consolidated financial statements.) Most of the Company's secured loans are short-term in nature. The renewal of these instruments is at the discretion of the Company and, as such, provides us with some flexibility in regard to our capital deployment strategies.
Dividends
On September 3, 2020, the Company's Board of Directors declared a non-recurring special dividend of $1.50 per share to common stock shareholders of record at the close of business on September 21, 2020. On October 29, 2020, the Company's Board of Directors declared a non-recurring special dividend of $1.50 per share to common stock shareholders of record at the close of business on November 23, 2020. In the aggregate, the Company paid $21.2 million in dividends during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Cash Flows
The majority of the Company’s trading activities involve two-day value trades under which payment is received in advance of delivery or product is received in advance of payment. The combination of sales volume, inventory turnover, and precious metals price volatility can cause material changes in the sources of cash used in or provided by operating activities on a daily basis. The Company manages these variances through its liquidity forecasts and counterparty limits by maintaining a liquidity reserve to meet the Company’s cash needs. The Company uses various short-term financial instruments to manage the cycle of our trading activities from customer purchase order to cash collections and product delivery, which can cause material changes in the amount of cash used in or provided by financing activities on a daily basis.
The following summarizes components of our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
For the years presented, our principal capital requirements have been to fund (i) working capital and (ii) investing activity. Our working capital requirements fluctuated with market conditions, the availability of precious metals, and the volatility of precious metals commodity pricing. The primary reason for the increase in net cash used in operating activities was due to increased inventory purchases during a period of increased demand and rising precious metal prices. Net cash used in investing activities increased as a result of increased loan origination and acquisition activity, which was driven by higher precious metal spot prices, as well as our acquisition of JMB. The primary reason for the increase in net cash provided by financing activities was due to an increased use of short term debt financing to accommodate a period of high demand for precious metal products, as well as proceeds received in connection with the Company’s public offering of its common stock.
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities
Operating activities used $52.7 million and provided $47.9 million in cash for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a $100.6 million increase in cash used compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in cash used was primarily due to changes in working capital, which includes the balances of accounts payable and other current liabilities, inventories, liabilities on borrowed metals, and derivative liabilities, partially offset by increased net income as a result of increased demand, adjusted for noncash items, and by changes in the balances of derivative assets.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
Investing activities used $130.4 million and provided $48.8 million in cash for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a $179.2 million increase in cash used compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This period over period increase in cash used was primarily due to the higher investing cash outflows of $110.2 million associated with the acquisition and origination of secured loans during the period, the incremental acquisition of a pre-existing equity method investment of $78.9 million, and an increase of cash outflows of $8.0 million in connection with the purchase of long term investments, partially offset by $17.5 million redemption amount upon acquisition of a pre-existing equity method investment.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Financing activities provided $232.1 million and used $52.7 million in cash for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a $284.8 million increase in the source of cash compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This period over period increase was primarily due to the change in cash provided by product financing arrangements of $146.2 million, the change in the cash provided by the Trading Credit Facility of $82.0 million, the net proceeds of $75.3 million the Company received in connection with its public offering of common stock, and cash received from employee stock option exercises of $3.6 million, partially offset by the payment of two non-recurring special dividends in the aggregate amount of $21.2 million, and the change in balance of debt issuance costs of $1.1 million.
Capital Resources
We believe that our current cash availability under the Trading Credit Facility, product financing arrangements, financing derived from borrowed metals and the cash we anticipate generating from operating activities will provide us with sufficient liquidity to satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures, investment requirements, and commitments through at least the next twelve months.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND COMMITMENTS
Counterparty Risk
We manage our counterparty risk by setting credit and position risk limits with our trading counterparties. These limits include gross position limits for counterparties engaged in sales and purchase transactions and inventory consignment transactions with us. They also include collateral limits for different types of sale and purchase transactions that counterparties may engage in from time to time.
Commodities Risk and Derivatives
We use a variety of strategies to manage our risk including fluctuations in commodity prices for precious metals. Our inventory consists of, and our trading activities involve, precious metals and precious metal products, for which prices are linked to the corresponding precious metal commodity prices. Inventory purchased or borrowed by us is subject to price changes. Inventory borrowed is a natural hedge, since changes in value of the metal held are offset by the obligation to return the metal to the supplier or deliver metals to the customer.
Open sale and purchase commitments in our trading activities are subject to changes in value between the date the purchase or sale price is fixed (the trade date) and the date the metal is received or delivered (the settlement date). We seek to minimize the effect of price changes of the underlying commodity through the use of forward and futures contracts. Our open sale and purchase commitments generally settle within 2 business days, and for those commitments that do not have stated settlement dates, we have the right to settle the positions upon demand.
Our policy is to substantially hedge our underlying precious metal commodity inventory position. We regularly enter into metals commodity forward and futures contracts with financial institutions to hedge price changes that would cause changes in the value of our physical metals positions and purchase commitments and sale commitments. We have access to all of the precious metals markets, allowing us to place hedges. We also maintain relationships with major market makers in every major precious metals dealing center, which allows us to enter into contracts with market makers. Our forwards contracts open at June 30, 2021 are scheduled to settle within 60 days. Futures positions do not have settlement dates. The Company typically uses futures contracts for its shorter-term hedge positions and forward contracts for longer term hedge positions.
The Company enters into these derivative transactions solely for the purpose of hedging our inventory holding risk, and not for speculative market purposes. Due to the nature of our hedging strategy, we are not using hedge accounting as defined under, Derivatives and Hedging Topic 815 of the Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC".) Unrealized gains or losses resulting from our futures and forward contracts are reported as cost of sales with the related amounts due from or to counterparties reflected as derivative assets or liabilities. The Company adjusts the derivatives to fair value on a daily basis until the transactions are settled. When these contracts are net settled, the unrealized gains and losses are reversed and the realized gains and losses for forward contracts are recorded in revenue and cost of sales and the net realized gains and losses for futures are recorded in cost of sales.
The Company’s net (losses) gains on derivative instruments for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, totaled ($125.6) million and $8.1 million, respectively. These net (losses) gains on derivative instruments were substantially offset by the changes in fair market value of the underlying precious metals inventory and open sale and purchase commitments, which is also recorded in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of income.
The purpose of the Company's hedging policy is to substantially match the change in the value of the derivative financial instrument to the change in the value of the underlying hedged item. The following table summarizes the results of our hedging activities, showing the precious metal commodity inventory position, net of open sale and purchase commitments, which is subject to price risk, compared to change in the value of the derivative instruments as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020:
We are exposed to the risk of default of the counterparties to our derivative contracts. Significant judgment is applied by us when evaluating the fair value implications. We regularly review the creditworthiness of our major counterparties and monitor our exposure to concentrations. At June 30, 2021, we believe our risk of counterparty default is mitigated based on our evaluation of the creditworthiness of our major counterparties, the strong financial condition of our counterparties, and the short-term duration of these arrangements.
Commitments and Contingencies
Refer to Note 15 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for information relating Company's commitments and contingencies.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, we had the following outstanding sale and purchase commitments and open forward and future contracts, which are normal and recurring, in nature:
The notional amounts of the commodity forward and futures contracts and the open sales and purchase orders, as shown in the table above, are not reflected at the notional amounts in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company records commodity forward and futures contracts at the fair value, which is the difference between the market price of the underlying metal or contract measured on the reporting date and the trade amount measured on the date the contract was transacted. The fair value of the open derivative contracts are shown as a component of derivative assets or derivative liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
The Company enters into the derivative forward and future transactions solely for the purpose of hedging its inventory holding risk, and not for speculative market purposes. The Company’s gains (losses) on derivative instruments are substantially offset by the changes in fair market value of the underlying precious metals inventory position, including our open sale and purchase commitments. The Company records the derivatives at the trade date, and any corresponding unrealized gains or losses are shown as a component of cost of sales in the consolidated statements of income. We adjust the carrying value of the derivatives to fair value on a daily basis until the transactions are physically settled. (See Note 11 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.)
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). In connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that we believe to be relevant at the time the Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review our accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that the Company’s consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could materially differ from our estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We have reviewed these critical accounting estimates and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for its metals and sales contracts using settlement date accounting. Pursuant to such accounting, the Company recognizes the sale or purchase of the metals at settlement date. During the period between the trade and settlement dates, the Company has entered into a forward contract that meets the definition of a derivative in accordance with the Derivatives and Hedging Topic 815 of the ASC. The Company records the derivative at the trade date with any corresponding unrealized gain (loss), shown as component of cost of sales in the consolidated statements of income. The Company adjusts the derivatives to fair value on a daily basis until the transactions are settled. When these contracts are settled, the unrealized gains and losses are reversed, and revenue is recognized for contracts that are physically settled. For contracts that are net settled, the realized gains and losses are recorded in cost of sales, with the exception of forward contracts, where their associated realized gains and losses are recorded in revenue and cost of sales, respectively.
Also, the Company recognizes its storage, logistics, licensing, advertising revenue, and other services revenues in accordance with the FASB's release ASU 2014-09 Revenue From Contracts With Customers Topic 606 and subsequent related amendments ("ASC 606"), which follows five basic steps to determine whether revenue can be recognized: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Inventories
The Company's inventory, which primarily consists of bullion and bullion coins, is acquired and initially recorded at cost and then marked to fair market value. The fair market value of the bullion and bullion coins comprises two components: (i) published market values attributable to the cost of the raw precious metal, and (ii) the premium paid at acquisition of the metal, which is attributable to the incremental value of the product in its finished goods form. The market value attributable solely to such premium is readily determinable by reference to multiple reputable published sources. The precious metal component of the inventory may be hedged through the use of precious metal commodity positions, while the premium component of our inventory is not a commodity that may be hedged.
The Company’s inventory, except for certain lower of cost or net realizable value basis products (as described below), is subsequently recorded at their fair market values. The daily changes in the fair market value of our inventory are offset by daily changes in the fair market value of hedging derivatives that are taken with respect to our inventory positions; both the change in the fair market value of the inventory and the change in the fair market value of these derivative instruments are recorded in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of income.
While the premium component included in inventory is marked-to-market, our commemorative coin inventory, including its premium component, is held at the lower of cost or net realizable value, because the value of commemorative coins is influenced more by supply and demand determinants than on the underlying spot price of the precious metal content of the commemorative coins. Unlike our bullion coins, the value of commemorative coins is not subject to the same level of volatility as bullion coins because our commemorative coins typically carry a substantially higher premium over the spot metal price than bullion coins. Additionally, neither the commemorative coin inventory nor the premium component of our inventory is hedged.
Inventory includes amounts borrowed from suppliers and customers arising from various arrangements including unallocated metal positions held by customers in the Company’s inventory, amounts due to suppliers for the use of consigned inventory, metals held by suppliers as collateral on advanced pool metals, as well as shortages in unallocated metal positions held by the Company in the supplier’s inventory. Unallocated or pool metal represents an unsegregated inventory position that is due on demand, in a specified physical form, based on the total ounces of metal held in the position. Amounts under these arrangements require delivery either in the form of precious metals or cash. The Company mitigates market risk of its physical inventory and open commitments through commodity hedge transactions. (See Note 11 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.)
The Company enters into product financing agreements for the transfer and subsequent option or obligation to reacquire its gold and silver inventory at an agreed-upon price based on the spot price with a third party finance company. This inventory is restricted and is held at a custodial storage facility in exchange for a financing fee, charged by the third party finance company. During the term of the financing agreement, the third party company holds the inventory as collateral, and both parties intend for the inventory to be returned to the Company at an agreed-upon price based on the spot price on the termination (repurchase) date. The third party charges a monthly fee as percentage of the market value of the outstanding obligation; such monthly charge is classified as interest expense. These transactions do not qualify as sales and have been accounted for as financing arrangements in accordance with ASC 470-40 Product Financing Arrangements, and are reflected in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets as product financing arrangements. The obligation is stated at the amount required to repurchase the outstanding inventory. Both the product financing and the underlying inventory (which is restricted) are carried at fair value, with changes in fair value included in cost of sales in the Company’s consolidated statements of income.
The Company periodically loans metals to customers on a short-term consignment basis. Such inventory is removed at the time the customer elects to price and purchase the metals, and the Company records a corresponding sale and receivable.
The Company enters into financing arrangements with certain customers under which A-Mark purchases precious metals products that are subject to repurchase by the customer at the fair value of the product on the repurchase date. The Company or the counterparty may typically terminate any such arrangement with 14 days' notice. Upon termination the customer’s rights to repurchase any remaining inventory is forfeited.
Business Combinations
We make certain judgments and estimates when determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Those judgments and estimates also include determining the lives assigned to acquired intangibles, the resulting amortization period, what indicators will trigger an impairment, whether those indicators are other than temporary, what economic or competitive factors affect valuation, valuation methodology, and key assumptions including discount rates and cash flow estimates.
Goodwill and Other Purchased Intangible Assets
We evaluate goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangibles for impairment annually in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year (or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist) in accordance with the Intangibles - Goodwill and Other Topic 350 of the ASC. Other finite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment when events or changes in business circumstances indicate that
the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. We may first qualitatively assess whether relevant events and circumstances make it more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill is less than its carrying value. If, based on this qualitative assessment, we determine that goodwill is more likely than not to be impaired, a quantitative impairment test is performed. This step requires us to determine the fair value of the business and compare the calculated fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If through this quantitative analysis the Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, the goodwill of the reporting unit is considered not to be impaired. If the Company concludes that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a goodwill impairment will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value.
The Company also performs impairment reviews on its indefinite-lived intangible assets (i.e., trade names and trademarks). In assessing its indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, the Company has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether events or circumstances exist that lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, the Company is not required to perform any additional tests in assessing the asset for impairment. However, if the Company concludes otherwise or elects not to perform the qualitative assessment, then it is required to perform a quantitative analysis to determine if the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying value. If through a quantitative analysis the Company determines the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its carrying amount, the indefinite-lived intangible asset is considered not to be impaired. If the Company concludes that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying value, an impairment will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value.
Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing the Company’s consolidated financial statements, the Company is required to estimate its provision for income taxes in each of the tax jurisdictions in which it conducts business, in accordance with the Income Taxes Topic 740 of the ASC ("ASC 740"). The Company computes its annual tax rate based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to it in the various jurisdictions in which it earns income. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company's annual tax rate and in evaluating uncertainty in its tax positions. The Company has adopted the provisions of ASC 740-10, which clarifies the accounting for uncertain tax positions. ASC 740-10 requires that the Company recognizes the impact of a tax position in the financial statements if the position is not more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to certain uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense and the accrued interest and penalties are included in deferred and income taxes payable in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. See Note 12 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for more information on the Company’s accounting for income taxes.
Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. The factors used to assess the likelihood of realization include the Company's forecast of the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income, and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in applicable tax jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in the Company's effective tax rate on future earnings. Based on our assessment, it appears more likely than not that all of the net deferred tax assets will be realized through future taxable income.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of accounting changes and recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 2 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.