Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. Risk Factors and under the heading Forward-Looking Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis, as well as other sections in this report, should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein.
For a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” under Part II., Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
The Company
Amneal Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (the "Company," "we," "us," or "our") is a pharmaceutical company specializing in developing, manufacturing, marketing and distributing high-value generic pharmaceutical products across a broad array of dosage forms and therapeutic areas, as well as branded products. We were formed on October 4, 2017 under the name Atlas Holdings, Inc. for the purpose of facilitating the combination (the "Combination") of Impax Laboratories, Inc. ("Impax") and Amneal Pharmaceuticals LLC ("Amneal"), which closed on May 4, 2018. Refer to Note 1. Nature of Operations and Basis of Presentation for further information related to the Combination. Prior to the consummation of the Combination, Amneal and Impax operated separately as independent companies. The historical financial results of the Company for the periods prior to the May 4, 2018 closing of the Combination are the historical financial results of Amneal, and thus the current period results, and balances, may not be comparable to prior years.
On January 31, 2020, we acquired a 65.1% controlling interest in both AvKARE Inc., a Tennessee corporation now a limited liability company (“AvKARE, LLC”), and Dixon-Shane, LLC d/b/a R&S Northeast LLC, a Kentucky limited liability company (“R&S”). As a result of the AvKARE, LLC and R&S acquisitions (the “Acquisitions”), we now have three reportable segments: Generics, Specialty, and AvKARE.
Generics
Our Generics segment includes approximately 250 product families covering an extensive range of dosage forms and delivery systems, including both immediate and extended release oral solids, powders, liquids, sterile injectables, nasal sprays, inhalation and respiratory products, ophthalmics (which are sterile pharmaceutical preparations administered for ocular conditions), films, transdermal patches and topicals (which are creams or gels designed to administer pharmaceuticals locally through the skin). We focus on developing products with substantial barriers-to-entry resulting from complex drug formulations or manufacturing, or legal or regulatory challenges. Generic products, particularly in the U.S., generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margins at the time of their launch, and even more so in periods of market exclusivity, or in periods of limited generic competition. As such, the timing of new product introductions can have a significant impact on the Company’s financial results. The entrance into the market of additional competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and / or pricing of the affected products. Additionally, pricing is often affected by factors outside of the Company’s control.
We focus on developing products with substantial barriers-to-entry as a result of complex drug formulations or manufacturing, legal and/or regulatory challenges. We believe that focusing on these opportunities allows us to offer first-to-file ("FTF"), first-to-market ("FTM") and other "high-value" products, which we define as products with zero to three generic competitors at time of launch. These products tend to be more profitable and often have longer life cycles than other generic pharmaceuticals. As of December 31, 2020, our Generics segment had 111 products either approved but not yet launched or pending FDA approval and another 90 products in various stages of development. Over 60% of our total generic pipeline consists of what we believe to be potential FTF, FTM and high-value products.
Specialty
Specialty is comprised of the Impax specialty business acquired in the Combination and the Gemini Laboratories LLC ("Gemini") business acquired on May 7, 2018. Refer to Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures for further information related to the Combination and the Gemini acquisition. Prior to these two transactions, we did not have a Specialty segment.
Our Specialty segment is engaged in the development, promotion, sale and distribution of proprietary branded pharmaceutical products, with a focus on products addressing central nervous system ("CNS") disorders, including migraine and Parkinson’s disease. Our portfolio of products includes Rytary®, an extended release oral capsule formulation of carbidopa-levodopa for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, post-encephalitic parkinsonism, and parkinsonism that may follow carbon monoxide intoxication or manganese intoxication. In addition to Rytary®, our promoted Specialty portfolio includes Unithroid® (levothyroxine sodium), for the treatment of hypothyroidism, which is sold under a license and distribution agreement with Jerome Stevens Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Emverm® (mebendazole) 100 mg chewable tablets, for the treatment of pinworm, whipworm, common roundworm, common hookworm and American hookworm in single or mixed infections, and Zomig® (zolmitriptan) products, for the treatment of migraine headaches, which is sold under a license agreement with AstraZeneca U.K. Limited. We believe that we have the research, development and formulation expertise to develop branded products that will deliver significant improvements over existing therapies. Effective during the three months ended September 2019, the operating results for oxymorphone were reclassified from Generics to Specialty, where it is sold as a non-promoted product.
For Specialty products, the majority of the product’s commercial value is usually realized during the period in which the product has market exclusivity. In the U.S. when market exclusivity expires and generic versions of a product are approved and marketed, there can often be very substantial and rapid declines in the branded product’s sales.
AvKARE
AvKARE provides pharmaceuticals, medical and surgical products and services primarily to governmental agencies, primarily focused on serving the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs. AvKARE is a wholesale distributor of bottle and unit dose pharmaceuticals under the registered names of AvKARE and AvPAK, as well as medical and surgical products. AvKARE is also a packager and wholesale distributor of pharmaceuticals and vitamins to its retail and institutional customers who are located throughout the United States of America focused primarily on offering 340b-qualified entities products to provide consistency in care and pricing.
The Industry
The pharmaceutical industry is highly competitive and highly regulated. As a result, we face a number of industry-specific factors and challenges, which can significantly impact our results. For a more detailed explanation of our business and its risks, refer to Item 1. Business and Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a global pandemic. Governments and businesses around the world have taken unprecedented actions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including imposing restrictions on movement and travel such as quarantines and shelter-in-place requirements, and restricting or prohibiting outright some or all commercial and business activity, including the manufacture and distribution of certain goods and the provision of non-essential services. These measures, though currently temporary in nature, may become more severe and continue indefinitely depending on the evolution of the outbreak.
We observed lost sales and some supply interruptions during the year ended December 31, 2020 in our New York, New Jersey and India manufacturing plants. While manufacturing has resumed to levels around pre-COVID-19, we may again experience supply chain constraints at our New York, New Jersey, India or other facilities during subsequent waves of COVID-19 infections. These potential supply chain disruptions may significantly impact our 2021 results of operations and cash flows. As noted in Item 2. Properties, several of our key domestic manufacturing, packaging, and facilities are located in New York and New Jersey, two states with a high number of confirmed cases of COVID-19.
To the extent that the COVID-19 pandemic continues or worsens, national, state, and local governments may impose additional restrictions or extend the restrictions already in place. The worsening of the pandemic and the related safety and business operating restrictions could result in a number of adverse impacts to our business, including, but not limited to, additional disruption to the economy and our customers, additional work restrictions, and supply chains being interrupted or slowed. Also, governments may impose other laws, regulations, or taxes that could adversely impact our business, financial condition, or results of operations. Further, depending on the extent to which our customers are affected, they could delay or reduce purchases of products we provide. The potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic also could impact us in a number of other ways including, but not limited to, reductions to our profitability, fluctuations in foreign currency markets, the availability of future borrowings, the cost of borrowings, credit risks of our customers and counterparties, and potential impairment of the carrying amount of goodwill or other definite-lived assets.
We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further precautionary and preemptive actions as may be required by national, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and shareholders. Until the ultimate extent and duration of the pandemic is known, we cannot predict the ultimate effects the pandemic may have on our business, in particular with respect to demand for our products, our strategy, and our prospects, the effects on our customers, or the impact on our financial results.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
The following table sets forth our summarized, consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 23%, or $366 million, to $2.0 billion compared to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase over the prior year was primarily attributable to $294 million in incremental revenue from our newly acquired AvKARE segment, $214 million from 2019 and 2020 new product launches in our Generics segment and $10 million primarily from volume increases in our Specialty segment, partially offset by erosion in our Generics segment from competition primarily related to Levothyroxine Sodium Tabs and Diclofenac Gel 1% and a $16 million decline from the divestitures of our international businesses, primarily in the U.K. and Germany.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Cost of goods sold, including impairment charges, increased 7%, or $91 million, to $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily attributable to $242 million in incremental cost of goods sold from our newly acquired AvKARE segment and cost of goods sold related to new product launches of $74 million. These amounts were partially offset by a $92 million decrease in cost of goods sold impairment charges mainly in our Generics segment, a $36 million decrease in expenses related to the Levothyroxine transition agreement with Lannett Company ("Lannett"), a $19 million decline in inventory obsolescence, a $12 million decline associated with the divestitures of our international businesses primarily in the U.K. and Germany, a $9 million reduction in site closure and integration costs and better plant utilization and operating efficiencies in 2020.
Accordingly, gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $628 million or 32% of total revenues as compared to gross profit of $353 million or 22% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our gross profit as a percentage of net revenue increased compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the factors described above.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $327 million, as compared to $290 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $37 million increase was primarily due to $59 million in incremental expenses related to our newly acquired AvKARE segment, partially offset by cost savings associated with our restructuring and integration programs, as well as efficient cost management efforts.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $180 million, as compared to $188 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $8 million decrease was primarily attributable to cost savings in our Generics segment associated with the Company’s restructuring programs and the timing of expenses in 2020 due to delayed spending as a result of COVID-19, partially offset by a $6 million increase in milestone achievements and upfront license payments with our development partners and increased spend within our Specialty segment ongoing projects.
In-Process Research and Development Impairment Charges
We recognized in-process research and development ("IPR&D") impairment charges of $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $47 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The charges in 2020 were associated with four products in our Generics segment, three of which experienced significant price erosion, resulting in significantly lower than expected future cash flows, and the other of which was canceled due to the withdrawal of our development partner.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the impairment charges were primarily associated with seven products in our Generics segment that were acquired as part of the Combination. For one IPR&D product, the impairment charge was the result of increased competition at launch resulting in significantly lower than expected future cash flows. For one IPR&D product, the impairment charge was the result of a strategic decision to no longer pursue approval of the product. For the other five IPR&D products, the impairment charges were the result of significant price erosion for the products resulting in significantly lower than expected future cash flows.
Acquisition, Transaction-Related and Integration Expenses
Acquisition, transaction-related and integration expenses were $9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $16 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, acquisition, transaction-related and integration expenses were primarily related to professional services fees (e.g., legal, investment banking and consulting) associated with the pending acquisition of a 98% interest in Kashiv Specialty Pharmaceuticals, LLC (see Note 28. Subsequent Events), systems integrations associated with the Combination and integration activities associated with the Acquisitions. In comparison, acquisition, transaction-related and integration expenses for the prior year primarily related to the substantial completion of business integration activities related to the Combination during 2019.
Restructuring and Other Charges
On July 10, 2019, we announced a plan to restructure our operations that is intended to reduce costs and optimize our organizational and manufacturing infrastructure. Pursuant to the restructuring plan as revised, we expect to reduce our headcount by approximately 300 to 350 by December 31, 2021, primarily by ceasing manufacturing at our Hauppauge, NY facility.
We recorded $2 million of restructuring and other charges for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of charges associated with cash severance and other benefits provided pursuant to our severance programs for former employees. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $34 million in restructuring and other charges, which consisted of $12 million of property plant and equipment and right of use asset impairment charges primarily in connection with the planned closure of the Company’s Hauppauge, NY facility, employee restructuring separation charges of $11 million in connection with our severance programs for employees at our Hauppauge, NY, Hayward, CA and other facilities, and $11 million of other employee severance charges.
Charges Related to Legal Matters, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net charge of $6 million for commercial legal proceedings and claims, primarily related to our Generics segment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a net charge of $12 million primarily associated with a settlement agreement with Teva Pharmaceuticals related to our Generics segment. For further details, see Note 21. Commitments and Contingencies.
Intellectual Property Legal Development Expense
Intellectual property legal development expenses include, but are not limited to, costs associated with formulation assessments, patent challenge opinions and strategy, and litigation expenses to defend our intellectual property. For the year ended December 31, 2020, these expenses were $11 million as compared to $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $3 million decrease was primarily associated with legal proceedings that were completed in the year ended December 31, 2019. For further details, see Note 21. Commitments and Contingencies.
Gain From Reduction of Tax Receivable Agreement Liability
In connection with the Combination, the Company entered into a tax receivable agreement (“TRA”) for which it is generally required to pay the other holders of Amneal Common Units 85% of the applicable tax savings, if any, in U.S. federal and state income tax that it is deemed to realize as a result of certain tax attributes of their Amneal Common Units sold to the Company (or exchanged in a taxable sale) and that are created as a result of (i) the sales of their Amneal Common Units for shares of Class A Common Stock and (ii) tax benefits attributable to payments made under the TRA.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a $429 million valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets (“DTAs”) to zero. In conjunction with the valuation allowance of our DTAs, we reversed the accrued TRA liability, which resulted in a $193 million gain to our statement of operations. For a further discussion, see Note 8. Income Taxes.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $127 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $164 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $38 million was primarily attributable to a $22 million decline in interest expense as reductions in interest rates offset increased borrowings and a $21 million favorable foreign currency impact primarily associated with the strengthening of the euro and the Swiss franc relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a $7 million unfavorable impact from divestitures.
(Benefit From) Provision For Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $104 million primarily resulting from a $110 million carryback of U.S. Federal net operating losses and $4 million of related interest under the CARES Act, of which we collected $110 million of cash during 2020. The CARES Act is an emergency economic stimulus package in response to the COVID-19 pandemic which, among other things, includes provisions relating to income and non-income-based tax laws. These DTAs had a 100% valuation allowance as of December 31, 2019.
The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $383 million, primarily resulting from a $425 million valuation allowance recorded on our DTAs. We recorded valuation allowances on our various DTAs on a jurisdictional basis after it was determined that it is more likely than not that our DTAs will not be realized.
Generics
The following table sets forth results of operations for our Generics segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Generics net revenue was $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $34 million or 3% when compared with the same period in 2019. The year-over-year increase was primarily driven by 2019 and 2020 new product launches of $214 million, which included EluRyng and Sucralfate Oral Suspension, partially offset by a decline of $16 million due to the divestiture of our international businesses primarily in the U.K. and Germany in 2019, a $28 million decline related to the reclassification of Oxymorphone to Specialty mid-2019, and erosion in our existing business primarily from Levothyroxine Sodium Tabs and Diclofenac Gel 1% generic competition. Excluding the effect of the divestitures and reclassification of Oxymorphone, Generics revenues increased 6% year over year.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Generics cost of goods sold, including impairment charges, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $929 million, a decrease of $175 million or 16% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The year-over-year decrease was primarily associated with an $85 million decline in intangible asset impairment charges. Cost of goods sold was also favorably impacted by a $36 million decline of expenses related to the Levothyroxine transition agreement with Lannett, a $19 million decline in inventory related charges, a $17 million decline from the reclassification of Oxymorphone to our Specialty segment, a $12 million decline associated with the divestitures of our international businesses, primarily in the U.K and Germany, a $9 million decline in site closure expenses, a $10 million decline in amortization expense, and operating efficiencies and better plant utilization, partially offset by $74 million of incremental cost of goods sold from new product launches.
Generics gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $414 million or 31% as compared to gross profit of $205 million or 16% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. Generics gross profit as a percentage of sales increased compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the factors described above.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Generics SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $56 million, as compared to $69 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $13 million decrease year-over-year was primarily associated with cost savings initiatives associated with our restructuring and integration programs, efficient expense management and the timing of expenses in 2020 due to delayed spending as a result of COVID-19 as well as a reduction in international expenditures from the divested business.
Research and Development
Generics research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $150 million as compared to $172 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $22 million year-over-year decrease was primarily associated with a $16 million reduction in project spend due to a shift in portfolio to Specialty, cost savings associated with our restructuring programs, and delays from COVID-19 and transitioning some third-party costs in-house.
In-Process Research and Development Impairment Charges
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized IPR&D impairment charges of $3 million, associated with four products, three of which experienced significant price erosion, resulting in significantly lower than expected future cash flows, and the other of which was canceled due to the withdrawal of our development partner.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized IPR&D impairment charges of $47 million associated with six intangible assets that were partially impaired and one intangible asset that was fully impaired. For one IPR&D product, the impairment charge was the result of increased competition at launch resulting in significantly lower than expected future cash flows. For one IPR&D product, the impairment charge was the result of a strategic decision to no longer pursue approval of the product. For the other five IPR&D products, the impairment charges were the result of significant price erosion for the products resulting in significantly lower than expected future cash flows.
Charges Related to Legal Matters, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net charge of $6 million for Generics commercial legal proceedings and claims. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a net charge of $12 million primarily associated with a Generics settlement agreement with Teva Pharmaceuticals. For further details, see Note 21. Commitments and Contingencies.
Intellectual Property Legal Development Expenses
Generics intellectual property legal development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $11 million as compared to $13 million for the prior year period. These costs include, but are not limited to, formulation assessments, patent challenge opinions and strategy, and litigation expenses to defend our intellectual property.
Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net
Generics other operating income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was less than $1 million, as compared to $25 million of other operating expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $26 million year-over-year decrease was primarily related to integration expenses associated with the Combination in 2019, during which substantially all of the business integration activities related to that transaction were completed.
Specialty
The following table sets forth results of operations for our Specialty segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Specialty net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $356 million, an increase of 12% or $38 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase from the prior year was primarily due to $28 million in sales related to Oxymorphone which was reclassified from our Generics segment to our Specialty segment mid 2019. Excluding this reclassification, Specialty grew $10 million, or 3%, due to volume growth in Rytary and Unithroid, partially offset by the adverse impact of COVID-19 on Emverm sales and declines in non-promoted products.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Specialty cost of goods sold, including impairment charges, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $193 million, an increase of $23 million or 14% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase from the prior year was primarily due to $17 million of incremental expenses associated with the reclassification of Oxymorphone and $9 million of incremental amortization expense, as well as a volume increase in our existing business, partially offset by a $7 million decline in intangible asset impairment charges.
Specialty gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $163 million or 46% as compared to gross profit of $148 million or 47% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Specialty SG&A expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $76 million, as compared to $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $4 million decrease was primarily due to a reduction in in-person expenditures due to COVID-19.
Research and Development
Specialty research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $30 million, as compared to $16 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $14 million increase was primarily due to a $9 million in ongoing project costs associated with IPX203 as well as $7 million in milestone payments. IPX203 is our investigational extended-release formulation of Carbidopa-Levodopa in advanced Parkinson's Disease patients.
Other Operating Expense, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized other operating expense, net of less than $1 million in the Specialty segment compared to $9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $9 million decrease was primarily attributable to integration expenses associated with the Combination incurred in 2019, during which substantially all of the business integration activities related to that transaction were completed.
AvKARE
The following table sets forth results of operations for our AvKARE segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Our AvKARE segment consists of the businesses we acquired in the Acquisitions on January 31, 2020. Prior to the Acquisitions, we did not have an AvKARE segment. Refer to Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures. Operating results for the sale of Amneal products by AvKARE are included in Generics.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of liquidity is cash generated from operations, available cash and borrowings under debt financing arrangements, including $495 million of available capacity on our revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020, as defined in Note 17. Debt. We believe these sources are sufficient to fund our planned operations, meet our interest and contractual obligations and provide sufficient liquidity over the next 12 months. However, our ability to satisfy our working capital requirements and debt obligations will depend upon economic conditions, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and demand for our products, which are factors that may be out of our control.
Our primary uses of capital resources are to fund operating activities, including research and development expenses associated with new product filings, and pharmaceutical product manufacturing expenses, license payments, and spending on production facility expansions and capital equipment items. As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations evolves, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs. A continued worldwide disruption could materially affect our future access to sources of liquidity, particularly our cash flows from operations, and financial condition. In the event of a sustained market deterioration, we may need additional liquidity, which would require us to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate actions.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the CARES Act, is an emergency economic stimulus package in response to the COVID-19 pandemic which, among other things, includes provisions relating to income and non-income-based tax laws. During 2020, we received $110 million in cash from U.S. federal tax refunds associated with the CARES Act, which includes interest of approximately $4 million. See Note 8. Income Taxes for more information on the effect of the CARES Act on the Company.
We estimate that we will invest approximately $60 million to $70 million during 2021 for capital expenditures to support and grow our existing operations, primarily related to investments in manufacturing equipment, information technology and facilities. In addition, we expect to close on our pending acquisition of 98% of Kashiv Specialty Pharmaceuticals, LLC during the first half of 2021. Under the terms of the acquisition, we will pay an upfront purchase price comprised of: (i) a cash payment of $70 million at the closing, which is subject to certain customary purchase price adjustments and (ii) a cash payment of $30 million at the one-year anniversary of the execution of the purchase agreement. We expect to fund the transaction with cash on hand. See Note 28. Subsequent Events for more information.
We will also make substantial payments for monthly interest and quarterly principal amounts due on our Term Loan and Rondo Term Loan. Related to our Term Loan, the Company was required to calculate the amount of excess cash flows based on its results for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, the Company expects to make a payment of $14 million in March 2021 to satisfy the excess cash flow requirements, in addition to our normal principal payments. Accordingly, we expect to make $41 million in principal payments and make interest payment payments totaling $112 million during 2021 related to our Term Loan. Related to our Rondo Term Loan, we expect to make $9 million in principal payments and make interest payments totaling $6 million during 2021. Additionally, we fully repaid the Short-Term Sellers Note during February 2021. See Note 17. Debt for more information.
We are party to a tax receivable agreement that requires us to make cash payments to APHC Holdings LLC (formerly known as Amneal Holdings LLC) ("Holdings") in respect of certain tax benefits that we may realize or may be deemed to realize as a result of sales or exchanges of Amneal common units by Holdings. The timing and amount of any payments under the tax receivable agreement will also vary, depending upon a number of factors including the timing and number of Amneal common units sold or exchanged for our Class A Common Stock, the price of our Class A Common Stock on the date of sale or exchange, the timing and amount of our taxable income, and the tax rate in effect at the time of realization of our taxable income. The tax receivable agreement also requires that we make an accelerated payment to Holdings equal to the present value of all future payments due under the agreement upon certain change of control and similar transactions. Further sales or exchanges occurring subsequent to December 31, 2020 could result in future Amneal tax deductions and obligations to pay 85% of such benefits to the holders of Amneal common units. These obligations could be incremental to and substantially larger than the approximate $206 million contingent liability as of December 31, 2020. As a result of the foregoing, our obligations under the tax receivable agreement could have a substantial negative impact on our liquidity. See Item 1A. Risk Factors and Note 8. Income Taxes for more information.
In addition, pursuant to the limited liability operating agreement of Amneal, in connection with any tax period, Amneal will be required to make distributions to its members, on a pro rata basis in proportion to the number of Amneal Common Units held by each member, of cash until each member (other than the Company) has received an amount at least equal to its assumed tax liability and the Company has received an amount sufficient to enable it to timely satisfy all of its U.S. federal, state and local and non-U.S. tax liabilities, and meet its obligations pursuant to the tax receivable agreement. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, Amneal made an aggregate of $3 million, $13 million, and $36 million, respectively, in tax distributions to Holdings. There was no amount due to Holdings as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on deposit and highly liquid investments. A portion of our cash flows are derived outside the United States. As a result, we are subject to market risk associated with changes in foreign exchange rates. We maintain cash balances at both U.S. based and foreign country based commercial banks. At various times during the year, our cash balances held in the United States may exceed amounts that are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). We make our investments in accordance with our investment policy. The primary objectives of our investment policy are liquidity and safety of principal.
Cash Flows
For a discussion comparing of our cash flows for the fiscal years 2019 to 2018, see Cash Flows under Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth our summarized, consolidated cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $379 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The year over year improvement was primarily due to $110 million of cash received from a U.S. Federal net operating loss carryback related to the CARES Act, improved operating performance and sales collections, and a decrease in payments of employee separation benefits and interest, which were partially offset by an unfavorable impact from inventory.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $318 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $20 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily related to cash paid for the Acquisitions, a decrease in proceeds from the surrender of corporate owned life insurance, and a decrease related to proceeds from the sale of our international businesses in the U.K. and Germany in 2019, partially offset by a decrease in the acquisition of intangible assets and a decrease in purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $132 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $46 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily attributable to the net proceeds from a $180 million term loan associated with the Acquisitions and a decrease in tax distributions to non-controlling interests, partially offset by an increase in payments of principal on debt and capital leases.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
(1)A description of our Term Loan, and related debt service and interest requirements is contained in Note 17. Debt. Interest on our Term Loan was calculated based on applicable rates at December 31, 2020, including any impact from our interest rate swap.
(2)Amounts represent future minimum rental payments under non-cancelable leases for certain facilities. A discussion of our operating lease obligations is contained in Note 12. Leases.
(3)Amounts represent future minimum rental payments under non-cancelable financing lease obligation for a production facility in New York. A discussion of our financing lease obligations is contained in Note 12. Leases.
(4)Rondo Term Loan relates to the Acquisitions. Interest on the Rondo Term Loan was calculated based on the applicable rate at December 31, 2020. A discussion of the Rondo Term Loan, and related debt service and interest requirements is contained in Note 17. Debt.
The foregoing table does not include milestone payments potentially payable by the Company under its collaboration agreements and licenses. Such milestone payments are dependent upon the occurrence of specific and contingent events, and not the passage of time. A discussion of our significant contingent milestones is contained in Note 5. Alliance and Collaboration and Note 24. Related Party Transactions. Additionally, the foregoing table does not include $45 million of aggregate principal and the related interest due on the long-term promissory notes and the short-term promissory note issued in connection with the Acquisition. The short-term promissory note of $1 million was fully repaid in February 2021. Refer to the section Acquisition Financing - Notes Payable-Related Party in Note 17. Debt for a discussion of this indebtedness.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Included within these policies are certain policies which contain critical accounting estimates and, therefore, have been deemed to be “critical accounting policies.” Critical accounting estimates are those which require management to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made and for which the use of different estimates, which reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We have identified the following to be our critical accounting policies: sales-related deductions, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, income taxes and contingencies.
Sales-Related Deductions
Our gross product revenue is subject to a variety of deductions, which are estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenue is recognized, and primarily represent chargebacks, rebates, group purchasing organization fees, prompt payment (cash) discounts, consideration payable to the customer, billbacks, Medicaid and other government pricing programs, price protection and shelf stock adjustments, and sales returns. Those deductions represent estimates of rebates and discounts related to gross sales for the reporting period and, as such, knowledge and judgment of market conditions and practice are required when estimating the impact of these revenue deductions on gross sales for a reporting period.
Historically, our changes of estimates reflecting actual results or updated expectations have not been material to our overall business. Product-specific rebates, however, may have a significant impact on year-over-year individual product growth trends. If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate predictors of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. The sensitivity of our estimates can vary by program, type of customer and geographic location. However, estimates associated with governmental allowances, Medicaid and other performance-based contract rebates are most at risk for material adjustment because of the extensive time delay between the recording of the accrual and its ultimate settlement, an interval that can generally range up to one year. Because of this time lag, in any given quarter, our adjustments to actual can incorporate revisions of several prior quarters.
Business Combinations
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. The consolidated financial statements and results of operations reflect an acquired business after the completion of the acquisition. The fair value of the consideration
paid is assigned to the underlying net assets of the acquired business based on their respective fair values as determined using a market participant concept. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets and other identifiable intangible assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Intangible assets are amortized over the estimated useful life of the asset. Significant judgments are used in determining the estimated fair values assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed and in determining estimates of useful lives of long-lived assets. Fair value determinations and useful life estimates are based on, among other factors, estimates of expected future net cash flows, estimates of appropriate discount rates used to present value expected future net cash flow streams, the assessment of each asset’s life cycle, competitive trends impacting the asset and each cash flow stream, as well as other factors. These judgments can materially impact the estimates used to allocate acquisition date fair values to assets acquired and liabilities assumed and the future useful lives. For these and other reasons, actual results may vary significantly from estimated results.
Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill, which represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired, is carried at cost. Goodwill is not amortized; rather, it is subject to a periodic assessment for impairment by applying a fair value based test. We test goodwill for possible impairment annually during the fourth quarter, or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
In order to test goodwill for impairment, an entity is permitted to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether a quantitative assessment of goodwill is necessary. The qualitative factors considered by the Company may include, but are not limited to, general economic conditions, the Company’s outlook, market performance of the Company’s industry and recent and forecasted financial performance. Further testing is only required if the entity determines, based on the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. Otherwise, no further impairment testing is required. If a quantitative assessment is required, the Company determines the fair value of its reporting unit using a combination of the income and market approaches. If the net book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company recognizes a goodwill impairment charge for the reporting unit equal to the lesser of (i) the total goodwill allocated to that reporting unit and (ii) the amount by which that reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
Goodwill is allocated and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. As a result of the Acquisitions, we added a third reportable segment, AvKARE, to our existing reportable segments, Generics and Specialty. Our reportable segments are the same as the respective operating segments and reporting units. As of December 31, 2020, $361 million, $92 million, and $70 million of goodwill was allocated to the Specialty, Generics, and AvKARE segments, respectively. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we tested each of the reporting units for impairment using a quantitative assessment. The determination of fair value in the quantitative assessment required us to make significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions primarily included, but were not limited to: the selection of appropriate peer group companies, the discount rate, terminal growth rates, and forecasts of revenue, operating income, depreciation and amortization, restructuring charges and capital expenditures. For more information see Note 15. Goodwill and Intangible Assets. There was no impairment of goodwill in any reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Significant judgment is employed in determining the assumptions utilized in our quantitative assessment. Accordingly, any changes in assumptions described above could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations. Additionally, for each of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. For a list of these factors, see Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Intangible Assets
We review our long-lived assets, including intangible assets with finite lives, for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. We evaluate assets for potential impairment by comparing estimated future undiscounted net cash flows to the carrying amount of the asset. If the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, impairment is measured based on the difference between the carrying amount of the assets and fair value which is generally an expected present value cash flow technique. Our policy in determining whether an impairment indicator exists comprises measurable operating performance criteria as well as other qualitative measures. Events giving rise to impairment are an inherent risk in the pharmaceutical industry and cannot be predicted. Factors that we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review include significant under-performance of
a product in relation to expectations, significant negative industry or economic trends, and significant changes or planned changes in our use of the assets. If our assumptions are not correct, there could be an impairment loss in subsequent periods or, in the case of a change in the estimated useful life of the asset, a change in amortization expense.
Intangible assets with indefinite lives, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), are tested for impairment if impairment indicators arise and, at a minimum, annually. However, an entity is permitted to first assess qualitative factors to determine if a quantitative impairment test is necessary. Further testing is only required if the entity determines, based on the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. Otherwise, no further impairment testing is required. The indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test consists of a one-step analysis that compares the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of an intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We consider many factors in evaluating whether the value of its intangible assets with indefinite lives may not be recoverable, including, but not limited to the discount rate, terminal growth rates, general economic conditions, our outlook and market performance of our industry and recent and forecasted financial performance.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a total of $37 million of intangible asset impairment charges, of which $34 million was recognized in cost of goods sold and $3 million was recognized in in-process research and development. The impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 are primarily related to ten products, six of which are currently marketed products and four of which are IPR&D products, all acquired as part of the Combination. For more information regarding these impairment charges, see Note 15. Goodwill and Intangible Assets.
Income Taxes
We record valuation allowances against our DTAs when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a DTA will not be realized. We routinely evaluate the realizability of our DTAs by assessing the likelihood that our DTAs will be recovered based on all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, estimates of future taxable income, tax planning strategies and results of operations. Estimating future taxable income is inherently uncertain and requires judgment. In projecting future taxable income, we consider our historical results and incorporate certain assumptions, including projected new product launches, revenue growth, and operating margins, among others.
A valuation allowance, if needed, reduces DTAs to the amount expected to be realized. When determining the amount of net DTAs that are more likely than not to be realized, we assess all available positive and negative evidence. This evidence includes, but is not limited to, prior earnings history, projected future earnings, carryback and carry-forward periods and the feasibility of ongoing tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of the realization of a DTA. The weight given to the positive and negative evidence is commensurate with the extent the evidence may be objectively verified. As such, it is generally difficult for positive evidence regarding projected future taxable income to outweigh objective negative evidence of recent financial reporting losses.
As of December 31, 2020, based upon all available objective and verifiable evidence both positive and negative, including historical levels of pre-tax income (loss) both on a consolidated basis and tax reporting entity basis, legislative developments, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future pre-tax income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies, we determined that it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefits of our gross DTAs. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, this valuation allowance was $423 million and reduced the carrying value of these gross DTAs, net of the impact of the reversal of taxable temporary differences, to zero.
As described in Note 8. Income Taxes, we are a party to a TRA under which we are generally required to pay to the other holders of Amneal Common Units 85% of the applicable tax savings, if any, in U.S. federal and state income tax that we are deemed to realize as a result of certain tax attributes of their Amneal Common Units sold to us (or exchanged in a taxable sale) and that are created as a result of (i) the sales of their Amneal Common Units for shares of Class A common stock and (ii) tax benefits attributable to payments made under the TRA.
The timing and amount of any payments under the TRA may vary, depending upon a number of factors including the timing and number of Amneal common units sold or exchanged for our Class A Common Stock, the price of our Class A Common Stock on the date of sale or exchange, the timing and amount of our taxable income, and the tax rate in effect at the time of realization of the our taxable income (the TRA liability is determined based on a percentage of the corporate tax savings from the use of the TRA's attributes). Further sales or exchanges occurring subsequent to December 31, 2020 could result in future Amneal tax deductions and obligations to pay 85% of such benefits to the holders of Amneal common units.
The projection of future taxable income involves significant judgment. Actual taxable income may differ materially from our estimates, which could significantly impact our liabilities under the TRA. As noted above, we have determined it is more-likely-than-not we will be unable to utilize all of our DTAs subject to the TRA; therefore, as of December 31, 2020, we had not recognized the contingent liability under the TRA related to the tax savings we may realize from common units sold or exchanged. If utilization of these DTAs becomes more-likely-than-not in the future, at such time, these TRA liabilities (which amount to approximately $206 million as of December 31, 2020, as a result of basis adjustments under Internal Revenue Code Section 754) will be recorded through charges to our statements of operations. However, if the tax attributes are not utilized in future years, it is reasonably possible no amounts would be paid under the TRA. Should we determine that a DTA with a valuation allowance is realizable in a subsequent period, the related valuation allowance will be released and if a resulting TRA payment is determined to be probable, a corresponding TRA liability will be recorded.
Contingencies
We are involved in various litigation, government investigations and other legal proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of business. Our legal proceedings are complex, constantly evolving and subject to uncertainty. As such, we cannot predict the outcome or impact of our legal proceedings.
While we believe we have valid claims and/or defenses for the matters described in Note 21. Commitments and Contingencies, the nature of litigation is unpredictable and the outcome of the following proceedings could include damages, fines, penalties and injunctive or administrative remedies. For any proceedings where losses are probable and reasonably capable of estimation, we accrue for a potential loss. When we have a probable loss for which a reasonable estimate of the liability is a range of losses and no amount within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we record the loss at the low end of the range. While these accruals have been deemed reasonable by our management, the assessment process relies heavily on estimates and assumptions that may ultimately prove inaccurate or incomplete. Additionally, unforeseen circumstances or events may lead us to subsequently change our estimates and assumptions. The process of analyzing, assessing and establishing reserve estimates relative to legal proceedings involves a high degree of judgment.
Although the outcome and costs of the asserted and unasserted claims is difficult to predict, based on the information presently known to management, we do not currently expect the ultimate liability, if any, for such matters to have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
For further details, see Note 21. Commitments and Contingencies.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Recently issued accounting standards are discussed in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.