Item 7.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
We are a leading system provider of megawatt-scale power resiliency solutions that orchestrate the rhythm and harmony of power on the grid™, and protect and expand the capability of our Navy's fleet. Our solutions enhance the performance of the power grid, protect our Navy’s fleet, and lower the cost of wind power. In the power grid market, we enable electric utilities, industrial facilities, and renewable energy project developers to connect, transmit and distribute smarter, cleaner and better power through our transmission planning services and power electronics and superconductor-based systems. In the wind power market, we enable manufacturers to field highly competitive wind turbines through our advanced power electronics and control system products, engineering, and support services. Our power grid and wind products and services provide exceptional reliability, security, efficiency and affordability to our customers.
Our power system solutions help to improve energy efficiency, alleviate power grid capacity constraints, improve system resiliency, and increase the adoption of renewable energy generation. Demand for our solutions is driven by the growing needs for modernized smart grids that improve power reliability, security and quality, the U.S. Navy's effort to upgrade in-board power systems to support fleet electrification, and the need for increased renewable sources of electricity, such as wind and solar energy. Concerns about these factors have led to increased spending by corporations and the military, as well as supportive government regulations and initiatives on local, state, and national levels, including renewable portfolio standards, tax incentives and international treaties.
We manufacture products using two proprietary core technologies: PowerModule™ programmable power electronic converters and our Amperium® high temperature superconductor ("HTS") wires. These technologies and our system-level solutions are protected by a broad and deep intellectual property portfolio consisting of hundreds of patents and licenses worldwide.
We operate our business under two market-facing business units: Grid and Wind. We believe this market-centric structure enables us to more effectively anticipate and meet the needs of power generation project developers, the Navy's ship protection systems, electric utilities and wind turbine manufacturers.
• Grid. Through our Gridtec™ Solutions, our Grid business segment enables electric utilities and renewable energy project developers to connect, transmit and distribute power with exceptional efficiency, reliability, security and affordability. We provide transmission planning services that allow us to identify power grid congestion, poor power quality, and other risks, which help us determine how our solutions can improve network performance. These services often lead to sales of our grid interconnection solutions for wind farms and solar power plants, power quality systems and transmission and distribution cable systems. We also sell ship protection products to the U.S. Navy through our Grid business segment.
•
Wind. Through our Windtec™ Solutions, our Wind business segment enables manufacturers to field wind turbines with exceptional power output, reliability and affordability. We supply advanced power electronics and control systems, license our highly engineered wind turbine designs, and provide extensive customer support services to wind turbine manufacturers. Our design portfolio includes a broad range of drivetrains and power ratings of 2 MW and higher. We provide a broad range of power electronics and software-based control systems that are highly integrated and designed for optimized performance, efficiency, and grid compatibility.
Our fiscal year begins on April 1 and ends on March 31. When we refer to a particular fiscal year, we are referring to the fiscal year beginning on April 1 of that same year. For example, fiscal 2020 refers to the fiscal year beginning on April 1, 2020. Other fiscal years follow similarly.
On October 31, 2018, we entered into a Subcontract Agreement with Commonwealth Edison Company (“ComEd”) (the “Subcontract Agreement”) for the manufacture and installation of our resilient electric grid (“REG”) system within ComEd’s electric grid in Chicago, Illinois (the “Project”). As provided in the Subcontract Agreement, the Subcontract Agreement became effective upon the signing of an amendment by us and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (“DHS”) to the existing contract (the “Prime Contract”) between ourselves and DHS on June 20, 2019. Unless terminated earlier by us, ComEd or DHS according to the terms of the Subcontract Agreement, the term of the Subcontract Agreement will continue until we complete our warranty obligations under the Subcontract Agreement. Under the terms of the Subcontract Agreement, we have agreed, among other things, to provide the REG system and to supervise ComEd’s installation of the REG system in Chicago. As part of our separate cost sharing arrangement with DHS under the Prime Contract, we expect funding provided by DHS in connection with the Subcontract Agreement to be between $9.0 to $11.0 million, which represents the total amount of revenues we are expected to recognize over the term of the Subcontract Agreement and includes up to $1.0 million that we have agreed to reimburse ComEd for costs incurred by ComEd while undertaking its tasks under the Subcontract Agreement (the "Reimbursement Amount”). In addition, we have agreed to deliver an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $5.0 million to secure certain obligations under the Subcontract Agreement, which we have done, and deposited $5.0 million in an escrow account as collateral to secure such letter of credit. ComEd has agreed to provide the site and provide all civil engineering work required to support the installation, operation and integration of the REG system into ComEd’s electric grid. Other than the Reimbursement Amount, ComEd is responsible for its own costs and expenses. Substation work on the project began in late 2019, and we have delivered the REG project hardware. The REG system is expected to be operational in 2021.
On October 1, 2020, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with the selling stockholders named therein. Pursuant to the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement and concurrently with entering into such agreement, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding (i) shares of capital stock of Northeast Power Systems, Inc., a New York corporation (“NEPSI”), and (ii) membership interests of Northeast Power Realty, LLC, a New York limited liability company, which holds the real property that serves as NEPSI’s headquarters (the "NEPSI Acquisition"). NEPSI is a U.S.-based global provider of medium-voltage metal-enclosed power capacitor banks and harmonic filter banks for use on electric power systems. As a result of this transaction, NEPSI became a wholly-owned subsidiary and is operated by our Grid business segment.
The NEPSI purchase price was $26.0 million in cash on hand, including cash from the settlement of our $25 million certificate of deposit during the three months ended September 30, 2020, and 873,657 restricted shares of our common stock. As part of the transaction, in the future, the selling stockholders may receive up to an additional 1,000,000 restricted shares of our common stock upon the achievement of certain specified future revenue objectives during varying periods of up to four years after the closing.
On October 26, 2020, we completed an offering of 3,670,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $15.00 per share under our then-existing Registration Statement on Form S-3. We received net proceeds of approximately $51.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. See Note 1, “Nature of the Business and Operations and Liquidity,” for further information about this offering.
On May 6, 2021, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of (i) Neeltran, Inc., a Connecticut corporation (“Neeltran”) that supplies rectifiers and transformers to industrial customers, and (ii) Neeltran International, Inc., a Connecticut corporation (“International”), as well as the real property that served as Neeltran’s headquarters. For additional information, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
In 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic and spread throughout the globe, including in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts where our headquarters are located, and in other areas where we have business operations. In response to the outbreak, we have followed the guidelines of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and applicable state government authorities to protect the health and safety of our employees, their families, our suppliers, our customers and our communities. While these measures and, COVID-19 generally, have not materially disrupted our business to date, any future actions necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic may result in disruption to our business.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve. The extent to which the outbreak impacts our business, liquidity, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the continued geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, the location, duration and magnitude of future waves of infection, new mutations of the virus, availability and adoption of vaccines, effectiveness of vaccines against the virus and its mutations, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States, the European Union, India and other countries, the duration and extent of business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken to contain and treat the disease.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended March 31, 2019, including a year-to-year comparison between fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2020.
Revenues
Total revenues increased by 36% to $87.1 million in fiscal 2020 from $63.8 million in fiscal 2019. Our revenues are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Revenues in our Grid business unit are derived from our D-VAR product sales, NEPSI product sales, HTS wire sales, ship protection systems ("SPS"), government-sponsored electric utility projects, license contracts and other prototype development contracts. We also engineer, install and commission our products on a turnkey-basis for some customers. The Grid business unit accounted for 81% of total revenues in fiscal 2020 and 78% in fiscal 2019. Grid revenues increased 42% to $70.5 million in fiscal 2020 from $49.6 million in fiscal 2019. The increase in revenues was driven by the contribution from the NEPSI Acquisition as well as growth in the D-VAR, Volt Var Optimization ("VVO") and SPS product lines.
Revenues in our Wind business unit are derived from wind turbine electrical control systems and core components, wind turbine license and development contracts, service contracts and consulting arrangements. Our Wind business unit accounted for 19% of total revenues in fiscal 2020 and 22% in fiscal 2019. Revenues in the Wind business unit increased 16% to $16.6 million in fiscal 2020 from $14.3 million in fiscal 2019. The increase over the prior year period was driven by increased shipments of Electrical Control Systems ("ECS") to Inox and an increase in spares revenue. As further described in Note 1 “Nature of the Business and Operations and Liquidity,” Inox was delinquent on its obligations to post letters of credit for sets of ECS that Inox had agreed to purchase under the terms of the supply contract, and on May 29, 2020, we sent written notice to Inox notifying Inox of its default under the supply contract due to Inox’s failure to post letters of credit in the amount of €6.0 million for the payment of ECS that Inox is obligated to purchase under the terms of the supply contract. On October 1, 2020, Inox delivered approved letters of credit for payment of the remaining ECS that Inox had been obligated to purchase as a result of its then existing forecast under the terms of the Supply Contract and cured the default set forth in the May 29, 2020 default notice. Should Inox submit a forecast for purchases under the Supply Contract in the future, its ability to perform its obligations with respect to such forecasted purchases may be hampered by the prolonged impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, or otherwise. Inox has been active in the new central and state government auction regime in India and has a cumulative order book of over 1.4 GW. However, we cannot predict if and how successful Inox will be in executing on these orders or in obtaining new orders under the new central and state auction regime. Any failure by Inox to succeed under this regime, or any delay in Inox’s ability to deliver its wind turbines, could result in fewer ECS shipments to Inox.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased by 28% to $69.7 million in fiscal 2020, compared to $54.4 million in fiscal 2019. Gross margin increased to 20% in fiscal 2020 from 15% in fiscal 2019. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2020 was driven by additional revenues and a more favorable product mix. Cost of revenues in fiscal 2020 includes $0.5 million for amortization on our backlog intangible asset as result of the NEPSI Acquisition. In addition, a fair value purchase adjustment of approximately $1.0 million for the step-up basis assigned to acquired inventory, to properly reflect the fair value in purchase accounting, was charged to cost of revenues in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The step up was assigned to acquired work-in-progress and finished goods inventory that were completely delivered during fiscal 2020.
Operating Expenses
Research and development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses increased by 15% to $11.0 million, or 13% of revenue in fiscal 2020, compared to $9.6 million, or 15% of revenue, in fiscal 2019. The increase in R&D expenses is a result of additional compensation expense, additional stock compensation expenses and higher outside services expenses.
Selling, general, and administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased by 12% to $25.3 million, or 29% of revenue in fiscal 2020 from $22.7 million, or 36% of revenue, in fiscal 2019. The increase in SG&A expenses is primarily the result of higher compensation, higher stock compensation expense and additional outside services expenses.
Amortization of acquisition related intangibles
We recorded $1.2 million in fiscal 2020 and $0.3 million in fiscal 2019 in amortization expense related to our core technology and know-how, customer relationships, and other intangible assets. The increase in amortization expense is primarily a result of the NEPSI Acquisition.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
The change in fair value of our contingent consideration for the earnout payment on the NEPSI Acquisition resulted in a loss of $3.0 million in the year ended March 31, 2021. The change in the fair value was primarily driven by the change in our stock price, which is a key valuation metric. There was no contingent consideration for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
Operating loss
Our operating loss is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The Grid segment generated an operating loss of $13.3 million in fiscal 2020 and $13.5 million in fiscal 2019. The operating loss held relatively steady despite an increase in revenue primarily due to the acquisition related adjustments in cost of revenues discussed above.
The Wind segment generated an operating loss of $3.3 million in fiscal 2020 and $7.7 million in fiscal 2019. The decrease in operating loss for fiscal 2020 was driven by improved gross margins due to additional revenues as well as less operating expenses.
Unallocated corporate expenses in fiscal 2020 consisted of a loss on contingent consideration of $3.0 million and stock-based compensation expense of $3.5 million. Unallocated corporate expenses in fiscal 2019 consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $1.9 million.
Change in fair value of warrants
There were no warrants outstanding as of March 31, 2021 and 2020. The change in the fair value of warrants of $4.6 million in the year ended March 31, 2020 was primarily due to changes in our stock price, which is a key valuation metric, as well as the exercise in June 2019 of warrants previously issued to Hercules Technology Growth Capital, Inc. (the “Hercules Warrants”) in June 2019 and the exercise and expiration in November 2019 of warrants previously issued to Hudson Bay Capital (the “Hudson Warrants”) in November 2019.
Interest income, net
Interest income, net was $0.4 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $1.3 million for fiscal 2019. The decrease in interest income, net, was driven primarily by higher cash balances in the first half of fiscal 2019 as well as lower interest rates applicable in fiscal 2020.
Other (expense) income, net
Other expense, net was $0.8 million in fiscal 2020, compared to other income, net of $0.3 million in fiscal 2019. The decrease in other income, net was due to foreign currency losses in fiscal 2020.
Income Taxes
We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.8 million in fiscal 2020 compared to income tax expense of $0.2 million in fiscal 2019. The decrease in income tax expense is a result of purchase accounting for the acquired intangible assets and the resulting deferred tax liability from the NEPSI Acquisition. The Company recorded a deferred tax liability of $1.7 million, primarily for the difference in book and tax basis on the intangible assets acquired in fiscal 2020. As a result, the Company was able to benefit additional deferred tax assets and therefore released a corresponding valuation allowance of $1.7 million during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The tax benefit was offset during the fiscal year for income tax expense in foreign jurisdictions.
Net loss
Net loss was $22.7 million in fiscal 2020, compared to net loss of $17.1 million in fiscal 2019. The increase in net loss was driven primarily by the loss on contingent consideration of $3.0 million and additional amortization expenses tied to the NEPSI Acquisition.
Please refer to the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A, for a discussion of certain factors that may affect our future results of operations and financial condition.
Non-GAAP Measures
Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flow that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The non-GAAP measures included in this Form 10-K, however, should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to the comparable measure prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We define non-GAAP net loss as net loss before stock-based compensation, amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, acquisition costs, changes in fair value of contingent consideration and warrants, and other non-cash or unusual charges. We believe non-GAAP net loss assists management and investors in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding these non-cash charges and other items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use non-GAAP net loss as a factor to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. A reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net loss is set forth in the table below (in thousands, except per share data):
We incurred non-GAAP net losses of $14.1 million or $0.59 per share for fiscal 2020, compared to $19.5 million, or $0.93 per share, for fiscal 2019. The decrease in non-GAAP net loss in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was driven by higher revenues, a more favorable product mix and the change in fair value of contingent consideration and warrants.
For a description and reconciliation of our other non-GAAP financial measure, non-GAAP operating cash flow, see below under “Non-GAAP Financial Measure - Non-GAAP Operating Cash Flow.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced recurring operating losses and as of March 31, 2021 had an accumulated deficit of $1,001.3 million.
Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including the successful completion of our product development activities, our ability to commercialize our REG and ship protection system solutions, the rate of customer and market adoption of our products, collecting receivables according to established terms, the continued availability of U.S. government funding during the product development phase of our superconductor-based products and whether Inox is successful in executing on Solar Energy Corporation of India Limited orders or in obtaining additional orders under the new central and state auction regime.
As described above, on October 1, 2020, we acquired NEPSI. The NEPSI purchase price was $26.0 million in cash, which included cash from the settlement of our $25 million certificate of deposit during the three months ended September 30, 2020, and 873,657 restricted shares of our common stock. As part of the transaction, the selling stockholders may receive up to an additional 1,000,000 restricted shares of our common stock upon the achievement of certain specified revenue objectives in the future.
As described above, on October 26, 2020, we completed an offering of 3,670,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $15.00 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $51.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In addition, we had granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 550,500 shares of common stock at the public offering price which they did not exercise.
In February 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 that will expire in February 2024 (the “Form S-3”). The Form S-3 allows us to offer and sell from time-to-time up to $250 million of common stock, debt securities, warrants or units comprised of any combination of these securities. The Form S-3 is intended to provide us flexibility to conduct registered sales of our securities, subject to market conditions, in order to fund our future capital needs. The terms of any future offering under the Form S-3 will be established at the time of such offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC prior to the completion of any such offering.
As described above, on May 6, 2021, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of (i) Neeltran, that supplies rectifiers and transformers to industrial customers, and (ii) International, for: (a) $1.0 million in cash, and (b) 301,556 shares of the Company’s common stock, which were paid and issued to the selling stockholders of Neeltran. We also paid $1.1 million to the selling stockholders of Neeltran at closing to pay off previous loans made by them to Neeltran. [Placeholder for registration of shares].
Also on May 6, 2021, our subsidiary, AMSC Husky LLC, purchased the real property that served as Neeltran’s headquarters for $4.3 million, of which (a) $2.4 million was paid in immediately available funds by AMSC Husky to the owners of such real property, and (b) $1.9 million was paid directly to TD Bank as full payment for the outstanding indebtedness secured by the mortgage on such real property. Additionally, we paid approximately $7.6 million, including $1.9 million of indebtedness secured by the mortgage on the real property, directly to Neeltran lenders at closing to extinguish outstanding Neeltran indebtedness to third parties. All cash payments associated with the Neeltran acquisition were funded with cash on hand.
At March 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash of $80.7 million, compared to $66.1 million at March 31, 2020 an increase of $14.6 million. As of March 31, 2021, we had approximately $3.2 million of cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash in foreign bank accounts. Our cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities was $8.7 million and $16.5 million in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in net cash used in operations in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was due primarily to the overall impact of increased sales activities on the operating accounts in fiscal 2020.
Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities was $2.5 million and ($36.6 million) in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was due primarily to the purchase of the $35.0 million certificate of deposit in the year ended March 31, 2020 with no such transaction in the fiscal 2020 period and the sale of the $30.0 million in certificates of deposit in the year ended March 31, 2021, offset by cash that was used to pay for the NEPSI Acquisition.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $50.8 million and $5.8 million in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to the proceeds from the October 2020 offering.
At March 31, 2021, we had $5.6 million of restricted cash included in long-term assets and $2.2 million of restricted cash in short-term assets. At March 31, 2020, we had $5.7 million of restricted cash included in long-term assets and $0.5 million of restricted cash in short-term assets. These amounts included in restricted cash primarily represent collateral deposits to secure surety bonds and letters of credit for various customer contracts including the Subcontract Agreement with ComEd. These deposits are held in interest bearing accounts.
We believe we have sufficient available liquidity to fund our operations and capital expenditures for the next twelve months. In addition, we may seek to raise additional capital, which could be in the form of loans, convertible debt or equity, to fund our operating requirements and capital expenditures. Our liquidity is highly dependent on our ability to increase revenues, including our ability to collect revenues under our agreements with Inox, control our operating costs, and our ability to raise additional capital, if necessary. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional capital on favorable terms or at all, or execute on any other means of improving our liquidity as described above. Additionally, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global financial markets may reduce our ability to raise additional capital, if necessary, which could negatively impact our liquidity. We also continue to closely monitor our expenses and, if required, we intend to reduce our operating and capital spending to enhance liquidity.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure - Non-GAAP Operating Cash Flow
We define non-GAAP operating cash flow as operating cash flow before the Sinovel settlement (net of legal fees and expenses); tax effect of adjustments; and other unusual cash flows or items. The tax effect of adjustments relates primarily to the Sinovel settlement, net. We believe non-GAAP operating cash flow assists management and investors in comparing our operating cash flow across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding these non-recurring cash items that it does not believe are indicative of our core operating cash flow. A reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP operating cash flow is set forth in the table below (in thousands).
Legal Proceedings
From time to time, we are involved in legal and administrative proceedings and claims of various types. We record a liability in our consolidated financial statements for these matters when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. We review these estimates each accounting period as additional information is known and adjust the loss provision when appropriate. If a matter is both probable to result in liability and the amounts of loss can be reasonably estimated, we estimate and disclose the possible loss or range of loss to the extent necessary to make the consolidated financial statements not misleading. If the loss is not probable or cannot be reasonably estimated, a liability is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules, such as relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, which are often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating transactions that are not required to be reflected on our balance sheet except as discussed below.
We occasionally enter into construction contracts that include a performance bond. As these contracts progress, we continually assess the probability of a payout from the performance bond. Should we determine that such a payout is probable, we would record a liability.
In addition, we have various contractual arrangements, under which we have committed to purchase certain minimum quantities of goods or services on an annual basis.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. The amendments in ASU 2016-13 provide more decision-useful information about the expected credit losses on financial instruments and other commitments to extend credit held by a reporting entity at each reporting date. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that year. Following the release of ASU 2019-10 in November 2019, the new effective date, as long as we remain a smaller reporting company, would be annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, the adoption of ASU 2016-13 may have on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. The amendments in ASU 2018-13 provide for increased effectiveness of the disclosures made around fair value measurements while including consideration for costs and benefits. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those periods. As of April 1, 2020, we have adopted ASU 2018-13 and noted no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 provide for simplified accounting to several income tax situations and removal of certain accounting exceptions. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those periods. We do not expect the impact of the adoption of ASU 2019-12 to be material to our consolidated financial statements.
We do not believe that other recently issued accounting pronouncements will have a material impact on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires that we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ under different assumptions or conditions. Our accounting policies that involve the most significant judgments and estimates are as follows:
•
Revenue recognition;
•
Business acquisitions;
•
Marketable securities;
•
Accounts receivable;
•
Inventory;
•
Valuation of long-lived assets;
• Leases;
•
Goodwill;
•
Income taxes;
•
Stock-based compensation;
•
Contingencies;
•
Product warranty; and
•
Fair value of financial instruments.
Revenue recognition
Revenue contracts are defined as an arrangement that creates enforceable rights and obligations of both parties where collection of the contract price is deemed probable. We record revenue based on a five-step model which includes verifying the existence of the contract, identifying the performance obligations, determining the transaction price, allocating the contract transaction price to the performance obligations, and recognizing the revenue when (or as) control of goods or services is transferred to the customer. The transfer of control can occur at the time of delivery, installation or post-installation where applicable.
The Company's equipment and system product line includes certain contracts which do not meet the requirements of an exchange transaction and therefore do not fall within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606. As these non-exchange transaction contracts are considered grant revenue and do not fall within any specific accounting literature, the Company follows guidance within ASC 606 by analogy to recognize grant revenue over time.
For certain arrangements, such as contracts to perform research and development, prototype development contracts and certain customized product sales, we record revenues using the over-time method, measured by the relationship of costs incurred to total estimated contract costs. Over-time revenue recognition accounting is predominantly used on certain turnkey power systems installations for electric utilities and long-term prototype development contracts with the U.S. government. We follow this method when any of the three following criteria are met: when the customer receives the benefits as they are performed, control transfers to the customer as the work is performed, or there is no alternative use to us and there is an enforceable right to payment including a reasonable profit through the life of the contract. However, the ability to reliably estimate total costs at completion is challenging, especially on long-term prototype development contracts, and could result in future changes in contract estimates. For contracts where reasonably dependable estimates of the revenues and costs cannot be made, we follow the point in time method.
We enter into sales arrangements that may provide for multiple performance obligations to a customer. Sales of certain products may include extended warranty and support or service packages, and at times include performance bonds. As these contracts progress, we continually assess the probability of a payout from the performance bond. Should we determine that such a payout is likely, we would record a liability. We would reduce revenue to the extent a liability is recorded. In addition, we enter into licensing arrangements that include training services.
Performance obligations are separated into more than one unit of accounting when (1) the delivered element(s) have value to the customer on a stand-alone basis, and (2) our promise to transfer the goods or services to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. In general, revenues are separated between the different product shipments which have stand-alone value, and the various services to be provided. Revenues for product shipments are generally recognized at a point in time where control of the product is transferred to the customer, while revenues for the services are generally recognized over the period of performance. We identify all goods and/or services that are to be delivered separately under a sales arrangement and allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation using the respective standalone selling price ("SSP") which is determined primarily using the cost plus expected margin approach for products and a relief from royalty method for licenses. Revenue allocated to each performance obligation is recognized when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. We review SSP and the related margins at least annually.
Our license agreements provide either for the payment of contractually determined paid-up front license fees or milestone based payments in consideration for the grant of rights to manufacture and or sell products using our patented technologies or know-how. Some of these agreements provide for the release of the licensee from past and future intellectual property infringement claims. When we can determine that we have no further obligations other than the grant of the license and that we have fully transferred the technology know-how, we recognize the revenue under a point in time model. In other license arrangements, we may also agree to provide training services to transfer the technology know-how. In these arrangements, we have determined that the licenses have no standalone value to the customer and are not separable from training services as we can only fully transfer the technology know-how through the training component. Accordingly, we account for these arrangements as a single unit of accounting, and recognize revenue over the period of its performance using the over-time method. Costs for these arrangements are expensed as incurred.
Existing customers are subject to ongoing credit evaluations based on payment history and other factors. If it is determined that collectability of any portion of the contract value is not probable, an analysis of variable consideration will be performed using either the most likely amount or expected value method to determine the amount of revenue that must be constrained until the scenario causing the variability has been resolved. For contractual arrangements that involve variable consideration, we recognize revenue for these amounts upon reaching the constraining event successfully. We do not generally provide for extended payment terms or provide our customers with a right of return.
Infrequently, we receive requests from customers to hold product being purchased from us for a valid business purpose. We recognize revenues for such arrangements provided the transaction meets, at a minimum, the following criteria: a valid business purpose for the arrangement exists; risk of ownership of the purchased product has been transferred to the buyer; there is a fixed delivery date that is reasonable and consistent with the buyer’s business purpose; the product is ready for shipment; we have no continuing performance obligation in regards to the purchased product and these products have been segregated from our inventories and cannot be used to fill other orders received. There were no such transactions during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 or 2020.
We have elected to record taxes collected from customers on a net basis and do not include tax amounts in revenue or costs of revenue.
Our contract assets and liabilities primarily relate to the timing differences between cash received from a customer in connection with contractual rights to invoicing and the timing of revenue recognition following completion of performance obligations. Our accounts receivable balance is made up entirely of customer contract related balances.
See Note 4, “Revenue Recognition,” for further information regarding the Company’s adoption of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Business Acquisitions
We account for acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. The purchase price for each acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. The excess purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Intangible assets, if identified, are also recorded.
Determining the fair value of certain assets and liabilities assumed is judgmental in nature and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions as well as the use of specialists as needed.
The consideration for our acquisitions may include future payments that are contingent upon the occurrence of a particular event. We record a contingent consideration obligation for such contingent consideration payments at fair value on the acquisition date. We estimate the fair value of contingent consideration obligations through valuation models that incorporate probability adjusted assumptions related to the achievement of the milestones and the likelihood of making related payments. Each period we revalue the contingent consideration obligations associated with the acquisition to fair value and record changes in the fair value within the operating expenses in our consolidated statements of income. Increases or decreases in the fair value of the contingent consideration obligations can result from changes in assumed revenue risk premium and volatility, as well as changes in the stock price and assumed probability with respect to the attainment of certain financial and operational metrics, among others. Significant judgment is employed in determining these assumptions as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent period. Accordingly, future business and economic conditions, as well as changes in any of the assumptions described above, can materially impact the fair value of contingent consideration recorded at each reporting period. See Note 3, "NEPSI Acquisition," for additional information.
Marketable Securities
Marketable securities consist of certificates of deposit with maturities of greater than 12 months that are measured using such inputs as quoted prices and are classified within Level 1 of the valuation hierarchy. We determine the appropriate classification of marketable securities at the time of purchase and re-evaluate such classification as of each balance sheet date. All marketable securities are considered available for sale and are carried at fair value. Changes in fair value are recorded to other income (expense), net. We periodically review the realizability of each short and long term marketable security when impairment indicators exist with respect to the security. If other than temporary impairment of value of the security exists, the carrying value of the security is written down to its estimated fair value.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist of amounts owed by commercial companies and government agencies. Accounts receivable are stated net of allowances for doubtful accounts. Our accounts receivable relate principally to a limited number of customers. As of March 31, 2021, Naval Surface Warfare Center accounted for approximately 28%, and RWE Renewables, LLC accounted for approximately 11% of our accounts receivable balance, with no other customers accounting for greater than 10% of the balance. As of March 31, 2020, Fuji Bridex Pte. Ltd. accounted for approximately 25%, Department of Homeland Security accounted for 18%, and Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction Co., Ltd. accounted for approximately 17% of our accounts receivable balance, with no other customers accounting for greater than 10% of the balance. Changes in the financial condition or operations of our customers may result in delayed payments or non-payments which would adversely impact our cash flows from operating activities and/or our results of operations. As such, we may require collateral, advanced payment or other security based upon the customer history and/or creditworthiness. In determining the allowance for doubtful accounts, we evaluate the collectability of accounts receivable based primarily on the probability of recoverability based on historical collection and write-off experience, the age of past due receivables, specific customer circumstances, and current economic trends. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payment, additional allowances may be required. Failure to accurately estimate the losses for doubtful accounts and ensure that payments are received on a timely basis could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Inventory
Inventories include material, direct labor and related manufacturing overhead, and are stated at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis, or net realizable value determined on a first-in, first-out basis as the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation. We record inventory when we take delivery and title to the product according to the terms of each supply contract.
Program costs may be deferred and recorded as inventory on contracts on which costs are incurred in excess of approved contractual amounts and/or funding, if future recovery of the costs is deemed probable.
At each balance sheet date, we evaluate our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence. Inventories that management considers excess or obsolete are reserved. Management considers forecasted demand in relation to the inventory on hand, competitiveness of product offerings, market conditions and product life cycles when determining excess and obsolescence and net realizable value adjustments. Once inventory is written down and a new cost basis is established, it is not written back up if demand increases.
We recorded inventory reserves of $1.8 million and $1.3 million during fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively, based on evaluating our ending inventories for excess quantities and obsolescence.
Valuation of long-lived assets
We periodically evaluate our long-lived assets, consisting principally of fixed and amortizable intangible assets for potential impairment. In accordance with the applicable accounting guidance for the treatment of long-lived assets, we review the carrying value of our long-lived assets or asset group that is held and used, including intangible assets subject to amortization, for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. Under the held and used approach, the asset or asset group to be tested for impairment should represent the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. The determination of our asset groups involves a significant amount of judgment, assumptions and estimates. We evaluate our long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets may not be recoverable from the estimated undiscounted future cash flows.
Our judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market and operational performance. Indicators of potential impairment include:
•
a significant change in the manner in which an asset group is used;
•
a significant decrease in the market value of an asset group;
•
identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit;
•
a significant adverse change in its business or the industry in which it is sold;
•
a current period operating cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the asset group; and
•
significant advances in our technologies that require changes in our manufacturing process.
There were no indicators requiring further impairment testing on our long-lived assets during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 or 2020.
Leases
Leases include all agreements in which we obtain control of a physical asset. Leases are captured on the balance sheet as both a right of use asset and associated lease liability and are valued based on the commencement of our control of the asset, after being discounted by our incremental borrowing rate. Our lease portfolio is made up primarily of real estate leases for our various offices, but also includes items such as vehicles, IT equipment and other miscellaneous tools and equipment needed for manufacturing. Our incremental borrowing rate was determined through an analysis to identify what rates we could obtain if we were to secure external financing for similar transactions, and includes considerations of both the market and our current credit ratings. An analysis will be performed annually, or upon execution of any individually material agreement, to ensure that the rates being applied to newly acquired leases are still accurate.
The majority of our leases are classified as operating leases, and therefore the expense is captured in income from operations each period.
We have elected to exclude all leases of less than twelve months from the balance sheet presentation. We have also elected a policy in which we will not segregate lease components from non-lease components, so in the event we execute an agreement which includes a non-lease component our asset and liability recorded to the balance sheet will include the value of that non-lease component as well. This policy will be applied to all classifications of leases.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over net assets of acquired businesses that are consolidated. We perform our annual assessment of goodwill on February 28th of each fiscal year and whenever events or changes in circumstances or a triggering event indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Determining whether a triggering event has occurred often involves significant judgment from management. An entity is permitted to first assess qualitatively whether it is necessary to perform a goodwill impairment test. The quantitative impairment test is required only if the entity concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. We determine the fair value of a reporting unit based on an income approach utilizing a discounted cash flow adjusted for entity specific factors. In evaluating whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, an entity should consider the totality of all relevant events or circumstances that affect the fair value or carrying amount of a reporting unit. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, then an impairment charge is recognized reducing the goodwill by the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value, not to exceed the total amount of the goodwill, allocated to that reporting unit. See Note 5, “Goodwill” for further information and discussion.
We performed our annual assessment of goodwill on February 28, 2021 and noted no triggering events from the analysis date to March 31, 2021 and determined that there was no impairment to goodwill.
Income taxes
Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current fiscal year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse. All deferred tax assets and liabilities are presented as non-current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
We regularly assess our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Assessments of the realization of deferred tax assets require that management consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, and make significant judgments about many factors, including the amount and likelihood of future taxable income. Based on all the available evidence, we have recorded valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realizable due to the taxable losses that have been incurred since our inception and uncertainty around our future profitability.
Accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. Any changes in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision. We include interest and penalties related to gross unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes. See Note 13, “Income Taxes,” of our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our income tax assumptions and expenses.
Stock-based compensation
We measure compensation cost arising from the grant of share-based payments to employees and non-employees at fair value and recognize such cost over the period during which the employee and non-employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. Total stock-based compensation expense recognized during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 was $3.5 million and $1.9 million, respectively. For awards with service conditions only, we recognize compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service/vesting period. For awards with performance conditions, accruals of compensation cost are made based on the probable outcome of the performance conditions. The cumulative effect of changes in the probability outcomes are recorded in the period in which the changes occur.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. Management determined that expected volatility rates should be estimated based on historical and implied volatilities of our common stock. The expected term represents the average time that the options that vest are expected to be outstanding based on the vesting provisions and our historical exercise, cancellation and expiration patterns. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if circumstances change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate an expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. See Note 15, “Stockholders’ Equity,” of our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our stock-based compensation assumptions and expenses.
We account for share-based payments made to non-employees in the same manner as other share-based payments for employees, with the measurement being based on the fair value at the grant date. The non-employee share based payments will be included within our stock compensation currently reported.
Contingencies
From time to time, we are involved in legal and administrative proceedings and claims of various types. We record a liability in our consolidated financial statements for these matters when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. We review these estimates each accounting period as additional information is known and adjust the loss provision when appropriate. If the loss is not probable or cannot be reasonably estimated, a liability is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements. If, with respect to a matter, it is not both probable to result in liability and the amount of loss cannot be reasonably estimated, an estimate of possible loss or range of loss shall be disclosed unless such an estimate cannot be made. We do not recognize gain contingencies until they are realized. Legal costs incurred in connection with loss contingencies are expensed as incurred. See Note 16, “Commitments and Contingencies”, of our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Product Warranty
Warranty obligations are incurred in connection with the sale of our products. We generally provide a one to three year warranty on our products, commencing upon installation. The costs incurred to provide for these warranty obligations are estimated and recorded as an accrued liability at the time of sale. Future warranty costs are estimated based on historical performance rates and related costs to repair given products. The accounting estimate related to product warranty involves judgment in determining future estimated warranty costs. Should actual performance rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revision to the estimated warranty liability would be required.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, accounts receivable, notes receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and warrants. The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued expenses due to their short term nature approximate fair value at March 31, 2021 and 2020. The estimated fair values have been determined through information obtained from market sources and management estimates. Marketable securities consist of certificates of deposit with maturities of greater than 12 months that are measured using such inputs as quoted prices and are classified within Level 1 of the valuation hierarchy. We determine the appropriate classification of our marketable securities at the time of purchase and re-evaluate such classification as of each balance sheet date. All marketable securities are considered available for sale and are carried at fair value. Changes in fair value are recorded to other income (expense), net. The fair value for the debt and warrant arrangements were historically estimated by management based on the terms that we believe we could obtain in the current market for debt with the same terms and similar maturities. The warrants were subject to revaluation at each balance sheet date, and any change in fair value was recorded as a change in fair value in other (expense) income until the earlier of the warrants’ exercise or expiration. We relied on assumptions used in a lattice model to determine the fair value of the warrants. We have appropriately valued the warrants within Level 3 of the valuation hierarchy.