Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
The following discussion highlights our results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the twelve months ended June 30, 2021 and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on our audited financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). You should read the discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Basis of Presentation
The financial statements contained herein have been prepared in accordance with GAAP and the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates if conditions differ from our assumptions. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the “Notes to Financial Statements”, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in preparation of our financial statements.
Internally-Developed Capitalized Software
We capitalize certain costs related to internal-use software, primarily consisting of direct labor and third-party vendor costs associated with creating the software. Software development projects generally include three stages: the preliminary project stage (all costs are expensed as incurred), the application development stage (certain costs are capitalized and certain costs are expensed as incurred) and the post-implementation/operation stage (all costs are expensed as incurred). Costs capitalized in the application development stage include costs related to the design and implementation of the selected software components, software build and configuration infrastructure, and software interfaces. Capitalization of costs requires judgment in determining when a project has reached the application development stage, the proportion of time spent in the application development stage, and the period over which we expect to benefit from the use of that software. Once the software is placed in service, these costs are amortized on the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the software, which is generally three years.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have issued three types of stock-based awards under our stock plans: stock options, restricted stock units and stock warrants. All stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and independent contractors are measured at fair value at each grant date. We rely on the Black-Scholes option pricing model for estimating the fair value of stock-based awards granted, and expected volatility is based on the historical volatilities of peer company’s common stock. Stock options generally vest over two years from the grant date and generally have ten-year contractual terms. Restricted stock units generally have a term of 20 months from the closing date of the agreement. Stock warrants issued have a term of five years from the closing date of the respective private placements. Information about the assumptions used in the calculation of stock-based compensation expense is set forth in Notes 4 and 6 in the “Notes to Financial Statements”.
Revenue Recognition
We generate substantially all of our revenue from contractual arrangements with our businesses, colleges and universities and non-profit organizations to provide a comprehensive platform of integrated technology and technology enabled services related to product offerings. Revenue related to our licensing arrangements is generally recognized ratably over the contract term commencing upon platform delivery. Revenue related to licensing arrangements recognized in a given time period will consist of contracts that went live in the current period or that went live in previous periods and are currently ongoing.
Performance Obligations and Timing of Recognition
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
We derive revenue from annual licensing arrangements, including maintenance fees, setup fees and other variable fees for course development and miscellaneous items. Our contracts with partners generally have two to five-year terms and have a single performance obligation. The promises to set up and provide a hosted platform of integrated technology and services that our partners need to attract, enroll, educate and support students are not distinct within the context of the contracts. This performance obligation is satisfied as the partners receive and consume benefits, which occurs ratably over the contract term.
Occasionally, we provide professional services, such as custom development, non-complex implementation activities, training, and other various professional services. We evaluate these services to determine if they are distinct and separately identifiable in the context of the contract. In our contracts with customers that contain multiple performance obligations as a result of this assessment, we allocate the transaction price to each separate performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling prices of our solutions and services are typically estimated based on observable transactions when the solutions or services are sold on a standalone basis. When standalone selling prices are not observable, we utilize a cost plus margin approach to allocate the transaction price.
We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations because the variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a service that forms part of a single performance obligation (i.e., consideration received is based on the level of product offerings, which is unknown in advance).
We also receive fees that are fixed in nature, such as annual license and maintenance charges, in place of or in conjunction with variable consideration. The fees are independent of the number of students that are enrolled in courses with our customers and are allocated to and recognized ratably over the service period of the contract that the Company’s platform is made available to the customer (i.e. the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit of the software over the contract service period).
The following factors affect the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of our revenue and cash flows:
● The majority of our customers are private and public learning institutions across various domestic regions, however the majority of our revenue is derived from enterprise customers
● The majority of our customers have annual payment terms
Contract Fulfilment Costs
We may incur certain fulfilment costs related to software design of specific course offerings for our customers, primarily comprised of software development, configuration costs, and implementation costs. These costs are capitalized and recorded on a contract-by-contract basis and amortized using the straight-line method over the length of the contract (i.e. on a systematic basis that is consistent with the transfer to the customer of the goods or services to which the asset relates). There were no costs to fulfill capitalized or amortized as of June 30, 2021 or June 30, 2020.
Accounts Receivable, Contract Assets and Liabilities
Balance sheet items related to contracts consist of accounts receivable (net) and contract liabilities on our balance sheets. Accounts receivable (net) is stated at net realizable value, and we utilize the allowance method to provide for doubtful accounts based on management’s evaluation of the collectability of the amounts due. Our estimates are reviewed and revised periodically based on historical collection experience and a review of the current status of accounts receivable. Historically, actual write-offs for uncollectible accounts have not significantly differed from prior estimates. There was no allowance for doubtful accounts on accounts receivable balances as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
We may recognize revenue prior to billing a customer when we have satisfied or partially satisfied our performance obligations as billings to our customers may not be made until after the service period has commenced. As of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, we do not have any contract assets.
Contract liabilities as of each balance sheet date represent the excess of amounts billed or received as compared to amounts recognized in revenue on our condensed statements of operations as of the end of the reporting period, and such amounts are reflected as a current liability on our condensed balance sheets as deferred revenue. We generally receive payments prior to completion of the service period and our performance obligations. These payments are recorded as deferred revenue until the services are delivered or until our obligations are otherwise met, at which time revenue is recognized.
Some contracts also involve annual license fees, for which upfront amounts are received from customers. In these contracts, the license fees received in advance of the platform’s launch are recorded as contract liabilities.
Results of Operations
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to June 30, 2020
Revenue
We generated revenues of $674,580 for the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to $59,749 for the year ended June 30, 2020. Revenue growth compared to prior year for the twelve months ended June 30, 2021 was primarily driven by growth in the sale of annual license fees and associated implementation and customization services. In addition, increases in variable revenue related to customer user fees also contributed to the year-over-year increase.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and personnel-related expenses, including executive management, legal, finance, human resources and other departments that do not provide direct operational services. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees and other corporate expense.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $4,620,431 as compared to $2,046,968 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase of $2,573,463 is due primarily to the hiring of new team members and associated increases in compensation costs as well as incremental professional fees.
Technology and Content Development
Technology and content development expenses consist primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense and contracted services associated with the ongoing improvement and maintenance of our platform as well as hosting and licensing costs. Technology and content expense also include the amortization of capitalized software costs.
As we worked in 2021 to position Amesite to close repeatable sales, we continued to create features and capabilities that supported customer needs at larger scale. On March 1, 2021, we announced the successful implementation of our whole enterprise solution for The Henry Ford Museum of American Innovation. We were able to provide their organization with the ability to migrate their entire training system into our AI-backed ecosystem, enabling them to achieve their goals of teaching and inspiring the next generation of innovators and inventors more efficiently. On June 2, 2021, we announced the launch of our services on Microsoft Azure. By tapping into the strength of Azure, our platform will be available to a much wider audience in a way that is far easier to access than traditional continuing education setups. As a Microsoft Partner we had access to the Azure FastTrack for ISV program, where we engaged with senior level engineers to help us develop a truly cloud-native solution. Through Microsoft’s partner program, we can reach a vast network of professionals through Microsoft’s connections to universities and companies across the country, on Microsoft Azure.
We believe that our continuous investment in our platform technology is a key factor in our product differentiation. We delivered our third generation (Gen 3) platform in January 2020, and have continued work on the next generation of the Amesite platform (Gen 4); and we are targeting availability by the end of Q1 2022. We believe that our strong reviews and high learner retention are proof points on our product and will help drive sales. We are targeting maintaining these reviews with larger programs throughout our 2022 fiscal year.
We believe the specific, unique features that we have delivered have enabled our partners to launch programs easily and with low overhead. Automated grading and release, tracking of user participation and automation of notifications reduce administrative burdens for our customers, and improve the user experiences. Our goal is to improve the way the world learns, specifically by improving the user experience in learning and providing more engaging, customized experiences.
Technology and content development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $2,276,555 as compared to $1,346,172 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase of $930,383 is due primarily to contract services that support the development of our technology platforms and amortization of capitalized software costs.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consist primarily of activities to attract customers to our offerings. This includes personnel and personnel-related expenses, various search engine and social media costs as well as the cost of advertising.
We significantly increased expenditures on sales and marketing in 2021. This was primarily driven by growth in our sales team and an associated increase in digital marketing spend to drive lead generation and grow pipeline to support our growing team. In 2021 we also continued our focus on creation of value-added content and social posts including the release of case studies with both The Henry Ford Museum of American Innovation and Wayne State University.
We have demonstrated the ability to deliver solutions for whole enterprises, including enterprises that offer paid learning opportunities for other enterprises or individuals. We strive to be agile and aggressive in pursuing contracts at larger scales, even as we continue to provide services to companies and universities for specific programs and applications. We plan to pursue selected business opportunities, including joint developments, collaborations and acquisitions that have the potential to build sales more rapidly. We aim to develop and pursue such opportunities on a consistent basis to grow the Company.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $1,751,606 as compared to $748,993 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase of $1,002,613 is due primarily to increased personnel and personnel-related costs and increased contracted services related to various search engine, social media and advertising costs.
Interest Income. For the year ended June 30, 2021, interest income totaled $1,593 as compared to interest income of $17,158 for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense (including amortization of issuance costs) amounted to $3,613,873 for the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to interest expense of $105,077 for the year ended June 30, 2020. See Note 7 to Notes to Financial Statements.
Net Loss. Primarily as a result of the increased operating expenses noted above, our net loss for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $11,586,292 as compared to a net loss for the year ended June 30, 2020 of $4,170,303.
Capital Expenditures
During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had capital asset additions of $842,326 and $795,748, respectively, which were comprised of $768,899 and $784,987 respectively, in capitalized technology and content development, and $73,427 and $10,761, respectively, of property and equipment, including primarily computer equipment and software. We will continue to capitalize significant software development costs, comprised primarily of internal payroll, payroll related and contractor costs, as we build out and complete our technology platforms.
Financial position, liquidity, and capital resources
We are not currently profitable, and we cannot provide any assurance of when we will be profitable. We incurred a net loss of $11,586,292 and $4,170,303 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively.
During the period from November 14, 2017 (date of incorporation) to June 30, 2020, we raised net proceeds of approximately $11,300,000 from private placement financing transactions (stock and debt). On September 25, 2020, the Company completed the Offering of 3,000,000 shares of its common stock, $0.0001 par value per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share (total net proceeds of approximately $12,800,000 after underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering costs). As of June 30, 2021, our cash balance totaled $10,713,091.
At present, we believe that our cash balances and available liquidity should be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated operating and investing needs for at least the next 12 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under applicable SEC rules.