Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
●
Overview. Discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting us, to provide context for the remainder of MD&A.
●
Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
●
Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows and discussion of our financial condition.
●
Critical Accounting Estimates. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly under “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and in other reports we file with the SEC. All references to years relate to the calendar year ended December 31 of the particular year.
Overview
Headquartered in Cupertino, California, Aemetis is an international renewable natural gas, renewable fuels and byproducts company focused on the acquisition, development and commercialization of innovative technologies that replace traditional petroleum-based products. We operate in two reportable geographic segments: “North America” and “India.”
Founded in 2006, we own and operate a 65 million gallon per year ethanol facility in the California Central Valley in Keyes, California where we manufacture and produce low carbon renewable fuel ethanol, WDG, CDS, and DCP, all of which are sold to local dairies and feedlots as animal feed. We operate a research and development laboratory to develop efficient conversion technologies using waste feedstocks to produce biofuels and biochemicals. We also own and operate a 50 million gallon per year renewable chemical and advanced fuel production facility on the East Coast of India producing high quality distilled biodiesel and refined glycerin for customers in India and Europe.
During 2018, Aemetis Biogas, LLC (“ABGL”) was formed to construct bio-methane anaerobic digesters at local dairies near the Keyes Plant, many of whom also purchase WDG produced at the Keyes Plant. The digesters are connected via a pipeline owned by ABGL to a gas cleanup and compression unit being built at the Keyes Plant to produce Renewable Natural Gas (“RNG”). During 2020, ABGL completed construction on the first two diary digesters and the pipeline that carries bio-methane from these dairies to the Keyes Plant. The next phase of the project involves the construction of 15 additional dairies, for a total of 17 dairies. With plans to build digesters at more than 30 dairies, ABGL continues to negotiate and sign participation agreements with local dairies and convert those agreements into fully executed leases to capture dairy bio-methane from manure wastewater lagoons where the bio-methane would otherwise be released into the atmosphere. Upon receiving the bio-methane from the dairies, impurities will be removed and converted to RNG where it will be either injected into the local gas utility pipeline, supplied to a renewable compressed natural gas.
In December 2018, we purchased a 5.2-acre parcel of land next to the Keyes Plant and subsequently leased the land to the Messer Group (“Messer”) to build a gas liquification plant. We constructed a piping structure to convey the CO2 produced at the Keyes Plant to the Messer plant (the “CO2 Project”). The Aemetis portion of the CO2 Project construction was completed in January 2020, with Messer completing construction of their plant in April 2020. We commenced operations in late April 2020, and began recognizing revenue from this project in the second quarter of 2020.
We lease a site in Riverbank, California, near the Keyes Plant, where we plan to utilize biomass-to-fuel technology that we have licensed from LanzaTech and InEnTec to build the Riverbank Cellulosic Ethanol Facility capable of converting local California waste biomass - principally agricultural waste - into ultra-low carbon intensity renewable cellulosic ethanol. By producing ultra-low carbon renewable cellulosic ethanol, we expect to capture higher value D3 RINs and California’s LCFS credits. D3 RINs have a higher value in the marketplace than D6 RINs due to D3 RINs’ relative scarcity and mandated pricing formula from the United States EPA.
During 2017, Goodland Advanced Fuels, Inc. (“GAFI”) was formed to acquire land, buildings and process equipment in Goodland, Kansas for the construction and development of a next generation biofuel facility for $15.4 million. GAFI entered into a Note Purchase Agreement with Third Eye Capital Corporation (“Third Eye Capital”). GAFI, the Company and its subsidiary Aemetis Advanced Product Keyes (“AAPK”) also entered into separate Intercompany Revolving Notes, pursuant to which GAFI may lend a portion of the proceeds of the revolving loan under the Note Purchase Agreement to AAPK. On December 31, 2019, Aemetis exercised an option it was granted in connection with the foregoing to purchase all of the capital stock of GAFI and has future plans to construct an advanced biofuels facility at the Goodland site. Prior to December 31, 2019, GAFI was consolidated into the financial statements as a variable interest entity.
We entered into an agreement to purchase Zebrex dehydration equipment from Mitsubishi on August 24th, 2018, to improve process efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions (“GHG”) at the Keyes Plant. We began initial equipment installation in the first quarter of 2020. The agreement allowed for deferred payments of the equipment until the unit begins operations. Due to COVID-19 shelter in place restrictions, construction of the project was halted late in the first quarter of 2020. Ongoing restrictions and contractor availability further delayed work toward completion until the second quarter of 2021. The Mitsubishi Zebrex ethanol dehydration system is a key part of increasing the electrification of the Keyes Plant and decreasing natural gas usage at the facility. This project decreases the carbon intensity of fuel produced at the Keyes Plant, allowing Aemetis to realize a higher price for the ethanol sold.
In December 2020, Aemetis Inc., announced its subsidiary, Aemetis Properties Riverbank, Inc., acquired less than a 20% ownership in Nevo Motors, Inc. (“Nevo Motors”). Under this agreement, Nevo Motors will utilize certain of Aemetis’ existing and future manufacturing facilities and fueling stations, as well as renewable natural gas and renewable electricity produced by Aemetis.
In January 2021, a U.S. patent was awarded for our exclusively licensed technology for the production of below zero carbon renewable fuel. This license enabled us to launch the “Carbon Zero” production plants that are designed to convert below zero carbon feedstocks such as waste wood and agricultural waste and renewable energy such as solar, RNG, biogas into energy dense liquid renewable fuels. These renewable fuels can be utilized in hybrid electric cars or other electric engines which may create a below zero carbon greenhouse gas footprint across the entire life cycle of the fuel based on the Argonne National Laboratory’s GREET model, the leading lifecycle analysis measurement tool.
We also own and operate the Kakinada Plant with a nameplate capacity of 150 thousand metric tons per year, or about 50 million gallons per year. We believe the Kakinada Plant is one of the largest biodiesel production facilities in India on a nameplate capacity basis. The Kakinada Plant is capable of processing a variety of vegetable oils and animal fat waste feedstocks into biodiesel that meet international product standards. The Kakinada Plant also distills the crude glycerin byproduct from the biodiesel refining process into refined glycerin, which is sold to the pharmaceutical, personal care, paint, adhesive and other industries.
On March 18, 2020, in order to address a worldwide shortage of hand sanitizer during the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S. Treasury Tobacco and Alcohol Tax and Trade Bureau (“TTB”) provided emergency waivers allowing fuel ethanol plants to produce high-grade alcohol for use in the production of hand sanitizer. Immediately following the emergency waiver for ethanol producers in March, Aemetis began supplying high-grade alcohol for the production of hand sanitizer. During the first week of April 2020, Aemetis applied for and was approved by the TTB as a Distilled Spirits Producer (“DSP”), which allowed the Company to produce fuel ethanol, high-grade alcohol for sanitizer and other health care and sanitary products, as well as industrial alcohol and potable alcohol for beverage spirits.
To further address this market, Aemetis began a series of capital projects at the Keyes Plant that will ultimately enable the Company to produce US Pharmacopeia (“USP”) grade alcohol for sale into these key medical, consumer, governmental and industrial alcohol markets. During June 2020, Aemetis renamed Biofuels Marketing, Inc. as Aemetis Health Products, Inc., and began a sales and marketing strategy of blending, bottling, and selling hand sanitizer into bulk, retail branded, and white label markets. Additionally, Aemetis Health Products, Inc. is developing sales and marketing channels for other personal protective equipment.
North America Revenue
Our revenue development strategy in North America has historically relied on supplying ethanol into the transportation fuel market in Northern California and supplying feed products to dairy and other animal feed operations in Northern California. We are actively seeking higher value markets for our ethanol in an effort to improve our overall margins and to add incremental income to the North America segment, including the development of the Riverbank Cellulosic Ethanol Facility, the expansion of bio-methane digesters at local dairies near the Keyes Plant, and the implementation of the Aemetis Integrated Microgrid System, the Food Emission and Energy Efficiency Delivery Initiative, the Mitsubishi dehydration system and other technologies. We are also actively working with local dairy and feed potential customers to promote the value of our WDG product in an effort to strengthen demand for this product.
On March 18, 2020 the TTB provided waivers allowing ethanol plants to produce high-grade alcohol for use in hand sanitizer. During the first week of April 2020, Aemetis received its permanent permit allowing for sales of fuel ethanol, industrial alcohol and spirits for potable alcohol beyond the waiver period. Accordingly, Aemetis began supplying alcohol as a component of hand sanitizer. During June 2020, Aemetis renamed Biofuels Marketing, Inc. to Aemetis Health Products, Inc., and began a sales and marketing strategy of blending, bottling and selling hand sanitizer into retail branded and white label markets. During the second quarter of 2020, the initial demand for high-grade alcohol as a component of hand sanitizer experienced a significant spike in demand from COVID-19 pandemic due to severe supply shortages, and accordingly, Aemetis was able to produce and supply high volumes of this product. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we produced and sold hand sanitizer to governmental agencies through other customers. With an initial supply shortage mostly addressed, the sale of high-grade alcohol into this market is expected to remain strong through overall market growth and consumer behavioral changes. Market normalization will be dependent on external developments associated with the COVID-19 pandemic; however, management believes qualified producers will continue to see opportunities for ongoing consumer demand beyond the pandemic’s timeframe. As a producer of high-grade alcohol, with plans to increase product quality to USP grade, and with the necessary permits to permanently supply into this market, Aemetis expects to emerge well positioned to produce a high-quality product and develop marketing channels that close the gap between suppliers and end customers. In addition, this allows us to compete in the hand sanitizer market with a high quality product.
During 2020, we produced six products at the Keyes Plant: denatured fuel ethanol, high-grade alcohol for sanitizer, WDG, DCO, CO2, and CDS. During the first quarter of 2020, we started transitioning from selling 100% of the ethanol we produce, pursuant to the J.D. Heiskell Purchase Agreement to a model where 100% of the ethanol is sold directly to Kinergy. The ethanol stored in our finished goods tank is 100% owned by Aemetis. WDG continues to be sold to A.L.Gilbert and DCO is sold to other customer under the J.D. Heiskell Purchase Agreement. Smaller amounts of CDS were sold to various local third parties. We began selling CO2 to Messer in the second quarter of 2020. We began selling high-grade alcohol in March 2020 directly to various customers throughout the West Coast and we also produced and sold Aemetis hand sanitizer under the Aemetis Health Products, Inc. subsidiary in the 4th quarter of 2020. North American revenue is dependent on the price of ethanol, high-grade alcohol, WDG, and DCO.
Ethanol pricing is determined pursuant to a marketing agreement with Kinergy and is generally based on daily and monthly pricing for ethanol delivered to the San Francisco Bay Area, California, as published by Oil Price Information Service, as well as quarterly contracts negotiated by Kinergy with local fuel blenders. The price for WDG is determined monthly pursuant to a marketing agreement with A.L. Gilbert and is generally determined in reference to the local price of dried distillers’ grains and other comparable feed products. North American revenue is dependent on the price of ethanol, high-grade alcohol, WDG, and DCO. Ethanol pricing is influenced by local and national inventory levels, local and national ethanol production, corn prices and gasoline demand. WDG is influenced by the price of corn, the supply and price of distillers dried grains, and demand from the local dairy and feed markets. High-grade alcohol pricing is based on the supply and demand restrictions in the current market. Our revenue is further influenced by our decision to operate the Keyes Plant at various capacity levels, conduct required maintenance, and respond to biological processes affecting output.
In the first half of 2019, our ethanol production was approved for a lower CI score and was awarded additional LCFS credits for the ethanol produced from January 1, 2019 to May 21, 2019. These credits have a market value and they can be sold in the open market. We recorded revenue of $0.3 million and $1.0 million in other sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, in connection with selling such LCFS credits.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell California Carbon Allowances (CCA) and received the cash in advance. We recorded a contract liability of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2020, as control of the credits was not transferred to the customer until January 31, 2021.
India Revenue
Our revenue strategy in India is based on continuing to sell biodiesel to our bulk fuel customers, fuel station customers, mining customers, industrial customers and tender offers placed by Government Oil Marketing Companies for bulk purchases of fuels. In 2019, the Indian government imposed restrictions on imports of biodiesel mixtures, which we expect will positively impact local sales of biodiesel and provide additional opportunities to supply biodiesel for manufacturing purposes and infrastructure companies.
In 2019, under the Indian government mandate of mixing biodiesel with diesel, the Kakinada Plant won the tender to supply biodiesel to Government Oil Marketing Companies such as Hindustan Petroleum, Bharat Petroleum, and Indian Oil Corporation. Under this agreement, we supplied biodiesel beginning in May 2019. In 2020, the tenders were delayed due to COVID-19 situation, and ultimately changed in format to allow for monthly bidding on volumes at a price set by the OMC on an annual basis. The Company plans to participate in these tenders during 2021 when the price of feedstock allows for profitable operation at the OMC set bid price.
North America Segment
Revenue
Substantially all of our North America revenues during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were from sales of ethanol, high-grade alcohol, and WDG. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we produced and sold 55.9 million gallons and 64.7 million gallons of ethanol, 4.4 million gallons and none of high-grade alcohol, and 393 thousand tons and 428 thousand tons of WDG, respectively.
Cost of Goods Sold
Substantially all of our feedstock is procured by J.D. Heiskell pursuant to the Heiskell Supply Agreement. Title to the corn passes to us when the corn is deposited into our weigh bin and entered into the production process. Our cost of feedstock is established by J.D. Heiskell based on the Chicago Board of Trade pricing and includes rail, truck or ship transportation, local basis costs and a handling fee paid to J.D. Heiskell. The credit term of the corn purchased from J.D. Heiskell is one day. Cost of goods sold also includes chemicals, plant overhead and out-bound transportation. Plant overhead includes direct and indirect costs associated with the operation of the Keyes Plant, including the cost of electricity and natural gas, maintenance, insurance, direct labor, depreciation and freight. Transportation includes the costs of in-bound delivery of corn by rail, inbound delivery of grain by ship, rail, and truck, and out-bound shipments of ethanol and WDG by truck.
Sales, Marketing and General Administrative Expenses (SG&A)
SG&A expenses consist of employee compensation, professional services, travel, depreciation, taxes, insurance, rent and utilities, license and permit fees, penalties, and sales and marketing fees. Our single largest expense is employee compensation, including related stock compensation, followed by sales and marketing fees paid in connection with the marketing and sale of ethanol and WDG.
We entered into an exclusive marketing agreement with Kinergy to market and sell our ethanol and we entered into an agreement with A.L. Gilbert in 2011 to market and sell our WDG. The agreements will expire on August 31, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively and automatically renew for additional one-year terms. Pursuant to these agreements, our marketing costs for ethanol and WDG are less than 2% of sales.
Research and Development Expenses (R&D)
In 2020, substantially all of our R&D expenses were related to research and development activities in Minnesota.
India Segment
Revenue
Substantially all of our India segment revenues during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were from sales of biodiesel and refined glycerin. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we sold 16 thousand metric tons of biodiesel and 1.4 thousand metric tons of refined glycerin. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, we sold 47 thousand metric tons of biodiesel and 5.2 thousand metric tons of refined glycerin.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of feedstock oil, chemicals, direct costs (principally labor and labor related costs) and factory overhead. Depending upon the costs of these inputs in comparison to the sales price of biodiesel and glycerin, our gross margins at any given time can vary from positive to negative. Factory overhead includes direct and indirect costs associated with the Kakinada Plant, including the cost of repairs and maintenance, consumables, maintenance, on-site security, insurance, depreciation and inbound freight.
We purchase crude palm stearin, a non-edible feedstock, for our biodiesel unit from neighboring natural oil processing plants at a discount to refined palm oil or import from international market when prices are viable. Raw material is received by truck and title passes when the goods are loaded at our vendors’ facilities. Credit terms vary by vendor. However, we generally receive 15 days of credit on the purchases. We purchase crude glycerin in the international market on letters of credit or advance payment terms.
Sales, Marketing and General Administrative Expenses (SG&A)
SG&A expenses consist of employee compensation, professional services, travel, depreciation, taxes, insurance, rent and utilities, licenses and permits, penalties, and sales and marketing fees. Pursuant to an operating agreement with Gemini, we receive operational support and working capital for our Kakinada Plant. We compensate Gemini with a percentage of the profits generated from operations. Payments of interest are identified as interest expense while payments of profits are identified as compensation for the operational support component of this agreement. We therefore include the portion of profits paid to Gemini as a component of SG&A, which will vary based on the profits earned by operations. In addition, we market our biodiesel and glycerin through our internal sales staff, commissioned agents and brokers. Commissions paid to agents are included as a component of SG&A.
Research and Development Expenses (R&D)
Our India segment has no research and development activities.
Key Performance Indicators (KPI):
Aemetis measures performance primarily on the utilization of its plants and the production of products. For traditional ethanol, the products are ethanol and WDG, measured in millions of gallons sold and tons sold, respectively. For biodiesel production, the products are biodiesel and refined glycerin, both measured in metric tons sold. Since our Keyes Plant uses a single feedstock, the delivered quantity and cost of corn is also used as a key performance indicator for this facility, as it indicates high-level profitability of the plant. Utilization is measured as the production of transportation fuel produced as a percentage of the nameplate capacity, the engineering specification of the plant. Management utilizes these metrics to assess cash generated by each facility on a daily or weekly basis and to make decisions on the appropriate level of operation to balance market demand with plant capabilities and efficiency and allow the investor to understand the major components that comprise revenues within each segment.
The following table summarized our KPIs:
Production and Price Performance
(Unaudited)
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31,
Revenues
Our revenues are derived primarily from sales of ethanol and WDG in North America and biodiesel and refined glycerin in India.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31 (in thousands)
North America. The 3% decrease in revenue was due to a decrease in sales of ethanol and WDG. Gallons of ethanol sold decreased to 55.9 million gallons during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 64.7 million gallons during the year ended December 31, 2019. The average price of ethanol decreased by 11% to $1.57 per gallon during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.77 per gallon during the year month ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to change in demand from COVID-19 shelter-in-place orders that reduced demand of gasoline. This reduction in demand for ethanol was partially offset by our entrance into the high-grade alcohol market in 2020 due to COVID-19 sanitizer alcohol demand. In addition, the sales volume of WDG decreased by 8% to 393 thousand tons during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 428 thousand tons during the year ended December 31, 2019 while the average sales price increased by 1% to $81.49 per ton. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated 59% of our revenues from sales of ethanol, 21% from sales of WDG, 15% from sales of high-grade alcohol, and 5% from sales of corn oil, CDS, and CO2 compared to 74% of our revenues from sales of ethanol, 23% from sales of WDG, and 3% from sales of corn oil and CDS for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, plant production averaged 112% of the 55 million gallon per year nameplate capacity compared to 118% during the year ended December 31, 2019.
India. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated 87% of our sales from biodiesel, and 8% of our sales from refined glycerin, and 5% from other sales compared to 89% of our sales from biodiesel, 6% of our sales from refined glycerin, and 5% from other sales for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in revenues was due to delays in the government tender contracts bidding and general slowness of sales due to COVID-19 in 2020, resulting in a decrease in biodiesel volumes by 66% to 15,987 metric tons during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 46,971 metric tons during the year ended December 31, 2019. The average price of biodiesel decreased to $863 per metric ton during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $904 per metric during the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, the refined glycerin volumes decreased by 72% to 1,440 metric tons during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 5,173 metric tons during the year ended December 31, 2019 while the average price increased by 50% to $814 per metric ton during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $543 per metric ton in the same period in 2019.
Cost of Goods Sold
Fiscal Year Ended December 31 (in thousands)
North America. We ground 21.1 million bushels of corn at an average price of $5.05 per bushel during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 22.7 million bushels of corn at an average price of $5.28 per bushel during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in volume was due to reducing production levels to allow the plant to effectively produce high grade alcohol while recognizing the lower price in the market for traditional ethanol as a result of lower consumer consumption of gasoline during the shelter-in-place orders.
India. The decrease in cost of goods sold reflects the 67% decrease in sales for 2020. The volume of crude palm stearin used for biodiesel during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 64% to 15.1 thousand metric tons while the cost of crude palm stearin for biodiesel decreased by an average of 8% to $630 per metric ton compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The average price of crude glycerin increased by 3% to $515 per metric ton while the volume decreased by 66% to 1.6 thousand metric tons compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross Profit
Fiscal Year Ended December 31 (in thousands)
North America. Gross profit increased by 138% in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to entering the high-grade alcohol market as high grade alcohol sells at a higher average price than ethanol coupled with the decreased price of corn. This was partially offset by lower volumes of sold of ethanol and WDG in the year ended December 31, 2020.
India. The decrease in gross profit was attributable to decrease in the sales volume of biodiesel of 66% to 15,987 metric tons and refined glycerin metric tons of 72% to 1,440 metric tons.
Operating Expenses
Research & Development (R&D)
Fiscal Year Ended December 31 (in thousands)
There was no significant change in R&D expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling, General & Administrative (SG&A)
Fiscal Year Ended December 31 (in thousands)
SG&A expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for employees, marketing expenses related to sales of ethanol and WDG in North America and biodiesel and other products in India, as well as professional fees, other corporate expenses, and related facilities expenses.
North America. SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to 10% as compared to 9% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in overall SG&A expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to increases in salaries and wages of $412 thousand, unpaid propery taxes penalties of $573 thousand; and bad debt expense of $1.3 million. This was partially offset by a decrease in professional fees of $863 thousand compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
India. SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to 11% compared to 9% for the years ended December 31, 2019. The overall decrease was due to decreases in operating support charges of $2.1 million, office maintenance of $244 thousand, rent and utilities of $272 thousand, and miscellaneous expenses of $97 thousand partially offset by an increase in professional fees of $236 thousand and exempt labor of $71 thousand.
Other (Income)/Expense
Fiscal Year Ended December 31 (in thousands)
Other (income) expense consists primarily of interest and amortization expense attributable to our debt facilities and those of our subsidiaries and accretion of our Series A preferred units. The debt facilities include stock or warrants issued as fees. The fair value of stock and warrants are amortized as amortization expense, except when the extinguishment accounting method is applied, in which case refinanced debt costs are recorded as extinguishment expense.
North America. Interest rate expense was higher during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in principal and interest on our senior notes and subordinated notes. The decrease in amortization expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to amortization of fees added during prior periods and reduction in extension fees added compared to the same period in 2019. Increase in accretion on Series A Preferred Units was due to issuance of additional units, partially offset by capitalized interest. Guarantee fees of $0.6 million were added during the year ended December 31, 2020.
India. Interest rate expense decreased due to accruing on only one working capital line while the other line was treated as feedstock provider for working capital without interest accrual during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other income of $0.8 million was caused primarily by release of long-standing accounts payable and interest on these payables as matters closed legally during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents were $0.6 million at December 31, 2020, of which $0.6 million was held in our North American entities and $39 thousand was held in our Indian subsidiary. Our current ratio was 0.08 and 0.22, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 2019. We expect that our future available liquidity resources will consist primarily of cash generated from operations, remaining cash balances, borrowings available, if any, under our senior debt facilities and our subordinated debt facilities, and any additional funds raised through sales of equity. The use of proceeds from all equity raises and debt financings are subject to approval by our senior lender.
Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents, current assets, current liabilities and debt at the end of each period were as follows (in thousands):
Our principal sources of liquidity have been cash provided by operations and borrowings under various debt arrangements. In the third quarter of 2020, $0.5 million from one investor was released to the Company from the EB-5 escrow account, which completed the funding of Phase I under this program.
We launched an EB-5 Phase II funding in 2016, under which we expect to issue $50.8 million in additional EB-5 Notes on substantially similar terms and conditions as those issued under our EB-5 Phase I funding. On November 21, 2019, the minimum investment amount was raised from $500,000 per investor to $900,000 per investor. As of December 31, 2020, EB-5 Phase II funding in the amount of $4.0 million had been released from escrow to the Company. Our principal uses of cash have been to refinance indebtedness, fund operations, and for capital expenditures. We anticipate these uses will continue to be our principal uses of cash in the future. Global financial and credit markets have been volatile in recent years, and future adverse conditions of these markets could negatively affect our ability to secure funds or raise capital at a reasonable cost, or at all.
We operate in a volatile market in which we have limited control over the major components of input costs and product revenues, and are making investments in future facilities and facility upgrades that improve the overall margin while lessening the impact of these volatile markets. As such, we expect cash provided by operating activities to fluctuate in future periods primarily because of changes in the prices for corn, ethanol, WDG, DCO, CDS, biodiesel, waste fats and oils, glycerin, non-refined palm oil and natural gas. To the extent that we experience periods in which the spread between ethanol prices, and corn and energy costs narrow or the spread between biodiesel prices and waste fats and oils or palm oil and energy costs narrow, we may require additional working capital to fund operations.
The operations in India and the Biogas project are isolated and stand on their own with regards to cash flow and ongoing funding, principally due to the separate financing facility for Aemetis Biogas LLC and positive cash flow from our India operations. Substantial doubt about the remaining operations is mitigated by a Reserve Credit Facility in the amount of $70 million from our senior lender to fund non-subordinated liabilities as they come due and other needed cash flows for a period greater than twelve months from the financial statement issuance date. Further, waivers were obtained from our senior lender for certain covenants for a period that is greater than twelve months which prevents the long-term debt from becoming current and assists us in remaining compliant with our debt covenants.
Management believes between a combination of having the available funding under the Reserve Credit Facility described in Note 16, as well as our amendments with our senior lender to keep the long-term debt from becoming due in the next twelve months, we will have the funding necessary to alleviate the going concern. Additionally, management believes the following items will provide added liquidity.
For the Keyes plant, we plan to operate the plant and continue to improve financial performance by adopting new technologies or process changes that allow for energy efficiency, cost reduction or revenue enhancements, execute upon awarded grants that improve energy and operational efficiencies resulting in lower cost, lower carbon demands and overall margin improvement. We will continue to expand in markets for high-grade alcohol by extending the value chain to allow for higher margin sales to consumers.
For the biogas project, we plan to operate the biogas digesters to capture and monetize biogas as well as continue to build new dairy digesters and extend the existing pipeline in order to capture the higher carbon credits available in California. Funding for continued construction is based upon extending the existing Preferred Unit Purchase Agreement, obtaining government guaranteed loans and executing on existing and new state grant programs.
For the Riverbank project, we plan to raise the funds necessary to construct and operate the Carbon Zero 1 plant and the Riverbank Cellulosic Ethanol Facility using loan guarantees and public financings based upon the licensed technology that generate federal and state carbon credits available for ultra-low carbon fuels utilizing lower cost, non-food advanced feedstocks to significantly increase margins.
For the India plant, we plan to secure higher volumes of shipments of fuels at the India plant by developing the sales channels and expanding the existing domestic markets.
In addition to the above we plan to continue to locate funding for existing and new business opportunities through a combination of working with our senior lender, restructuring existing loan agreements, selling equity through the ATM and otherwise, selling the current EB-5 Phase II offering, or by vendor financing arrangements.
At December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance of principal, interest and fees, net of discounts, on all Third Eye Capital Notes equaled $160.7 million including the GAFI debt. The current maturity date for all of the Third Eye Capital financing arrangements, except the GAFI financing arrangements, is April 1, 2021; provided, however, that pursuant to Amendment No. 19, we exercised the right to extend the maturity date of the Third Eye Capital Notes to April 1, 2022 and payment of a 1% extension fee, half of which can be paid in cash or common stock and the other half can be added to senior debt. The current maturity date for all of the Third Eye Capital GAFI financing arrangements is July 10, 2021. GAFI intends to repay its Third Eye Capital Notes obligations through a combination of the proceeds from the sale of the underlying property and by debt and equity offerings by an Aemetis subsidiary. We intend to repay the rest of the Third Eye Capital Notes through operational cash flow, proceeds from the issuance of the EB-5 Notes and/or a senior debt refinancing and/or an equity financing.
As of the date of this report, the Company has $70.0 million additional borrowing capacity to fund future cash flow requirements under the Reserve Liquidity Notes due on April 1, 2022.
Our senior lender has provided a series of accommodating amendments to the existing and previous loan facilities as described in further detail in Note 4. Debt of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K.
We also rely on our working capital lines with Gemini and Secunderabad Oils in India to fund our commercial arrangements for the acquisitions of feedstock. We currently provide our own working capital for the Keyes Plant; Gemini and Secunderabad Oils currently provides us with working capital for the Kakinada Plant. The ability of Gemini, and Secunderabad Oils to continue to provide us with working capital depends in part on both of their respective financial strength and banking relationships.
Change in Working Capital and Cash Flows
The below table (in thousands) describes the changes in current and long-term debt during the year ended December 31, 2020:
Working capital changes resulted in (i) a $0.2 million decrease in accounts receivable due to increases in alcohol sales in North America which caused the receivable balance to increase by $0.4 million, offset by a decrease of $0.6 million in India operations, $2.5 million decrease in inventories due to increases of $0.5 million in North America finished goods due to an amendment to the J.D. Heiskell Purchasing Agreement, and a $0.7 million increase in North America raw materials inventory offset by decreases of $0.2 million in North America work in process inventory and a $3.5 million decrease in India operational inventory, and (iii) a $1.0 million decrease in other current assets consisting of a $0.2 million increase in North America entities and a $1.2 million decrease from India operations.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.5 million, consisting of non-cash charges of $14.3 million, net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $24.9 million and net loss of $36.7 million. The non-cash charges consisted of: (i) $3.4 million in debt related fees and other amortization, (ii) $4.9 million in depreciation expenses, (iii) $1.0 million in stock-based compensation expense, (iv) a decrease of $1.0 million of deferred tax benefit, (v) $4.7 million in preferred unit accretion, and (vi) $1.3 million in provision for bad debts. Net changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of an increase in accounts receivable of $1.1 million offset by: (i) a decrease in other assets of $0.3million, (ii) a $2.4 million decrease in inventories, (iii) a $1.4 million increase in accounts payable, (iv) a $44 thousand decrease in prepaid expenses, (v) a $0.1 million increase in other liabilities and (vi) a $21.7 million increase in accrued interest.
Cash used by investing activities consisted of capital expenditures of $17.9 million from U.S. operations and capital expenditures of $1.4 million from our India operations, partially offset by an increase in cash from grant proceeds received for capital expenditures of $2.0 Million.
Cash provided by financing activities was $14.8 million, consisting primarily of $13.8 million received from the Series A Preferred Unit issuance, $5.1 million from the issuance of common stock in an equity offering, $1.7 million received from Third Eye Capital promissory note, $1.1 million received from PPP Loans, $0.5 million from EB-5 Phase I investors, $0.3 million for issuance of stock to option holders, and $0.3 from grant proceeds received for capital expenditures, and $9.2 million from working capital partners in India for their operations, partially offset by payments of $11.8 million in principal to working capital partners in India for their operations, $3.1 million on Third Eye Capital promissory note, $0.4 million on Third Eye Capital renewal and waiver fees, $0.5 million on GAFI Third Eye Capital notes, and $1.5 million payments on finance lease assets.
In October 2020, we commenced an at-the-market offering program, which allows us to sell and issue shares of our common stock from time-to-time. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 1,506,518 shares of common stock under the at-the-market offering program for net proceeds of $5.1 million net of commissions and offering related expenses. As of December 31, 2020, we had capacity to issue up to $10.6 million of common stock under the at-the-market offering program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no outstanding off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses for each period. The following represents a summary of our critical accounting policies, defined as those policies that we believe are the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued new guidance on the recognition of revenue. The guidance stated that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The standard was effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that reporting period. In March and April 2016, the FASB issued further revenue recognition guidance amending principal versus agent considerations regarding whether an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. The Company adopted this guidance on January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective approach. There was no cumulative impact to retained earnings. We assessed all of our revenue streams to identify any differences in the timing, measurement or presentation of revenue recognition.
Revenue Recognition. We derive revenue primarily from sales of ethanol, high-grade alcohol and related co-products in North America, and biodiesel and refined glycerin in India pursuant to supply agreements and purchase order contracts. We assessed the following criteria under the ASC 606 guidance: (i) identify the contracts with customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognize revenue when the entity satisfies the performance obligations.
We have elected to adopt the practical expedient that allows for ignoring the significant financing component of a contract when estimating the transaction price when the transfer of promised goods to the customer and customer payment for such goods are expected to be within one year of contract inception. Further, we have elected to adopt the practical expedient in which incremental costs of obtaining a contract are expensed when the amortization period would otherwise be less than one year.
North America: In North America, until May 13, 2020, we sold all our ethanol to J.D. Heiskell & Co. (“J.D. Heiskell”) under the Working Capital and Purchasing Agreement (the “J.D. Heiskell Purchasing Agreement”). On May 13, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Corn Procurement and Working Capital Agreement with J.D. Heiskell (the “Corn Procurement and Working Capital”), under the terms of which we will buy all corn from J.D. Heiskell and sell all WDG and corn oil we produce to J.D. Heiskell. Following May 13, 2020, we sold the majority of our fuel ethanol production to one customer, Kinergy Marketing, LLC (“Kinergy”), with whom we have an Ethanol Marketing Agreement to market ethanol. Kinergy agreed to purchase ethanol from us after we terminated the contract with J.D. Heiskell. The performance obligation is satisfied by delivery of the physical product to one of Kinergy’s contracted trucking companies. Upon delivery, the customer has the ability to direct the use of the product and receive substantially all of its benefits. The transaction price is determined based on daily market prices negotiated by Kinergy for ethanol and by our marketing partner A.L. Gilbert Company (“A.L. Gilbert”) for WDG. There is no transaction price allocation needed.
During the first quarter of 2020, Aemetis began selling high-grade alcohol for consumer applications directly to customers on the West Coast and Midwest using a variety of payment terms. These agreements and terms were evaluated according to ASC 606 guidance and such revenue is recognized upon satisfaction of the performance obligation by delivery of the product based on the terms of the agreement. Sales of high-grade alcohol represented 15% revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The below table shows our sales in North America by product category:
We also assessed principal versus agent criteria as we buy our feedstock from our customers and process and sell finished goods to those customers in some contractual agreements.
In North America, we assessed principal versus agent criteria as we buy corn as feedstock in producing ethanol from our working capital partner J.D. Heiskell and sell all WDG and corn oil produced in this process to J.D. Heiskell through A.L. Gilbert. We sold all ethanol we produced to J.D.Heiskell until May 13, 2020. We consider the purchase of corn as a cost of goods sold and the sale of ethanol upon transfer to the common carrier as revenue on the basis that (i) we control and bear the risk of gain or loss on the processing of corn which is purchased at market prices into ethanol and (ii) we have legal title to the goods during the processing time. The pricing for both corn and ethanol is set independently. Revenues from sales of ethanol and its co-products are billed net of the related transportation and marketing charges. Transportation charges are accounted for in cost of goods sold and marketing charges are accounted for in sales, general and administrative expense. Transportation and marketing charges are known within days of the transaction and are recorded at the actual amounts. The Company has elected to adopt an accounting policy under which these charges have been treated as fulfillment activities provided after control has transferred. As a result, these charges are recognized in cost of goods sold and selling, general and administrative expenses, respectively, when revenue is recognized. Revenues are recorded at the gross invoiced amount. Hence, we are the principal in North America sales scenarios where our customer and vendor may be the same.
India: In India, we sell products pursuant to purchase orders (written or verbal) or by contract with governmental or international parties, in which performance is satisfied by delivery and acceptance of the physical product. Given that the contracts are sufficiently similar in nature, we have assessed these contracts as a portfolio of similar contracts as allowed under the practical expedient. Doing so does not result in a materially different outcome compared to individually accounting for each contract. All domestic and international deliveries are subject to certain specifications as identified in contracts. The transaction price is determined daily based on reference market prices for biodiesel, refined glycerin, and Palm Fatty Acid Distillers (“PFAD”) net of taxes. There is no transaction price allocation needed.
The below table shows our sales in India by product category:
In India, we also assessed principal versus agent criteria as we buy our feedstock from our customers and process and sell finished goods to those same customers in certain contractual agreements. In those cases, we receive the legal title to feedstock from our customers once it is on our premises. We control the processing and production of biodiesel based on contract terms and specifications. The pricing for both feedstock and biodiesel is set independently. We hold the title and risk to biodiesel according to agreements we enter into in these situations. Hence, we are the principal in India sales scenarios where our customer and vendor may be the same.
Recoverability of Our Long-Lived Assets
Property and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation after assets are placed in service and are comprised primarily of buildings, furniture, machinery, equipment, land, and plants in North America and India. When property, plant and equipment are acquired as part of an acquisition, the items are recorded at fair value on the purchase date. It is our policy to depreciate capital assets over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist of property, plant and equipment. We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable. We measure recoverability of assets to be held and used by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, we record an impairment charge in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
The impairment test for long-lived assets requires us to make estimates regarding amount and timing of projected cash flows to be generated by an asset or asset group over an extended period of time. Management judgment regarding the existence of circumstances that indicate impairment is based on numerous potential factors including, but not limited to, a decline in our future projected cash flows, a decision to suspend operations at a plant for an extended period of time, adoption of our product by the market, a sustained decline in our market capitalization, a sustained decline in market prices for similar assets or businesses, or a significant adverse change in legal or regulatory factors or the business climate. Significant management judgment is required in determining the fair value of our long-lived assets to measure impairment, including projections of future cash flows. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. Changes in estimates of fair value could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
Our subsidiaries, Aemetis Advanced Fuels Keyes, which operates our ethanol production machinery and equipment, and Aemetis Biogas, which operates our biodigesters and pipeline, form the Keyes Plant asset group. UBPL, which operates our Kakinada Plant, form the India Plant asset group. Goodland Advanced Fuels, which consists of a partially completed dry-mill forms our GAFI asset group. These asset groups represent our significant long-lived assets. Both plants were operated efficiently and no asset groups showed indicators of impairment, therefore no impairment test was needed for our Company’s long-lived assets.
Testing for Debt Modification or Extinguishment Accounting
During 2020 and 2019, we evaluated amendments to our debt under ASC 470-60 for Troubled Debt Restructuring and under ASC 470-50 guidance for modification and extinguishment accounting. The evaluation for troubled debt restructuring includes assessing whether the creditor granted a concession. To determine this, we calculate the post-restructuring effective interest rate by projecting cash flows on the new terms and calculating a discount rate equal to the carrying amount of pre-restructuring debt, and compare this calculation to the terms of prior amendments. If the post restructuring effective interest rate is less than the prior terms effective interest rate, we assess this as having been granted a concession. We then apply troubled debt restructuring accounting to any debt in which the creditor granted a concession. If we assess as not a troubled debt restructuring we then evaluate for modification and extinguishment. This includes comparing the net present value of cash flows of the new debt to the old debt to determine if changes greater than 10 percent occurred. In instances where our future cash flows change more than 10 percent, we record our debt at fair value based on factors available to us for similar borrowings and use the extinguishment accounting method to account for the debt extinguishment.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 of the Financial Statements for a description of new accounting pronouncements.