ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Part I, including matters set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K, and our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K includes discussion of year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion of year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Except to the extent that differences among reportable segments are material to an understanding of our business taken as a whole, we present the discussion in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on a consolidated basis.
Overview
AutoNation, Inc., through its subsidiaries, is the largest automotive retailer in the United States. As of December 31, 2020, we owned and operated 315 new vehicle franchises from 230 stores located in the United States, predominantly in major metropolitan markets in the Sunbelt region. Our stores, which we believe include some of the most recognizable and well known in our key markets, sell 32 different new vehicle brands. The core brands of new vehicles that we sell, representing approximately 89% of the new vehicles that we sold in 2020, are manufactured by Toyota (including Lexus), Honda, Ford, General Motors, FCA US, Mercedes-Benz, BMW, and Volkswagen (including Audi and Porsche). As of December 31, 2020, we also owned and operated 74 AutoNation-branded collision centers, 5 AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, 4 AutoNation-branded automotive auction operations, and 3 parts distribution centers.
We offer a diversified range of automotive products and services, including new vehicles, used vehicles, “parts and service” (also referred to as “Customer Care”), which includes automotive repair and maintenance services as well as wholesale parts and collision businesses, and automotive “finance and insurance” products (also referred to as “Customer Financial Services”), which include vehicle service and other protection products, as well as the arranging of financing for vehicle purchases through third-party finance sources.
As of December 31, 2020, we had three reportable segments: Domestic, Import, and Premium Luxury. Our Domestic segment is comprised of retail automotive franchises that sell new vehicles manufactured by General Motors, Ford, and FCA US. Our Import segment is comprised of retail automotive franchises that sell new vehicles manufactured primarily by Toyota, Honda, Subaru, and Nissan. Our Premium Luxury segment is comprised of retail automotive franchises that sell new vehicles manufactured primarily by Mercedes-Benz, BMW, Audi, Lexus, and Jaguar Land Rover. The franchises in each segment also sell used vehicles, parts and automotive repair and maintenance services, and automotive finance and insurance products.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, new vehicle sales accounted for 51% of our total revenue and 16% of our total gross profit. Used vehicle sales accounted for 27% of our total revenue and 13% of our total gross profit. Our parts and service operations, while comprising 16% of our total revenue, contributed 41% of our total gross profit. Our finance and insurance sales, while comprising 5% of our total revenue, contributed 30% of our total gross profit.
Market Conditions
Full-year U.S. industry new vehicle unit sales were 14.6 million in 2020, as compared to 17.0 million in 2019 and 17.3 million in 2018. We currently expect that the annual rate of U.S. new vehicle unit sales will approach 16 million units in 2021. However, actual sales may materially differ. New vehicle unit volume has been impacted by reduced availability of inventory due to inventory shortages from manufacturer plant closures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that new vehicle inventory shortages will continue into 2021. Compared to the prior year, full-year U.S. industry used vehicle unit sales in 2020 decreased 7.0% and our full year used vehicle unit sales decreased 2.0%. During the second half of 2020, both industry and our used vehicle unit volume increased compared to the same period in the prior year. Market demand for used vehicles has increased due in part to increased affordability compared to new vehicles and decreased availability of new vehicles. The tight supply of new vehicle inventory and increased demand for used vehicles benefited new and used vehicle margins in 2020. While vehicle unit volume and parts and service volume improved during the second half of 2020, continued elevated levels of COVID-19 cases in the United States, and particularly in states where we
have a significant presence, could lead to additional governmental orders and other market disrupting impacts that could materially adversely impact our business. Additionally, any adverse economic impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including any potential economic recessions or downturns, could materially adversely impact our business in future periods.
Results of Operations
We had net income from continuing operations of $381.8 million and diluted earnings per share of $4.30 in 2020, as compared to net income from continuing operations of $450.8 million and diluted earnings per share of $4.98 in 2019.
Our total gross profit increased 1% during 2020, driven primarily by increases in new vehicle and used vehicle gross profit of 16% and 25%, respectively, partially offset by a decrease in our parts and service gross profit of 10%, each as compared to 2019. New and used vehicle gross profit benefited from an increase in gross profit per vehicle retailed (“PVR”) resulting from the tight supply of new vehicle inventory and increased demand for used vehicles, respectively, partially offset by a decrease in unit volume. Parts and service gross profit was adversely impacted by a decrease in parts and service volume that has been slow to recover from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Floorplan interest expense decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year as it benefited from the tight supply of new vehicle inventory, as well as several Federal Reserve interest rate reductions made in late 2019 and early 2020.
We implemented various actions during the year to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including temporarily placing associates on unpaid leave, implementing temporary base pay reductions for our executive officers and associates, temporarily freezing corporate new hiring, reducing our advertising expenses by approximately 14% for 2020, as compared to the prior year, significantly reducing our discretionary spending, and postponing over $130 million of capital expenditures. We also adjusted our sales model to further focus on digital and store efficiencies, and in June 2020, we restructured our workforce, mostly in our field operations. As a result, SG&A expenses as a percentage of gross profit decreased to 67.9% during 2020, from 72.6% in 2019.
During 2020, net income from continuing operations was adversely impacted by non-cash after-tax goodwill and franchise rights impairment charges totaling $308.4 million and after-tax charges incurred in connection with the closure of our aftermarket collision parts (“ACP”) business of $27.8 million. Net income from continuing operations during 2020 benefited from an after-tax gain related to our minority equity investment in Vroom Inc. of $97.5 million due to gains realized on sales of Vroom shares as well as a change in the fair value of the remaining shares held as of December 31, 2020. During 2019, net income from continuing operations benefited from net after-tax gains related to store/property divestitures of $34.4 million and after-tax gains related to legal settlements of $5.7 million.
Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations
On August 17, 2020, we made the decision to close our ACP business, which was finalized as of December 31, 2020. The ACP business represented less than 1% of our parts and service gross profit in 2020. In connection with the closing of the ACP business, we incurred total pre-tax charges of $36.7 million during 2020. The charges are comprised of inventory valuation adjustments, contract termination charges, accelerated depreciation and amortization, asset impairment charges, involuntary termination benefits, and other associated closing costs. See Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Strategic Initiatives
We plan to expand our AutoNation USA used vehicle stores by building over 100 stores with approximately 50 stores completed by the end of 2025. We anticipate that our capital investments for these 50 stores will exceed $500 million in the aggregate. The planned roll-out may be impacted by a number of variables, including customer adoption, market conditions, availability of used vehicle inventory, and our ability to identify, acquire, and build out suitable locations in a timely manner.
Inventory Management
Our new and used vehicle inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We monitor our vehicle inventory levels based on current economic conditions and seasonal sales trends.
We have typically not experienced significant losses on the sale of new vehicle inventory, in part due to incentives provided by manufacturers to promote sales of new vehicles and our inventory management practices. We monitor our new vehicle inventory values as compared to net realizable values, and had no new vehicle inventory write-downs at December 31, 2020 or 2019. We continue to actively manage inventory levels in response to impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.
We recondition the majority of used vehicles acquired for retail sale in our parts and service departments and capitalize the related costs to the used vehicle inventory. We monitor our used vehicle inventory values as compared to net realizable values. Typically, used vehicles that are not sold on a retail basis are sold at wholesale auctions. Our used vehicle inventory balance was net of cumulative write-downs of $3.4 million at December 31, 2020, and $3.2 million at December 31, 2019.
Parts, accessories, and other inventory are carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We estimate the amount of potentially damaged and/or obsolete inventory based upon historical experience, manufacturer return policies, and industry trends. Our parts, accessories, and other inventory balance was net of cumulative write-downs of $6.5 million at December 31, 2020, and $11.1 million at December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis and we base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable. Actual outcomes could differ materially from those estimates in a manner that could have a material effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements. Set forth below are the accounting estimates that we have identified as critical to our business operations and an understanding of our results of operations, based on the high degree of judgment or complexity in their application. See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of other significant accounting policies.
Goodwill
Goodwill for our reporting units is tested for impairment annually on April 30 or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value.
During the first quarter of 2020, in light of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and the decrease in our market capitalization as of March 31, 2020, we concluded that a triggering event had occurred potentially indicating that the fair values of our reporting units were less than their carrying values as of March 31, 2020. Therefore, we performed quantitative goodwill impairment tests for each of our reporting units as of March 31, 2020. As a result of these impairment tests, during the three months ended March 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges totaling $318.3 million, of which $257.4 million related to our Premium Luxury reporting unit, $41.6 million related to our Collision Centers reporting unit, and $19.3 million related to our Parts Centers reporting unit. The non-cash impairment charges are reflected as Goodwill Impairment in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income. The quantitative goodwill impairment test is dependent on many variables used to determine the fair value of our reporting units. See Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on how the fair values and carrying values of our reporting units are derived for the quantitative goodwill impairment test. This process also requires that we reconcile the estimated aggregate fair values of our reporting units to our market capitalization, including consideration of a control premium, based upon our stock price and/or average stock price over a reasonable period as of the measurement date.
As a result of the quantitative goodwill impairment tests, goodwill associated with our Premium Luxury reporting unit was partially impaired and goodwill associated with our Collision Centers and Parts Centers reporting units was fully impaired. The fair values of our Domestic and Import reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying values. Therefore, the most significant impact of a change in the assumptions used in determining our goodwill impairment as of March 31, 2020, was related to our Premium Luxury reporting unit. As noted above, the goodwill impairment testing process requires the estimated aggregate fair values of our reporting units to be reconciled with our market capitalization, including consideration of a control premium, based upon our stock price and/or average stock price over a reasonable period as of the measurement date. The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant adverse impact on the U.S. stock market during the first quarter of 2020, and our closing stock price declined significantly as of March 31, 2020. As a result, as of
March 31, 2020, our market capitalization and, therefore, the estimated fair values of our reporting units, significantly decreased. As a measure of sensitivity, a 50 basis point increase in the discount rate would have resulted in an increase to the goodwill impairment charge of approximately $100 million. This result and discussion is not intended to address all potential outcomes that could have resulted if different assumptions had been used in determining our goodwill impairment given the number of assumptions used in determining the impairment and the degree of sensitivity to changes in such assumptions in the determination of the fair value of the Company and its assets and liabilities. We would have been in compliance with the financial covenants in our debt agreements even if we had impaired all of the goodwill associated with all of our reporting units as such charges do not factor into the calculations for those covenants.
For our April 30, 2020 annual impairment test, we chose to make a qualitative evaluation about the likelihood of goodwill impairment, and we determined that it was not more likely than not that the fair values of our reporting units were less than their carrying amounts.
As of December 31, 2020, we have $227.2 million of goodwill related to the Domestic reporting unit, $500.6 million related to the Import reporting unit, and $457.2 million related to the Premium Luxury reporting unit.
Other Intangible Assets
Our principal identifiable intangible assets are individual store rights under franchise agreements with vehicle manufacturers, which have indefinite lives and are tested for impairment annually on April 30 or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. During the first quarter of 2020, we concluded that, as a result of the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, a triggering event had occurred that indicated the fair values of our franchise rights may have been less than their carrying values as of March 31, 2020. We performed quantitative impairment tests as of March 31, 2020, and as a result, we identified eight stores with franchise rights carrying values that exceeded their estimated fair values, and we recorded non-cash franchise rights impairment charges of $57.5 million during the first quarter of 2020. The non-cash impairment charges are reflected as Franchise Rights Impairment in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income.
For our April 30, 2020 annual impairment test, we elected to perform quantitative franchise rights impairment tests, and no additional impairment charges resulted from these quantitative tests. We identified seven stores that, while they each had franchise rights fair value in excess of or equal to carrying value, had lower relative performance compared to our total store population. We will continue to monitor these stores, as well as all stores, for events or changes in circumstances that may indicate potential impairment. The remainder of our stores had franchise rights with calculated fair values that substantially exceeded their carrying values. As of December 31, 2020, we had 56 stores with franchise rights totaling $509.0 million.
The quantitative franchise rights impairment test is dependent on many variables used to determine the fair value of each store’s franchise rights. See Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the valuation method and related estimates and assumptions used in our quantitative impairment testing. If the fair value of each of our franchise rights had been determined to be a hypothetical 10% lower as of the valuation date of April 30, 2020, the resulting incremental charge would have been less than $1 million. The effect of a hypothetical 10% decrease in fair value estimates is not intended to provide a sensitivity analysis of every potential outcome.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Although economic conditions have improved during the second half of 2020, we cannot predict the duration or scope of the COVID-19 pandemic. Negative financial impacts on our financial results and performance could be material in future periods. A change in the conditions, circumstances, or strategy, which influence determinations of fair value, including negative or declining cash flows or a decline in actual or planned revenues for our stores for a prolonged period, and, as it relates to goodwill, a significant decrease in our market capitalization or profitability, may result in a need to recognize additional goodwill and/or franchise rights impairment charges in the future.
Reported Operating Data
Same Store Operating Data
We have presented below our operating results on a same store basis to reflect our internal performance. The “Same Store” amounts presented below include the results of our stores for the identical months in each period presented in the comparison, commencing with the first full month in which the store was owned by us. Results from divested stores are excluded from both current and prior periods. Therefore, the amounts presented in the year 2019 column that is being compared to the year 2020 column may differ from the amounts presented in the year 2019 column that is being compared to the year 2018 column. We believe the presentation of this information provides a meaningful comparison of period-over-period results of our operations.
New Vehicle
The following discussion of new vehicle results is on a same store basis. The difference between reported amounts and same store amounts in the above tables of $4.3 million, $120.0 million, and $384.8 million in new vehicle revenue and $0.3 million, $1.8 million, and $9.2 million in new vehicle gross profit for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, is related to acquisition and divestiture activity, as well as new add-point openings, as applicable in a given year.
2020 compared to 2019
Same store new vehicle revenue decreased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due to a decrease in same store unit volume, partially offset by an increase in same store revenue PVR. The decrease in same store unit volume was primarily due to significant declines in new vehicle unit sales, particularly during the last two weeks of March 2020 through April 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Same store unit volume was also adversely impacted by reduced availability of inventory due to inventory shortages from manufacturer plant closures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, same store unit volume was adversely impacted by a shift in mix to used vehicles. Our used-to-new vehicle unit sales ratio increased to 96.6% in 2020, as compared to 86.9% in 2019.
Same store revenue PVR increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due in part to reduced availability of inventory and a continued shift in mix toward trucks and sport utility vehicles, which have relatively higher average selling prices. The shift in mix toward trucks and sports utility vehicles is due to a combination of improved vehicle fuel efficiency, relatively low average fuel prices, and changing consumer preference. Same store revenue PVR also benefited from a shift in mix away from Import vehicles, which have relatively lower average selling prices, as well as an increase in the manufacturers’ suggested retail prices for Premium Luxury vehicles.
Same store gross profit PVR increased during 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to increases in gross profit PVR as a result of the tighter supply in new vehicle inventory. Same store gross profit also benefited from increased manufacturer support in the form of incentives, particularly in the first half of 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net New Vehicle Inventory Carrying Benefit (Cost)
The following table details net new vehicle inventory carrying benefit (cost), consisting of new vehicle floorplan interest expense net of floorplan assistance earned (amounts received from manufacturers specifically to support store financing of new vehicle inventory). Floorplan assistance is accounted for as a component of new vehicle gross profit in accordance with GAAP.
2020 compared to 2019
We had a net new vehicle inventory carrying benefit in 2020 and a net new vehicle inventory carrying cost in 2019. Floorplan interest expense decreased due to lower average interest rates and lower average floorplan balances. Floorplan interest rates are variable and, therefore, increase and decrease with changes in the underlying benchmark interest rates. The Federal Reserve reduced interest rates three times over the third and fourth quarters of 2019, and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve further reduced interest rates to near 0% in March 2020. Floorplan assistance decreased due to lower new vehicle unit sales, partially offset by an increase in the average floorplan assistance rate per unit.
Used Vehicle
The following discussion of used vehicle results is on a same store basis. The difference between reported amounts and same store amounts in the above tables of $2.9 million, $63.7 million, and $158.3 million in retail used vehicle revenue and $0.2 million, $2.3 million, and $7.4 million in retail used vehicle gross profit for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, is related to acquisition and divestiture activity, as well as the opening of new add-points, AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, and automotive auctions, as applicable in a given year.
2020 compared to 2019
Same store retail used vehicle revenue increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due to an increase in same store revenue PVR, partially offset by a decrease in same store unit volume. The decrease in same store unit volume was due to significant declines in used retail vehicle unit sales during the last two weeks of March 2020 through April 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These declines were partially offset by an increase in relative market demand for used vehicles as compared to new vehicles, due in part to decreased availability of new vehicles due to lower inventory levels, increased affordability compared to new vehicles, and reduced disparity between used vehicles and new vehicles as used vehicles continue to have a wider availability of in-demand technology features. Our used-to-new vehicle unit sales ratio increased to 96.6% in 2020, as compared to 86.9% in 2019.
Same store revenue PVR increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due in part to an increase in market demand for used vehicles and a strong used vehicle pricing environment. Same store revenue PVR also benefited from a shift in mix toward Premium Luxury vehicles, which have relatively higher average selling prices.
Same store gross profit PVR increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due to increases in gross profit PVR for vehicles in all three reportable segments as a result of increased demand for used vehicles and a strong used vehicle pricing environment. In addition, gross profit PVR benefited from a shift in mix to used vehicles acquired through our “We’ll Buy Your Car” program, which have a relatively higher average gross profit PVR.
Parts & Service
Parts and service revenue is primarily derived from vehicle repairs paid directly by customers or via reimbursement from manufacturers and others under warranty programs, as well as from wholesale parts sales, collision services, and the preparation of vehicles for sale.
The following discussion of parts and service is on a same store basis. The difference between reported amounts and same store amounts in the above tables of $56.3 million, $115.1 million, and $112.6 million in parts and service revenue and $8.9 million, $38.2 million, and $51.5 million in parts and service gross profit for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, is related to the closure of our ACP business, acquisition and divestiture activity, and the opening of new add-points, AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, and collision centers, as applicable in a given year. Results from divested businesses, including our ACP business, are excluded from “Same Store” for both current and prior periods. See “Segment Results - Corporate and other” for additional information on the closure of our ACP business.
2020 compared to 2019
During 2020, same store parts and service gross profit decreased as compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in gross profit associated with customer-pay service of $58.7 million, collision business of $23.3 million, and warranty service of $19.5 million.
Gross profit associated with customer-pay service, collision business, and warranty service was adversely impacted by a decrease in volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher value repair orders. Warranty service gross profit also benefited from improved margin performance largely due to improved parts and labor rates negotiated with certain manufacturers. Collision business also benefited from improved margin performance.
Finance and Insurance
Revenue on finance and insurance products represents commissions earned by us for the placement of: (i) loans and leases with financial institutions in connection with customer vehicle purchases financed, (ii) vehicle service contracts with third-party providers, and (iii) other vehicle protection products with third-party providers. We sell these products on a commission basis, and we also participate in the future underwriting profit on certain products pursuant to retrospective commission arrangements with the issuers of those products.
The following discussion of finance and insurance results is on a same store basis. The difference between reported amounts and same store amounts in finance and insurance revenue and gross profit in the above tables of $0.2 million, $10.4 million, and $27.7 million for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, is related to acquisition and divestiture activity, as well as the opening of new add-points and AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, as applicable in a given year.
2020 compared to 2019
Same store finance and insurance revenue and gross profit increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due to an increase in finance and insurance gross profit PVR, partially offset by a decrease in vehicle unit volume. The increase in finance and insurance gross profit PVR was primarily due to an increase in product and finance penetration and higher realized margins on vehicle service contracts, including our AutoNation Vehicle Protection Plan product. Finance and insurance gross profit PVR also benefited from an increase in retrospective commissions due in part to lower claim activity and improved portfolio performance expectations. Increases in finance and insurance gross profit PVR were partially offset by a shift in unit volume mix from new vehicles to used vehicles, which have lower average selling prices than new vehicles and therefore typically generate lower gross profit per transaction associated with arranging customer financing. Sales of used vehicles also have lower finance and product penetration as compared to sales of new vehicles.
Segment Results
In the following table of financial data, revenue and segment income of our reportable segments are reconciled to consolidated revenue and consolidated operating income, respectively.
Domestic
The Domestic segment operating results included the following:
2020 compared to 2019
Domestic revenue decreased during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in new and used vehicle unit volume and parts and service volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the divestitures we completed in 2019. These decreases were partially offset by increases in new and used vehicle revenue PVR. New vehicle revenue PVR benefited from tighter supply in new vehicle inventory. New vehicle revenue PVR also benefited from a continued shift in mix toward trucks and sport utility vehicles, which have relatively higher average selling prices, as a result of a combination of improved vehicle fuel efficiency, relatively low average fuel prices, and changing consumer preference. Used vehicle revenue PVR benefited from increased demand for used vehicles and a strong used vehicle pricing environment.
Domestic segment income increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, due in part to a decrease in SG&A expenses resulting from the cost-saving actions we implemented to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in floorplan interest expenses due to lower average interest rates and lower average vehicle floorplan balances. Domestic segment income also benefited from an increase in new vehicle gross profit PVR due in part to tighter supply in new vehicle inventory and an increase in used vehicle gross profit PVR due to increased demand for used vehicles and a shift in mix to used vehicles acquired through our “We’ll Buy Your Car” program, which have a relatively higher average gross profit PVR. Increases to Domestic segment income were partially offset by a decrease in parts and service volume and vehicle unit volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Import
The Import segment operating results included the following:
2020 compared to 2019
Import revenue decreased during 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to decreases in new and used vehicle unit volume and parts and service volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the divestitures we completed in 2019. These decreases were partially offset by increases in new and used vehicle revenue PVR. New vehicle revenue PVR benefited from tighter supply in new vehicle inventory and a continued shift in mix toward trucks and sport utility vehicles, which have relatively higher average selling prices, as a result of a combination of improved vehicle fuel efficiency, relatively low average fuel prices, and changing consumer preference. Used vehicle revenue PVR benefited from increased demand for used vehicles and a strong used vehicle pricing environment.
Import segment income increased during 2020, as compared to 2019. SG&A expenses decreased due to the cost-saving actions we implemented to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and floorplan interest expenses decreased due to lower average interest rates and lower average vehicle floorplan balances. Import segment income also benefited from an increase in new vehicle gross profit PVR due in part to tighter supply in new vehicle inventory, as well as an increase in used vehicle gross profit PVR due to increased demand for used vehicles and a shift in mix to used vehicles acquired through our “We’ll Buy Your Car” program, which have a relatively higher average gross profit PVR. Increases in Import segment income were partially offset by decreases in parts and service gross profit and finance and insurance gross profit due to decreases in parts and service volume and vehicle unit volume, respectively, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Premium Luxury
The Premium Luxury segment operating results included the following:
2020 compared to 2019
Premium Luxury revenue decreased during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in new vehicle unit volume and parts and service volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in new vehicle revenue PVR due in part to increases in the manufacturers’ suggested retail prices and tighter supply in new vehicle inventory. Premium Luxury revenue also benefited from increases in used vehicle unit volume and used vehicle revenue PVR as a result of increased demand for used vehicles.
Premium Luxury segment income increased during 2020, as compared to 2019. SG&A expenses decreased due to the cost-saving actions we implemented to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and floorplan interest expenses decreased due to lower average interest rates and lower average vehicle floorplan balances. Premium Luxury segment income also benefited from increases in used vehicle unit volume and used vehicle gross profit PVR resulting from increased demand for used vehicles, as well as an increase in new vehicle gross profit PVR due to tighter supply in new vehicle inventory. Increases in Premium Luxury segment income were partially offset by decreases in parts and service volume and new vehicle unit volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Corporate and other
Corporate and other results included the following:
“Corporate and other” is comprised of our other businesses, including collision centers, auction operations, AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, and parts distribution centers, all of which generate revenues but do not meet the quantitative thresholds for reportable segments, as well as unallocated corporate overhead expenses and other income items.
As of December 31, 2020, we had 74 AutoNation-branded collision centers, 5 AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, 4 AutoNation-branded automotive auction operations, and 3 parts distribution centers that service our wholesale parts sales markets for the sale of original equipment manufacturer parts. We recently announced that we plan to expand our AutoNation USA used vehicle stores by building approximately 50 additional stores by the end of 2025. The roll-out may be impacted by a number of variables, including customer adoption, market conditions, availability of used vehicle inventory, and our ability to identify, acquire, and build out suitable locations in a timely manner.
As part of our continued efforts to reduce costs and increase efficiencies, we determined, on August 17, 2020, to close our aftermarket collision parts (“ACP”) business by the end of 2020. The ACP business represented less than 1% of our parts and service gross profit for 2020. In connection with the closing of the ACP business, we incurred total pre-tax charges of $36.7 million in 2020. The charges are comprised of inventory valuation adjustments, contract termination charges, accelerated depreciation and amortization, asset impairment charges, involuntary termination benefits, and other associated closing costs. See Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
During 2020, we recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges totaling $318.3 million, of which $257.4 million related to our Premium Luxury reporting unit, $41.6 million related to our Collision Centers reporting unit, and $19.3 million related to our Parts Centers reporting unit. We also recorded non-cash franchise rights impairment charges of $57.5 million. The non-cash goodwill impairments and franchise rights impairments are reflected as Goodwill Impairment and Franchise Rights Impairment, respectively, in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income and are reported in the “Corporate and other” category of our segment information. During 2020, we recorded non-cash long-lived asset impairment charges associated with our ACP business of $11.0 million, of which $5.1 million is included in the ACP closing charges described above, and non-cash intangible asset impairment charges associated with our collision centers and ACP business of $2.4 million, all of which are reported in the “Corporate and other” category of our segment information.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Our SG&A expenses consist primarily of compensation, including store and corporate salaries, commissions, and incentive-based compensation, as well as advertising (net of reimbursement-based manufacturer advertising rebates), and store and corporate overhead expenses, which include occupancy costs, legal, accounting, and professional services, and general corporate expenses. The following table presents the major components of our SG&A.
2020 compared to 2019
SG&A expenses decreased in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the cost-saving actions we implemented to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including temporarily placing associates on unpaid leave, implementing temporary base pay reductions for our executive officers and associates, temporarily freezing corporate new hiring, reducing our advertising expenses by approximately 14%, and reducing our discretionary spending. Gross advertising expenses decreased $37.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in advertising reimbursements from manufacturers of $11.6 million. As a percentage of total gross profit, SG&A expenses decreased to 67.9% in 2020 from 72.6% in 2019, primarily due to effective cost management including the cost-saving actions taken due to the pandemic.
Goodwill Impairment
We recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges of $318.3 million during the first quarter of 2020 primarily due to the impacts to our business and the decrease in our stock price and market capitalization as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Franchise Rights Impairment
We recorded non-cash franchise rights impairment charges of $57.5 million during the first quarter of 2020 and $9.6 million during the second quarter of 2019 to reduce the carrying values of certain franchise rights to their estimated fair values. See Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Other (Income) Expense, Net (Operating)
During 2020, we recognized $3.2 million related to contract termination charges and $5.1 million related to long-lived asset impairment charges in connection with the closure of our ACP business, as well as other asset impairment charges of $9.6 million. These charges were partially offset by net gains of $7.8 million related to store/property divestitures and $4.7 million related to legal settlements.
During 2019, we recognized net gains of $45.4 million primarily related to store/property divestitures and $7.5 million related to certain legal settlements. These gains were partially offset by non-cash asset impairments of $2.2 million.
Non-Operating Income (Expenses)
Floorplan Interest Expense
Floorplan interest expense was $63.8 million in 2020 and $138.4 million in 2019. The decrease in floorplan interest expense of $74.6 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, was the result of lower average interest rates and lower average vehicle floorplan balances. Floorplan interest rates are variable and therefore increase and decrease with changes in the underlying benchmark interest rates.
Other Interest Expense
Other interest expense was $93.7 million in 2020 and $106.7 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense of $13.0 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven by lower average interest rates primarily due to the repayment of the 5.5% Senior Notes due 2020 and lower average debt balances.
Other Income, Net (included in Non-Operating Income)
During 2020, we recorded a gain of $131.5 million related to our minority equity investment in Vroom, Inc., of which $63.4 million was realized based on Vroom shares sold during 2020 and $68.1 million was unrealized based on changes in the fair value of Vroom shares still held as of December 31, 2020. During 2019, we recorded an unrealized gain of $25.7 million based on changes in the fair value of Vroom shares still held as of December 31, 2019. Since our initial investment in Vroom, Inc. in October 2018 through December 31, 2020, we recognized a total cumulative gain of $157.2 million, of which $77.7 million was realized and $79.5 million remained unrealized as of December 31, 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, we sold the remaining shares of our Vroom equity investment. See Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Income Tax Provision
Income taxes are provided based upon our anticipated underlying annual blended federal and state income tax rates, adjusted, as necessary, for any discrete tax matters occurring during the period. As we operate in various states, our effective tax rate is also dependent upon our geographic revenue mix.
Our effective income tax rate was 30.6% in 2020 and 26.4% in 2019. The tax rate for 2020 reflects the fact that a significant portion of the goodwill impairment charges taken in the first quarter of 2020 was not deductible for income tax purposes. See Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations are related to stores that were sold or terminated prior to January 1, 2014. Results from discontinued operations, net of income taxes, were primarily related to carrying costs for real estate we have not yet sold associated with stores that were closed prior to January 1, 2014, and other adjustments related to disposed operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We manage our liquidity to ensure access to sufficient funding at acceptable costs to fund our ongoing operating requirements and future capital expenditures while continuing to meet our financial obligations. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, funds generated through operations, and amounts available under our revolving credit facility, commercial paper program, and secured used vehicle floorplan facilities will be sufficient to fund our working capital requirements, service our debt, pay our tax obligations and commitments and contingencies, and meet any seasonal operating requirements for the foreseeable future.
Available Liquidity Resources
We had the following sources of liquidity available for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) At December 31, 2020, we had $39.7 million of letters of credit outstanding. In addition, we use the revolving credit facility under our credit agreement as a liquidity backstop for borrowings under the commercial paper program. We had no commercial paper notes outstanding at December 31, 2020. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(2) As limited by the maximum consolidated leverage ratio in our credit agreement.
(3) Based on the eligible used vehicle inventory that could have been pledged as collateral. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In January 2021, we repaid the outstanding $300.0 million of 3.35% Senior Notes through utilization of available funds.
In the ordinary course of business, we are required to post performance and surety bonds, letters of credit, and/or cash deposits as financial guarantees of our performance relating to insurance matters. At December 31, 2020, surety bonds, letters of credit, and cash deposits totaled $102.4 million, including the $39.7 million of letters of credit issued under our revolving credit facility. We do not currently provide cash collateral for outstanding letters of credit.
In February 2019, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement with the SEC that enables us to offer for sale, from time to time and as the capital markets permit, an unspecified amount of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, subscription rights, depositary shares, stock purchase contracts, units, and guarantees of debt securities.
Capital Allocation
Our capital allocation strategy is focused on growing long-term value per share. We invest capital in our business to maintain and upgrade our existing facilities and to build new facilities for existing franchises, as well as for other strategic and technology initiatives. We also deploy capital opportunistically to repurchase our common stock and/or debt, to complete acquisitions or investments, and/or build facilities for newly awarded franchises. Our capital allocation decisions will be based on factors such as the expected rate of return on our investment, the market price of our common stock versus our view of its intrinsic value, the market price of our debt, the potential impact on our capital structure, our ability to complete acquisitions that meet our market and vehicle brand criteria and return on investment threshold, and limitations set forth in our debt agreements.
Share Repurchases
Our Board of Directors from time to time authorizes the repurchase of shares of our common stock up to a certain monetary limit. A summary of shares repurchased under our share repurchase program authorized by our Board of Directors follows:
The decision to repurchase shares at any given point in time is based on such factors as the market price of our common stock versus our view of its intrinsic value, the potential impact on our capital structure (including compliance with our maximum leverage ratio and other financial covenants in our debt agreements as well as our available liquidity), and the
expected return on competing uses of capital such as acquisitions or investments, capital investments in our current businesses, or repurchases of our debt.
As of December 31, 2020, $197.8 million remained available under our stock repurchase limit most recently authorized by our Board of Directors. In February 2021, our Board of Directors increased the share repurchase authorization by $1 billion.
Capital Expenditures
The following table sets forth information regarding our capital expenditures over the past three years:
At December 31, 2020, we owned approximately 80% of our new vehicle franchise store locations with a net book value of $2.1 billion, as well as other properties associated with our collision centers, auction operations, AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, parts distribution centers, and other excess properties with a net book value of $463.2 million. None of these properties are mortgaged or encumbered. We took various actions to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the postponement of over $130 million of capital expenditures during 2020.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
The following table sets forth information regarding cash used in business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, and cash received from business divestitures, net of cash relinquished, over the past three years:
During 2020, we divested one Premium Luxury store and two collision centers and terminated one Domestic franchise. During 2019, we purchased two parts distribution centers and divested three Domestic stores, five Import stores, and two collision centers.
Long-Term Debt
The following table sets forth our non-vehicle long-term debt as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
On March 26, 2020, we amended and restated our existing unsecured credit agreement to, among other things, (1) provide for lower commitment fees and loan margins as set forth in the amended and restated credit agreement, (2) extend the maturity date to March 26, 2025, and (3) provide for customary LIBOR replacement provisions.
In February 2020, we repaid the outstanding $350.0 million of 5.5% Senior Notes. On May 21, 2020, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.75% Senior Notes due 2030, which were sold at 99.479% of the aggregate principal amount. In January 2021, we repaid the outstanding $300.0 million of 3.35% Senior Notes through utilization of available funds.
We had no commercial paper notes outstanding at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2019, we had $170.0 million of commercial paper notes outstanding with a weighted-average annual interest rate of 2.13% and a weighted-average remaining term of 12 days.
A downgrade in our credit ratings could negatively impact the interest rate payable on our senior notes and could negatively impact our ability to issue, or the interest rates for, commercial paper notes. Additionally, an increase in our leverage ratio could negatively impact the interest rates charged for borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our long-term debt and commercial paper.
Restrictions and Covenants
Our credit agreement, the indentures for our senior unsecured notes, and our vehicle floorplan facilities contain numerous customary financial and operating covenants that place significant restrictions on us, including our ability to incur additional indebtedness or prepay existing indebtedness, to create liens or other encumbrances, to sell (or otherwise dispose of) assets, and to merge or consolidate with other entities.
Under our credit agreement, we are required to remain in compliance with a maximum leverage ratio and maximum capitalization ratio. The leverage ratio is a contractually defined amount principally reflecting non-vehicle debt divided by a contractually defined measure of earnings with certain adjustments. The capitalization ratio is a contractually defined amount principally reflecting vehicle floorplan payable and non-vehicle debt divided by our total capitalization including vehicle floorplan payable. The specific terms of these covenants can be found in our credit agreement, which we filed with our Current Report on Form 8-K on March 26, 2020.
The indentures for our senior unsecured notes contain certain limited covenants, including limitations on liens and sale and leaseback transactions.
Our failure to comply with the covenants contained in our debt agreements could result in the acceleration of all of our indebtedness. Our debt agreements have cross-default provisions that trigger a default in the event of an uncured default under other material indebtedness of AutoNation.
During 2020, we recorded non-cash goodwill and franchise rights impairment charges of $375.8 million. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the requirements of the financial covenants under our debt agreements as such non-cash impairment charges do not factor into the calculations for those covenants. Under the terms of our credit agreement, at December 31, 2020, our leverage ratio and capitalization ratio were as follows:
Vehicle Floorplan Payable
The components of vehicle floorplan payable are as follows:
Vehicle floorplan facilities are due on demand, but in the case of new vehicle inventories, are generally paid within several business days after the related vehicles are sold. Vehicle floorplan facilities are primarily collateralized by vehicle inventories and related receivables. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our vehicle floorplan payable.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the changes in our cash provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our primary sources of operating cash flows result from the sale of vehicles and finance and insurance products, collections from customers for the sale of parts and services, and proceeds from vehicle floorplan payable-trade. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are repayments of vehicle floorplan payable-trade, purchases of inventory, personnel-related expenditures, and payments related to taxes and leased properties.
2020 compared to 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities increased during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in earnings and a decrease in working capital requirements.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash flows from investing activities consist primarily of cash used in capital additions and activity from business acquisitions, business divestitures, property dispositions, and other transactions.
We will make facility and infrastructure upgrades and improvements from time to time as we identify projects that are required to maintain our current business or that we expect to provide us with acceptable rates of return.
2020 compared to 2019
Net cash used in investing activities decreased during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to proceeds received from sales of equity securities in 2020 and a decrease in purchases of property and equipment, partially offset by a decrease in cash received from business divestitures, net of cash relinquished, an investment in an equity security in 2020, and a decrease in proceeds from the sale of assets held for sale.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash flows from financing activities primarily include repurchases of common stock, debt activity, changes in vehicle floorplan payable-non-trade, and proceeds from stock option exercises.
2020 compared to 2019
During 2020, we borrowed $1.1 billion and repaid $1.1 billion under our revolving credit facility. During 2019, we had no borrowings or repayments under our revolving credit facility.
During 2020, we repaid the outstanding $350.0 million of 5.5% Senior Notes due 2020, issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.75% Senior Notes due 2030, and amended and restated our existing unsecured credit agreement. Cash flows from financing activities during 2020 reflect cash payments of $11.0 million for debt issuance costs associated with the senior note issuance and debt refinancing that are being amortized to interest expense over the terms of the related debt arrangements.
Cash flows from financing activities include changes in vehicle floorplan payable-non-trade totaling net repayments of $233.3 million during 2020 compared to net repayments of $134.3 million in 2019, as well as changes in commercial paper notes outstanding totaling net payments of $170.0 million during 2020 compared to net repayments of $460.0 million during 2019.
During 2020, we repurchased 7.2 million shares of common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $382.3 million (average purchase price per share of $52.76), including repurchases for which settlement occurred subsequent to December 31, 2020. During 2019, we repurchased 1.3 million shares of our common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $44.7 million (average purchase price per share of $35.51).
During 2020, cash flows from financing activities were also impacted by an increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options as compared to 2019.
Contractual Payment Obligations
The following table summarizes our payment obligations under certain contracts at December 31, 2020. The amounts presented are based upon, among other things, the terms of any relevant agreements. Future events that may occur related to the following payment obligations could cause actual payments to differ significantly from these amounts.
(1)See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)Amounts for long-term debt obligations reflect principal payments and are not reduced for unamortized debt discounts of $3.7 million or debt issuance costs of $11.1 million.
(3)Primarily represents scheduled fixed interest payments on our outstanding senior unsecured notes and finance leases. Estimates of future interest payments for vehicle floorplan payables and commercial paper are excluded due to the short-term nature of these facilities.
(4)Amounts for operating lease commitments do not include certain operating expenses such as maintenance, insurance, and real estate taxes. In 2020, these charges totaled approximately $21 million. Additionally, operating leases that are on a month-to-month basis are not included.
(5)Due to uncertainty regarding timing of payments expected beyond one year, long-term obligations for deferred compensation arrangements have been classified in the “More Than 5 Years” column.
(6)Our estimated chargeback obligations do not have scheduled maturities, however, the timing of future payments is estimated based on historical patterns.
(7)Our estimated self-insurance obligations are based on management estimates and actuarial calculations. Although these obligations do not have scheduled maturities, the timing of future payments is estimated based on historical patterns.
(8)Primarily represents purchase orders and contracts in connection with information technology and communication systems and real estate construction projects.
We expect that the amounts above will be funded through cash flows from operations or borrowings under our commercial paper program or credit agreement. In the case of payments due upon the maturity of our debt instruments, we currently expect to be able to refinance such instruments in the normal course of business.
In the ordinary course of business, we are required to post performance and surety bonds, letters of credit, and/or cash deposits as financial guarantees of our performance. At December 31, 2020, surety bonds, letters of credit, and cash deposits totaled $102.4 million, of which $39.7 million were letters of credit. We do not currently provide cash collateral for outstanding letters of credit. We have negotiated a letter of credit sublimit as part of our revolving credit facility. The amount available to be borrowed under this revolving credit facility is reduced on a dollar-for-dollar basis by the cumulative amount of any outstanding letters of credit.
As further discussed in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, there are various tax matters where the ultimate resolution may result in us owing additional tax payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Forward-Looking Statements
Our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and prospects, and the prevailing market price and performance of our common stock may be adversely affected by a number of factors, including the matters discussed below. Certain statements and information set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including, without limitation, statements regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, and financial condition, the actions we are taking in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our strategic initiatives, partnerships, or investments, including the planned expansion of our AutoNation USA used vehicle stores, our investments in digital and online capabilities, and other brand extension strategies, and other statements regarding our expectations for the future performance of our business and the automotive retail industry, as well as other written or oral statements made from time to time by us or by our authorized executive officers on our behalf, constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of historical fact, including statements that describe our objectives, plans, or goals are, or may be deemed to be, forward-looking statements. Words such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “goal,” “plan,” “believe,” “continue,” “may,” “will,” “could,” and variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current expectations concerning future results and events, and they involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that are difficult to predict and may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by these statements. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report, and we undertake no obligation to revise or update these statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances. The risks, uncertainties, and other factors that our stockholders and prospective investors should consider include, but are not limited to, the following:
•The automotive retail industry is sensitive to changing economic conditions and various other factors, including, but not limited to, unemployment levels, consumer confidence, fuel prices, interest rates, and tariffs. Our business and results of operations are substantially dependent on new and used vehicle sales levels in the United States and in our particular geographic markets, as well as the gross profit margins that we can achieve on our sales of vehicles, all of which are very difficult to predict.
•The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted, and may continue to disrupt, our business, results of operations, and financial condition going forward. Future epidemics, pandemics, and other outbreaks could also disrupt our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
•Our new vehicle sales are impacted by the incentive, marketing, and other programs of vehicle manufacturers.
•We are dependent upon the success and continued financial viability of the vehicle manufacturers and distributors with which we hold franchises.
•We are subject to restrictions imposed by, and significant influence from, vehicle manufacturers that may adversely impact our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and prospects, including our ability to acquire additional stores.
•We are investing significantly in our brand extension strategy, and if our strategic initiatives are not successful, we will have incurred significant expenses without the benefit of improved financial results.
•If we are not able to maintain and enhance our retail brands and reputation or to attract consumers to our own digital channels, or if events occur that damage our retail brands, reputation, or sales channels, our business and financial results may be harmed.
•The carrying value of our minority equity investment in Waymo does not have a readily determinable fair value and is required to be adjusted for observable price changes or impairments, both of which could adversely impact our results of operations and financial condition.
•New laws, regulations, or governmental policies regarding fuel economy and greenhouse gas emission standards, or changes to existing standards, may affect vehicle manufacturers’ ability to produce cost-effective vehicles or vehicles that consumers demand, which could adversely impact our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flow, and prospects.
•We are subject to numerous legal and administrative proceedings, which, if the outcomes are adverse to us, could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and prospects.
•Our operations are subject to extensive governmental laws and regulations. If we are found to be in purported violation of or subject to liabilities under any of these laws or regulations, or if new laws or regulations are enacted that adversely affect our operations, our business, operating results, and prospects could suffer.
•A failure of our information systems or any security breach or unauthorized disclosure of confidential information could have a material adverse effect on our business.
•Our debt agreements contain certain financial ratios and other restrictions on our ability to conduct our business, and our substantial indebtedness could adversely affect our financial condition and operations and prevent us from fulfilling our debt service obligations.
•We are subject to interest rate risk in connection with our vehicle floorplan payables, revolving credit facility, and commercial paper program that could have a material adverse effect on our profitability.
•Goodwill and other intangible assets comprise a significant portion of our total assets. We must test our goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment at least annually, which could result in a material, non-cash write-down of goodwill or franchise rights and could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and shareholders’ equity.
•Our largest stockholders, as a result of their ownership stakes in us, may have the ability to exert substantial influence over actions to be taken or approved by our stockholders. In addition, future share repurchases and fluctuations in the levels of ownership of our largest stockholders could impact the volume of trading, liquidity, and market price of our common stock.
•Natural disasters and adverse weather events can disrupt our business.
Additional Information
Investors and others should note that we announce material financial information using our company website (www.autonation.com), our investor relations website (investors.autonation.com), SEC filings, press releases, public conference calls, and webcasts. Information about AutoNation, its business, and its results of operations may also be announced by posts on the following social media channels:
•AutoNation’s Twitter feed (www.twitter.com/autonation)
•Mike Jackson’s Twitter feed (www.twitter.com/CEOMikeJackson)
The information that we post on these social media channels could be deemed to be material information. As a result, we encourage investors, the media, and others interested in AutoNation to review the information that we post on these social media channels. These channels may be updated from time to time on AutoNation’s investor relations website. The information on or accessible through our websites and social media channels is not incorporated by reference in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.