Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company developing novel solutions for people suffering from ACI and substance addiction. Our lead product candidate, ANEB-001, is intended to reverse the negative effects of ACI within 1 hour of administration. The signs and symptoms of ACI range from profound sedation to anxiety and panic to psychosis with hallucinations. There is no approved medical treatment currently available to specifically alleviate the symptoms of ACI. If approved by the FDA, we believe ANEB-001 has the potential to be the first FDA approved treatment of its kind on the market for reversing the effects of THC, the principal psychoactive constituent of cannabis. Clinical trials completed to date have shown that ANEB-001 is rapidly absorbed, well tolerated and leads to weight loss, an effect that is consistent with central CB1 antagonism. We intend to launch a Phase 2 proof-of-concept trial for ANEB-001 in the fourth calendar quarter of 2021.
ACI episodes have become a widespread health issue in the United States, particularly in the increasing number of states that have legalized cannabis for personal and recreational use. The ingestion of large quantities of THC is a major cause of ACI. Excessive ingestion of THC via edible products such as candies and brownies, and intoxication from synthetic cannabinoids (also known as “synthetics,” “K2” or “spice”), are two leading causes of THC-related emergency room visits. Synthetic cannabinoids are analogous to fentanyl for opioids insofar as they are more potent at the cannabinoid receptor than their natural product congener THC. In recent years, hospital emergency rooms across the United States have seen a dramatic increase in patient visits with cannabis-related conditions. Before the legalization of cannabis, an estimated 450,000 patients visited hospital emergency rooms annually for cannabis-related conditions. In 2014, this number more than doubled to an estimated 1.1 million patients, according to data published in “Trends and Related Factors of Cannabis-Associated Emergency Department Visits in the United States: 2006-2014,” Journal of Addiction Medicine (May/June 2019), which provided a national estimate analyzing data from NEDS, the largest database of U.S. hospital-owned emergency department visits. Based on our own analysis of the most recent NEDS data, we believe that the number of hospitalizations grew to 1.74 million patients in 2018 and was growing at an approximately 15% compounded annual growth rate between 2012 and 2018. We believe the number of cannabis-related hospitalizations and other health problems associated with ACIs such as depression, anxiety and mental disorders will continue to increase substantially as more states pass laws legalizing cannabis for medical and recreational use. Given the consequences, there is an urgent need for a treatment to rapidly reverse the symptoms of ACI.
In May 2020, we entered into the royalty-bearing License Agreement with Vernalis to exploit its license compounds and licensed products to combat symptoms of ACI and substance addiction. We are currently developing our lead product candidate, ANEB-001 to quickly, and effectively, combat symptoms of ACI.
Our objective is to develop and commercialize new treatment options for patients suffering from ACI and addiction. Our lead product candidate is ANEB-001, a potent, small molecule cannabinoid receptor antagonist, to address the unmet medical need for a specific antidote for ACI. ANEB-001 is an orally bioavailable, rapidly absorbed treatment that we anticipate will reverse the symptoms of ACIs, in most cases within 1 hour of administration. Our proprietary position in the treatment of ACI is protected by rights to two patent applications covering various methods of use of the compound and delivery systems. We anticipate starting a Phase 2 proof-of-concept trial for ANEB-001 in the fourth calendar quarter of 2021.
We were incorporated in Delaware on April 23, 2020, and commenced operations in May 2020. Our operations to date have consisted of organizing and acquiring the license rights to Vernalis’ licensed products, assembling an executive team, starting preparations for a Phase 2 proof-of-concept trial, including the synthesis of a new active pharmaceutical ingredient, the development and filing of a clinical trial protocol with regulatory agencies in Europe and raising capital. Prior to our IPO, we funded our operations through a private placement of our series A convertible preferred stock and issuance of two promissory notes to a related party.
Recent Developments
On September 10, 2021, we completed finished product manufacturing of our lead drug ANEB-001 for use in our upcoming Phase 2 clinical study. In compliance with all current Good Manufacturing Practice requirements, ANEB-001’s active pharmaceutical ingredient was delivered to its contract manufacturer and filled into 10mg and 50mg capsules for finished product. We are on track to commence our Phase 2 proof-of-concept study in October 2021, which is ahead of schedule, and we expect initial topline results from the first cohort in the first half of calendar 2022.
Stock Split and Initial Public Offering
On April 23, 2021, we effected a six-for-one stock split of our common stock to be consummated prior to the completion of our IPO. All shares, stock options, warrants and per share information presented in the accompanying financial statements and notes thereto have been adjusted to reflect the stock split on a retroactive basis for all periods presented. There was no change in the par value of our common stock.
On May 11, 2021, we completed our IPO of 3,078,224 shares of our common stock, including the partial exercise by the underwriter of their option to purchase 78,224 additional shares of common stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $21,548,000 and our shares commenced trading on The Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “ANEB.” We received approximately $19,783,000 in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses paid by us. Upon the closing of the IPO, a cashless exercise of Series A Preferred milestone warrants (“Milestone Warrants”) resulted in the issuance of 5,236,343 shares of Series A convertible preferred stock and all of the outstanding shares of Series A convertible preferred stock automatically converted into 7,283,843 shares of common stock.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since inception. If our development efforts for our current lead product candidate, ANEB-001, or other additional product candidates that we may develop in the future, are successful and result in marketing approval, or if we enter into collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from such collaboration or license agreements. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We have incurred operating losses since inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations in the future.
Research and Development Expenses
We expect to continue incurring significant research and development costs related to ANEB-001. Our research and development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 and for the period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020 included research and development consulting expenses and costs associated with development of our lead product candidate, ANEB-001.
We anticipate that our research and development activities will account for a significant portion of our operating expenses and these costs are expensed as incurred. We expect to significantly increase our research and development efforts as we continue to develop ANEB-001 and conduct clinical trials with patients suffering from symptoms of ACI, as well as continue to expand our product-candidate pipeline. Research and development expenses include:
● employee-related expenses, such as salaries, share-based compensation, benefits and travel expense for research and development personnel that we plan to hire;
● direct third-party costs such as expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and CMOs;
● costs associated with research and development activities of consultants;
● manufacturing costs in connection with producing materials for use in conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● other third-party expenses directly attributable to the development of our product candidates; and
● amortization expense for future asset purchases used in research and development activities.
We currently have one lead product candidate; therefore, we do not track our internal research and development expenses on an indication-by-indication basis.
Research and development activities will continue to be central to our business model. We expect our research and development expenses to be significant over the next several years as we advance our current clinical development program and prepare to seek regulatory approval.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 and for the period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020 consisted primarily of professional fees, stock-based compensation, insurance, personnel costs and rent.
Fair Value Adjustment for Milestone Warrants
The Milestone Warrants are freestanding financial instruments that qualified as liabilities required to be recorded at fair value at the inception date and remeasured each reporting period until settlement or until the underlying shares are converted to common, with gains and losses arising from changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended June 30, 2021 and For the Period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consisted of the following:
Other research and development for the year ended June 30, 2021 included $1,350,000 related to milestone payments made to Vernalis in the form of 192,857 shares of common stock issued from the IPO. For the period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020, other research and development consisted of the $150,000 upfront license fee paid to Vernalis.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consisted of the following:
Interest Expense
Interest expense of $11,767 for the year ended June 30, 2021 was related to two promissory notes issued to a related party in May and June of 2020. The notes were repaid in March 2021.
Fair Value Adjustment for Milestone Warrants
As a result of changes in fair value, we recognized a charge of approximately $26,627,000 related to the Milestone Warrants for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Since our inception in April 2020, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses in the future as we advance the clinical development of our programs. In May 2021, we completed our IPO in which we sold 3,078,224 shares of our common stock, including the exercise by the underwriter of their option to purchase 78,224 additional shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $7.00 per share. We received net proceeds from our IPO of approximately $19,783,000, after deducting underwriter discounts and offering expenses paid by us. As of June 30, 2021, we have cash of approximately $19,986,000.
We expect our current cash resources will be sufficient to operate into the first calendar quarter of 2023. We anticipate that additional capital will be needed to commence and complete a Phase 3 study of our drug candidate ANEB-001. As and if necessary, we will seek to raise these additional funds through various potential sources, such as equity and debt financings or through corporate collaboration and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, or, if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows:
Operating Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2021, our operating activities used $4,871,189 in cash, which was less than the net loss of $30,252,554, primarily due to fair value adjustment for Milestone Warrants, stock-based compensation, increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses. These changes were partially offset by the increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
For the period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020, our operating activities used $150,772 in cash, which was less than the net loss of $174,637, primarily due to an increase in accrued expenses.
Financing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $21,831,854. This was primarily due to proceeds received from the IPO and issuance of Milestone Warrants of $2,250,000 offset by the repayment of the related party promissory notes of approximately $200,000.
For the period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $3,175,752. This was primarily due to proceeds from issuance of Series A convertible preferred stock and from issuance of promissory notes to related party.
Funding Requirements
We expect that our cash at June 30, 2021 will enable us to fund our current and planned operating expenses and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months from the filing of this report. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we may exhaust our available capital resources sooner that we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our programs, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue from sales of any of our current or future product candidates, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and potential collaboration, license or development agreements. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
License Agreement with Vernalis Development Limited
On May 26, 2020, we entered into an exclusive License Agreement with Vernalis. Pursuant to the License Agreement, Vernalis granted us an exclusive worldwide royalty-bearing license to develop and commercialize a compound that we refer to as ANEB-001, as well as access to and a right of reference with respect to any regulatory materials under its control. The License Agreement allows us to sublicense the rights thereunder to any person with similar or greater financial resources and expertise without Vernalis’ prior consent, provided the proposed sublicensee is not developing or commercializing a product that contains a CB1 antagonist or is for the same indication covered by the trials or market authorization for ANEB-001. In exchange for the exclusive license, we agreed to pay Vernalis a non-refundable signature fee of $150,000, total potential developmental milestone payments of up to $29,900,000, total potential sales milestone payments of up to $35,000,000, and low to mid-single digit royalties on net sales. Subsequently, in May 2021 as part of the IPO, we issued 192,857 shares of common stock to Vernalis in lieu of future milestone payments of $1,350,000.
Under the License Agreement, we purchased the API for ANEB-001 from Vernalis on an “as is” basis for $20,000. We have the sole discretion to carry out the development and commercialization of ANEB-001, including obtaining regulatory approvals, and we are responsible for all costs and expenses in connection therewith. We have access to certain regulatory materials, including study reports from clinical and non-clinical trials, under Vernalis’ control. We agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to (i) develop and commercialize ANEB-001 in the United States and certain European countries and (ii) conduct a Phase 2 and human clinical trial within specified periods, which periods could be extended for a nominal fee. We also agreed to provide Vernalis with periodic reports of our activities and notice of market authorization within specified timeframes.
Office Lease, Manufacturing Contract and CRO Contract
We manage our business operations from our principal executive office in Lakeway, Texas, in 700 square feet of leased space under a sublease with a related party. Our office lease is month-to-month, and currently we pay rent of approximately $1,200 per month. In October 2020, we entered into an agreement with a third-party contract manufacturing organization. The total cost for the manufacturing contracts is approximately $973,000. Subsequently in February 2021, we entered into an agreement with a third-party CRO to manage and conduct our Phase 2 clinical trial in the fourth calendar quarter of 2021 with the anticipation of completing the trial by the first calendar quarter of 2022. The total cost for the CRO agreement is approximately €1,450,758 or $1,760,000.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical trial sites and clinical supply manufacturers and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and therefore, are cancellable contracts.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed and some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● CROs in connection with performing research services on our behalf and any clinical trials;
● Investigative sites or other providers in connection with studies and any clinical trials;
● Vendors in connection with the preparation of our NDA file, market and patient awareness programs, market research and analysis and medical education; and
● Vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies.
We base our expenses for services rendered on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes, contracts and communicating with our vendors. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payments. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid or accrued expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Valuation of Milestone Warrants
We classified the Milestone Warrants as liabilities on our balance sheet as we determined they met the definition of a freestanding financial instrument since they are legally detachable. We remeasured the liabilities associated with Milestone Warrants to fair value at each reporting date, and immediately prior to exercise, and recognized changes in the fair value of the liabilities in our statements of operations recorded as “fair value adjustment for Milestone Warrants.” The Milestone Warrants were originated and exercised within the fiscal year, so they do not actually appear on the June 30, 2021 and 2020 balance sheets presented in the financial statements.
The fair value of the Milestone Warrant liability was determined using the Black Scholes option-pricing model utilizing inputs such as the fair value of the underlying stock, expected term, expected volatility of the underlying stock over the expected term, and the risk-free interest rate over the expected term. Changes to these assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the Milestone Warrant liabilities and related fair value adjustments.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
In June 2020, the board of directors adopted the 2020 Stock Incentive Plan, which provided for the grant of qualified incentive stock options and nonqualified stock options or other awards to our employees, officers, directors, advisors, and outside consultants for the purchase of up to 1,650,000 shares of our common stock. Other awards include restricted stock, restricted stock units, stock appreciation rights and other stock-based awards. Other stock-based awards are awards valued in whole or in part by reference to, or are otherwise based on, shares of common stock. Stock options generally vest over a four-year period, at achievement of a performance requirement, or upon change of control (as defined in the applicable plan). The awards expire five years from the date of grant.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recorded stock-based compensation expense of $187,349 in general and administrative expenses and $12,598 in research and development expenses. No stock-based compensation expense was recognized for the period from April 23, 2020 (inception) to June 30, 2020.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which uses inputs such as the fair value of our common stock, assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock the expected term of the stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term, and our expected dividend yield. The fair value of our common stock is used to determine the fair value of restricted stock.
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of our common stock was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value of our common stock, our board of directors considered, among other things, timely valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including (i) our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations; (ii) our forecasted operating performance and projected future cash flows; (iii) the illiquid nature of our common stock; (iv) the rights and privileges of our common stock; (v) market multiples of our most comparable public peers; and (vi) market conditions affecting our industry.
There are significant judgments and estimates inherent in these valuations. The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different.
After the closing of the IPO, our board of directors now determine the fair value of our shares of common stock underlying stock-based awards based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by Nasdaq on the date of grant.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
The JOBS Act, permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.