Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with "Selected Financial Data" and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to the historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risk, assumptions and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions, forecasts and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this report. You should carefully read the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled "Risk Factors" to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section of this report titled "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
This section generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 may be found in the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of our prospectus for our initial public offering, dated February 4, 2021 filed with the SEC on February 5, 2021.
Overview
We are a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel small molecule therapeutics to address acute organ injuries and fibrotic diseases. Our goal is to transform the treatment paradigm for patients suffering from these potentially life-threatening conditions for which there are no approved medicines or where existing approved medicines have limitations. Our lead product candidate, ANG-3777, is a hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) mimetic that we are currently evaluating in multiple acute organ injuries and related indications, including acute kidney injury (AKI) and injuries to other major organs, such as the lungs, central nervous system (CNS) and heart. Within AKI, we are currently evaluating ANG-3777's ability to improve kidney function and reduce the severity of transplant-associated AKI, also known as delayed graft function (DGF), in patients at risk for kidney dysfunction, as well as for the treatment of AKI associated with cardiac surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass (CSA-AKI). We are also evaluating ANG-3777 for indications within acute lung injury (ALI), with our primary focus on acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), as well as acute CNS injuries. We are advancing multiple programs for the treatment of fibrotic diseases, leading with ANG-3070, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), and our inhibitor of rho kinase 2 (ROCK2). We also continue to develop other preclinical product candidates, including our CYP11B2 (aldosterone synthase) inhibitors, which we are investigating for the purpose of targeting aldosterone-related fibrotic diseases.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to conducting research and development activities, including drug discovery and pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, organizing and staffing our business, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. Prior to 2014, our efforts were primarily focused on researching a number of pathways related to serious organ diseases and applying our medicinal chemistry expertise towards creating potential therapeutics to address the unmet medical needs of patients. During this time period, our operations were funded primarily through the receipt of U.S. government grants and contracts. In 2014, we began raising capital through the sale of debt and equity securities as well as licenses, and since that time have significantly expanded our operations, with a focus on advancing our lead product candidate, ANG-3777, into and through multiple clinical programs and accelerating our other development programs, including our second product candidate, ANG-3070.
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have received an aggregate of $182.9 million in funding, which includes approximately $68.8 million from U.S. government grants and contracts and aggregate gross proceeds of $114.1 million through the issuance and sale of our debt and equity securities. In addition, in the year ended December 31, 2018, we received an upfront payment of $4.0 million from Sinovant pursuant to the Sinovant License discussed below. We also received an upfront payment under our license agreements with Vifor Pharma of $30.0 million in November 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $34.6 million. On February 9, 2021, we closed an IPO of 5,750,000 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to 750,000 additional shares of common stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $92.0 million. Additionally, we closed the Concurrent Private Placement of 1,562,500 shares of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of $25.0 million in connection with a stock purchase agreement with Vifor Pharma.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales since our inception and do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless we successfully develop and we or our collaborators commercialize our product candidates, which we do not expect to occur for several years, if ever. In addition, a significant portion of our future revenue and cash resources is expected to be derived from our license agreement with Vifor Pharma and, to a lesser extent, our license agreement with Sinovant. Our net losses were $80.1 million and $40.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $160.6 million. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect our expenses and operating losses to increase substantially as we advance ANG-3777, ANG-3070 and our other product candidates through clinical trials and preclinical development, and as we seek regulatory approval for ANG-3777, ANG-3070 or any of our other product candidates. In addition, if we seek approval for any of our wholly-owned product candidates or those for which we retain the right to commercialize, we expect to incur additional expenses as we expand our clinical, regulatory, quality, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities, incur significant commercialization expenses for marketing, sales, manufacturing and distribution if we obtain marketing approval for such product candidates. Finally, we expect to incur increased expenses to protect our intellectual property and expand our general and administrative support functions, including hiring additional personnel, as well as incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical development activities, other research and development activities and pre-commercialization activities.
We rely on third parties in the conduct of our preclinical studies and clinical trials and for manufacturing and supply of our product candidates. We have no internal manufacturing capabilities, and we expect to continue to rely on third parties, many of whom are single-source suppliers, for our preclinical study and clinical trial materials. In addition, we do not yet have a marketing or sales organization or commercial infrastructure. Accordingly, we will incur significant expenses to develop a marketing and sales organization and commercial infrastructure in advance of generating any product sales of wholly-owned product candidates or those for which we retain the right to commercialize. Furthermore, we will need to make continued investment in development studies, registration activities and the development of commercial support functions including quality assurance and safety pharmacovigilance before we will be in a position to sell any of our product candidates, if approved.
The Initial Public Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
The Initial Public Offering and Concurrent Private Placement, which both closed on February 9, 2021, generated aggregate net proceeds of approximately $109.9 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, private placement fee and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. See Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
COVID-19 Update
A novel strain of coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and the resulting disease, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), were first identified in Wuhan, China in December 2019, and subsequently declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. COVID-19 has placed strains on the providers of healthcare services, including the healthcare institutions where we conduct our clinical trials. These strains have resulted in institutions prohibiting the initiation of new clinical trials, enrollment in existing trials and restricting the on-site monitoring of clinical trials. For example, our Phase 3 registration trial of ANG-3777 to improve kidney function and reduce the severity of DGF, patient enrollment between February 2020 and when we completed enrollment was impacted by public safety restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Phase 2 clinical trial of ANG-3777 in patients at risk for developing AKI following cardiac surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass has been similarly impacted. We are continuing to evaluate the
impact of the COVID-19 restrictions on our expected pace of enrollment, as such impacts could delay the timing of topline results in either our Phase 3 study in DGF or our Phase 2 clinical trial in CSA-AKI. We also follow FDA guidance on clinical trial conduct during the COVID-19 pandemic, including the remote monitoring of clinical data.
Numerous state and local jurisdictions have imposed, and others in the future may impose, "shelter-in-place" orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar government orders and restrictions for their residents to control the spread of COVID-19. Starting in mid-March 2020, the governor of California, where our corporate operations are based, issued "shelter-in-place" or "stay at home" orders restricting non-essential activities, travel and business operations for an indefinite period of time, subject to certain exceptions for necessary activities. Similar orders and restrictions have been imposed in New York and Massachusetts, and such orders or restrictions have resulted in our office closing, work stoppages, slowdowns and delays, travel restrictions and cancellation of events, among other effects, thereby negatively impacting our operations. We are supporting our employees by utilizing remote work, leveraging virtual meeting technology and encouraging employees to follow local guidance.
The global pandemic of COVID-19 continues to rapidly evolve. The extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business, including our clinical trials, and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease.
At this time, we do not expect any disruption in our supply chain of drugs necessary to conduct our clinical trials and given our drug inventories, and we believe we will be able to supply the drug needs of our clinical trials in 2020 and 2021. However, we are continuing to evaluate our clinical supply chain in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
License, Collaboration and Grant Agreements
License Agreement with Vifor Pharma
In November 2020, we granted Vifor Pharma, an exclusive, global (excluding Greater China), royalty-bearing license, for the commercialization of ANG-3777 in all Renal Indications, beginning with DGF and CSA-AKI. The Vifor License also grants Vifor Pharma exclusive rights, with a right to sublicense subject to our consent for certain specified conditions, to develop and manufacture ANG-3777 for commercialization in Renal Indications worldwide (excluding Greater China) in cooperation with us or independently. We retain the right to develop and commercialize combination therapy products combining ANG-3777 with our other proprietary molecules, subject to Vifor Pharma's right of first negotiation with respect to global (excluding Greater China) rights to such combination therapy products in the Renal Indications.
Pursuant to the Vifor License, we are entitled to receive $80 million in upfront and near-term clinical milestone payments, including $30 million in upfront cash that we received in November 2020, a $30 million equity investment and $20 million due upon enrolling the first patient in a Phase 3 trial of ANG-3777 for CSA-AKI. In December 2020, we issued Vifor Pharma a convertible promissory note in aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million as part of the equity investment with a maturity date of three years, 2% interest and a conversion price of $11.57 per share, which was automatically converted into shares of our common stock upon the consummation of our initial public offering on February 9, 2021, and one or more entities affiliated with Vifor Pharma purchased $25 million of shares of our common stock in the Concurrent Private Placement at a price per share equal to the initial public offering price, $16.00 per share (see Note 17 in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.) We are also eligible to receive post-approval milestones of up to approximately $260 million. Further, we are eligible to receive milestone payments based upon global net sales: in the United States, the milestone payments range from $100 million to $450 million, based upon annual U.S. net sales tiers between $300 million and $1 billion, and outside the United States, the milestone payments range from $75 million to $200 million, based upon annual net sales tiers between $250 million and $550 million. In aggregate, we are eligible for sales milestone payments totaling $1.585 billion and a total potential deal value of up to $1.925 billion (subject to certain reductions and offsets). We are also eligible to receive tiered royalties on global net sales of ANG-3777 at royalty rates of 10% for annual U.S. net sales below $100 million, mid-teens to low twenties for annual U.S. net sales between $100 million and $500 million and 40% for annual U.S. net sales above $500 million. Outside the United States, we are eligible to receive tiered royalties on annual ex-U.S. net sales of ANG-3777 at royalty rates of 10% for annual ex-U.S. net sales below $50 million, mid-teens to low twenties for annual ex-U.S. net sales between $50 million and $250 million and 40% for annual ex-U.S. net sales above $250 million. Such milestones and royalties
are subject to certain specified reductions and offsets. We recognized revenue of $0.2 million for the upfront cash payment in 2020 as license revenue. We had deferred revenue under this agreement of $29.8 million at December 31, 2020.
Under the Vifor License, we retain responsibility at our own cost for executing a pre-specified clinical development plan, which has been designed to obtain regulatory approvals of ANG-3777 for the DGF and CSA-AKI indications in the United States, the European Union, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. The plan includes the completion of our ongoing and currently planned clinical trials and other clinical development activities in such indications. We will be responsible for regulatory interactions and filings relating to such indications in the United States, and Vifor Pharma will be responsible for such matters outside the United States. We will share equally with Vifor Pharma the cost of related post-approval clinical development activities for such indications. We will conduct drug substance and drug product development for ANG-3777 for DGF and CSA-AKI until production scale at our cost. Prior to the first regulatory approval of ANG-3777 for DGF or CSA-AKI in the United States or the European Union, Vifor Pharma will assume responsibility of the commercial manufacture of ANG-3777 for such indications in accordance with a supply agreement to be negotiated in good faith between Vifor Pharma and us. In addition, Vifor Pharma will be solely responsible at its own cost for the commercialization of DGF and CSA-AKI indications and any other Renal Indications, both within and outside of the United States (excluding Greater China). Pursuant to the Vifor License, we expect to collaborate with Vifor Pharma through the operation of joint governance committees, with each party having final determination authority in their respective areas of responsibility and other specific matters, subject to certain exceptions.
The Vifor License will continue until the expiration of the last royalty term for a licensed product in the licensed territory, unless earlier terminated. The royalty term for a licensed product is, on a country-by-country basis, shall start with the first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country and expire at the latest of (i) expiration of all licensed patents covering the composition of matter of such licensed product or method of use for such licensed product that has obtained regulatory approval in such country, (ii) expiration of all regulatory and data exclusivity applicable to such licensed product in such country, or (iii) the tenth (10th) anniversary of the date of the first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country.
Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License at its sole discretion upon the earlier of (i) the acceptance for filing of an NDA covering products incorporating ANG-3777 filed with the FDA (after completion of the relevant Phase 3 clinical trial for such products), or (ii) the third anniversary of the effective date of the Vifor License. Both we and Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License in its entirety if the other is in material breach of the Vifor License and has not cured the breach (if curable) within 60 days, or 90 days for incurable breach. In certain circumstances, in the event of our material breach of the Vifor License, Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License with respect to certain major markets. In addition, both parties have the right to terminate the Vifor License upon insolvency of the other party.
License Agreement with Sinovant
In August 2018, we granted Sinovant an exclusive, royalty-bearing license, with the right to sublicense through multiple tiers subject to our consent for certain specified conditions, for the development and commercialization of ANG-3777 for all therapeutic uses in humans and animals in Greater China (China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Macau). We also granted Sinovant a non-exclusive license, with the right to sublicense through multiple tiers subject to our consent for certain specified conditions, to manufacture ANG-3777 inside and/or outside Greater China for the development and commercialization of ANG-3777 for all therapeutic uses in humans and animals in Greater China.
In 2018, we received an upfront payment of $4.0 million from Sinovant. In addition, pursuant to the Sinovant License, if we achieve the agreed upon development and commercial milestones, Sinovant is obligated to make payments totaling up to $171 million, and tiered royalties on net sales of ANG-3777 at rates ranging from low-double digit percentages to percentages in the low-twenties. Such royalties are further subject to certain specified reductions and offsets.
The Sinovant License will continue on a product-by-product basis from the effective date of the license until the expiration of the last royalty term for such licensed product in Greater China. The royalty term for a licensed product is, on a country-by-country basis, the latest of the expiration of the last-to-expire valid claim of a licensed patent that covers the licensed product in such country, or the expiration of regulatory exclusivity for such licensed product in the country, or ten years after the first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country.
Sinovant may terminate the Sinovant License at its sole discretion on 90 days' written notice if notice is given before the regulatory approval of any licensed product incorporating ANG-3777, or 180 days' written notice if given after regulatory approval of any licensed product incorporating ANG-3777. Both we and Sinovant may terminate the Sinovant License in its entirety if the other is in material breach of the Sinovant License and has not cured the breach within 90 days (or 60 days if the breach is payment-related).
In addition, both parties have the right to terminate the Sinovant License upon insolvency of the other or upon a force majeure event that prohibits either party from performing its obligations for a period of six months.
No revenue was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Collaboration with the University of Michigan
In 2019, we entered into a subcontractor agreement with The Regents of the University of Michigan (UM), under which we provide funding for a study of ANG-3070 in nephrotic kidney disease. Under this agreement we obtain access to the Nephrotic Syndrome Study Network (NEPTUNE), an integrated group of academic centers, patient support organizations and clinical resources dedicated to advancing the treatment of kidney disorders. The goal of work under this agreement, which we support through a grant from the DOD, is to identify human disease and drug response profiles based upon the genes, networks and pathways that correlate with the therapeutic activity of ANG-3070 in primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) and other fibrotic diseases. We are obligated to provide to UM up to a total of $520,000 over the course of the project. We have an option to license and commercialize intellectual property generated during the term of the agreement that is solely owned by UM under commercially reasonable terms.
The agreement has a three-year term and may be terminated by UM for convenience upon 90 days' written notice. We may terminate the agreement for convenience with 30 days' written notice to UM or immediately upon termination of cancellation of our grant from the DOD.
No revenue was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Grants
Since our inception, we have had the benefit of receiving peer-reviewed, competitive grants and contracts from the NIH and the NSF under the SBIR program and from the DOD. From our inception through December 31, 2020, such grants resulted in total proceeds of $68.8 million and as of December 31, 2020, active grants and those for which we have received notification of the intent to fund will provide approximately $0.7 million in anticipated research costs, which includes monies to be paid to university collaborators and other subcontractors named in the grant applications.
We have several grant applications pending review by the NIH, NSF and DOD, and we intend to continue to apply for grants to fund our discovery efforts.
Components of Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our financial statements.
Revenue
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our revenue to date primarily has been derived from government funding consisting of U.S. government grants and contracts, and revenue under our license agreements.
Grant Revenue
Our grants and contracts reimburse us for direct and indirect costs relating to the grant projects and also provide us with a pre-negotiated profit margin on total direct and indirect costs of the grant award, excluding subcontractor costs, after giving effect to directly attributable costs and allowable overhead costs. Funds received from grants and contracts are generally deemed to be earned and recognized as revenue as allowable costs are incurred during the grant or contract period and the right to payment is realized.
Contract Revenue
Our license agreements comprise elements of upfront license fees, milestone payments based on development and royalties based on product sales. The timing of our operating cash flows may vary significantly from the recognition of the related revenue. Income from upfront payments is recognized when we satisfy the performance obligations in the contract, which can result in recognition at either a point in time or over the period of continued involvement. Other revenue, such as milestone payments, are recognized when achieved.
Our revenue to date has been generated from payments received pursuant to the Vifor License Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we recognized revenue from upfront payments over the term of our estimated period of performance using a cost-based input method under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We expect to continue recognizing revenue from upfront payments related to the Vifor License Agreement using the cost-based input method in the foreseeable future.
In addition to receiving an upfront payment, we may also be entitled to milestones and other contingent payments upon achieving predefined objectives. If a milestone is considered probable of being reached, and if it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone amount would also be included in the transaction price.
We expect that any license revenue we generate from our current license agreement, and from any future collaboration partners, will fluctuate in the future as a result of the timing and amount of upfront, milestones and other collaboration agreement payments and other factors.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Grant Revenue
Our cost of grant revenue primarily relates to personnel-related costs and expenses for grant projects.
Research and Development Expenses
To date, our research and development expenses have primarily related to discovery efforts and preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
▪personnel costs, including salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation, for personnel in research and development functions;
▪costs associated with medical affairs activities;
▪fees paid to consultants, clinical testing sites and contract research organizations (CROs), including in connection with our preclinical studies and clinical trials, and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical trial database management, clinical trial material management and statistical compilation, analysis and reporting;
▪contracted research and license agreement fees with no alternative future use;
▪costs related to acquiring, manufacturing and maintaining clinical trial materials and laboratory supplies;
▪depreciation of equipment and facilities;
▪legal expenses related to clinical trial agreements and material transfer agreements; and
▪costs related to preparation of regulatory submissions and compliance with regulatory requirements.
Other than with respect to reimbursable expenses required to be recorded under our government grants and contracts, we do not allocate our expenses by product candidates. A significant amount of our direct research and development expenses include payroll and other personnel expenses for our departments that support multiple product candidate research and development programs and, other than as specified above, we do not record research and development expenses by product. However, research and development expenses were primarily driven by expenses relating to the development of ANG-3777 and ANG-3070 in 2020 and 2019. Of our total
research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, 73% and 69%,
respectively, of such expenses were from external third-party sources and the remaining 27% and 31%,
respectively, were from internal sources.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates and continue to invest in research and development activities. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming, and successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of any of our clinical or preclinical product candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from these product candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
▪the scope, rate of progress and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
▪future preclinical and clinical trial results;
▪obtaining market access and reimbursement approvals; and
▪the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct preclinical or clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our preclinical or clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of our clinical development programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, such as salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, operational, finance and human resources functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include allocation of facilities costs, accounting and legal services and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents. A portion of the general and administrative expenses are reimbursed through the overhead rates contained in our grants with the U.S. Government.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued research and development activities, pre-commercial preparation activities for ANG-3777 and, if any future product candidate receives marketing approval, commercialization activities. We also anticipate incurring additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Other Income (Expense)
Convertible Notes Recorded at Fair Value
We have elected the fair value option for recognition of our convertible notes. Our convertible notes are subject to re-measurement each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations.
Liability Classified Series C Convertible Preferred Stock Recorded at Fair Value
Series C convertible preferred stock includes settlement features that result in liability classification. The initial carrying value of the Series C convertible preferred stock is accreted to the settlement value, the fair value of the securities to be issued upon the conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock. The discount to the settlement value is accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method. During 2020, certain of the convertible notes were exchanged for Series C convertible preferred stock. As the exchange was accounted for as a modification, the Series C convertible preferred stock that was exchanged for the convertible notes (the Exchanged Series C Shares) will continue to be recorded at fair value. The Exchanged Series C Shares are subject to re-measurement each reporting with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations.
Warrant Liability
We have accounted for certain of our freestanding warrants to purchase shares of our common stock as liabilities measured at fair value, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivative and Hedging. The warrants are subject to re-measurement at each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statements of operations.
Foreign Exchange Transaction Gain
Foreign currency transaction gains, primarily related to intercompany loans, are recorded as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations.
Earnings in Equity Method Investment
Earnings in equity method investment represents our 10% interest in NovaPark that is accounted for under the equity method.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
Comparison For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
_______________________
*Not meaningful
Contract Revenue
Contract revenue increased by $0.2 million, from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. Th increase is attributable to revenue recognized related to the upfront payment from Vifor Pharma pursuant to the Vifor License Agreement entered into in 2020.
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue increased by $1.2 million, or 80.7%, from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in reimbursable costs relating to our grant from the DOD for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Grant Revenue
Cost of grant revenue increased by $0.6 million, or 85.9%, from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to personnel-related costs and expenses for two new grant projects with the NIH and DOD for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $9.1 million, or 30.6%, from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $3.1 million in fees paid to CROs and CMOs as a result of increased clinical and non-clinical trial activities, primarily relating to the development of ANG-3777 and ANG-3070, an increase of $6.0 million in personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses, due to increases in headcount.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $8.4 million, or 87.3%, from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of $1.9 million of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses, due to increases in headcount, an increase of $4.0 million of corporate fees due to financing from debt and equity, and an increase of $2.5 million of professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting, tax and other services.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expenses increased by $22.8 million, from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to interest expense of $8.8 million related to our convertible notes and Series C convertible preferred stock and an increase of $14.3 million in fair value related to our warrant liability, convertible notes, and Series C convertible preferred stock for which we have elected the fair value option. The convertible notes and warrants both require re-measurement at each balance sheet date with gains and losses reported through our consolidated statement of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception, and we anticipate that we will incur losses for at least the next several years. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through the receipt of grants, the sale of debt and equity securities, and proceeds from license agreements. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $34.6 million and $5.6 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents.
From our inception, we have received an aggregate of $182.9 million in total funding, which consists of over $68.8 million from U.S. government grants and contracts.
In November 2020, we received an upfront payment of $30.0 million from Vifor pursuant to the Vifor License Agreement. In December 2020, we issued Vifor Pharma a convertible promissory note in aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million, with interest accruing at 2%, on substantially similar terms, but with a maturity date of three years and a conversion price of $11.57 per share (the Vifor Convertible Note).
In addition to the Vifor Convertible Note, we also issued $31.2 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible promissory notes in 2020.
In 2020, we issued 34,928 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock at $642.75 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $22.3 million.
In April 2020, we were approved for and received a loan of approximately $0.9 million from Hanmi Bank under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) and the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA). The loan is evidenced by a promissory note and agreement, dated April 21, 2020 (the PPP Note). The PPP Note proceeds are available to be used to pay for payroll costs, including salaries, commissions, and similar compensation, group health care benefits, and paid leaves; rent; utilities; and interest on certain other outstanding debt, if any. The interest rate on the PPP Note is a fixed rate of 1%
per annum. To the extent that the amounts owed under the PPP Note or a portion of them, are not forgiven, we will be required to make principal and interest payments in monthly installments beginning in August 2021. The SBA and U.S. Department of Treasury may continue to update guidance on the calculation of loan forgiveness, which updated guidance could affect the amount of the loan proceeds that could be forgiven. The PPP Note matures on the two year anniversary of the loan disbursement.
In February 2021, we generated aggregate net proceeds of approximately $109.9 million from our IPO and Concurrent Private Placement, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, private placement fee and estimated offering expenses payable. See Note 17.
Future Funding Requirements
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, together with the net proceeds from our initial public offering and the Concurrent Private Placement, will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least 12 months following the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements. However, we have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of biotechnology products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
▪the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing ANG-3777, ANG-3070 or any other product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
▪the outcome of our ongoing and future clinical trials, including our Phase 3 registration trial of ANG-3777 for DGF, our Phase 2 clinical trial of ANG-3777 for CSA-AKI, our Phase 2 clinical trial in Brazil of ANG-3777 for the reduction of severity and progression of ALI in patients with COVID-19 associated pneumonia who are at high risk of progressing to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and our Phase 1 clinical trial of ANG-3070 in healthy volunteers;
▪whether we are able to take advantage of any FDA expedited development and approval programs for any of our product candidates;
▪the clinical development of ANG-3777 for other potential indications in addition to DGF and CSA-AKI, including ALI and central nervous system (CNS) injuries;
▪the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business, including our clinical trials and financial condition;
▪the willingness of the FDA and foreign regulatory authorities to accept the results of our ongoing Phase 3 registration trial, as well as our other completed and planned clinical trials and preclinical studies and other work, as the basis for review and approval of ANG-3777 for DGF and any other indication;
▪the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining and maintaining FDA and any foreign regulatory approvals;
▪the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue, including our product candidates in preclinical development;
▪the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
▪our need to expand our research and development activities, including to conduct additional clinical trials;
▪market acceptance of our product candidates, including physician adoption, market access, pricing and reimbursement;
▪the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, products, product candidates and technologies;
▪our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
▪our need and ability to hire additional personnel, including management, clinical development, medical and commercial personnel;
▪the effect of competing technological, market developments and government policy;
▪the costs associated with being a public company, including our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems;
▪the costs associated with securing and establishing commercialization and manufacturing capabilities, as well as those associated with packaging, warehousing and distribution;
▪the costs associated with being a commercial company with approved products for sale, including our obligation to meet applicable healthcare laws and regulations and implement robust compliance programs;
▪the economic and other terms, timing of and success of our existing licensing arrangements and any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future and timing and amount of payments thereunder; and
▪the timing, receipt and amount of sales and general commercial success of any future approved products, if any.
Until such time as we or our collaborators can generate significant revenue from sales of ANG-3777 or we can generate sufficient revenue from sales of ANG-3070 or any other product candidate, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through public or private equity offerings or debt financings or other sources of capital, including collaborations, licenses, credit or loan facilities, receipt of research contributions or grants, tax credit revenue or a combination of one or more of these funding sources. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. This may be particularly true during the COVID-19 pandemic when the global capital markets are experiencing extreme volatility. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through additional collaborations, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $22.9 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $80.1 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $31.5 million and a change in net operating assets and liabilities of $25.8 million. The net non-cash charges were primarily related to a change in fair value of $16.5 million in convertible notes, Series C preferred stock and warrant liabilities, amortization of debt issuance costs of $7.7 million, stock-based compensation expense of $4.7 million and placement agent fees of $1.7 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was due to an increase of $29.8 million in deferred revenue due to the upfront fee from the Vifor License Agreement and $3.7 million in accrued expenses, partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a decrease of $5.6 million in accounts payable due to our overall growth, increased research and development spending and timing of payments.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $24.6 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $40.7 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $6.3 million and a change in net operating assets and liabilities of $9.8 million. The net non-cash charges were primarily related to a change in fair value of $2.6 million in convertible notes and warrant liabilities and stock-based compensation expense of $3.3 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was due to an increase of $10.7 million in accounts payable due to our overall growth, increased research and development spending and timing of payments.
Investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash used in investing activities of $41,000 and $0.2 million, respectively, was primarily used to purchase of fixed assets for research activities.
Financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $52.4 million, primarily due to net proceeds of $31.2 million from the issuance of convertible notes and warrants, $20.0 million from the issuance of liability classified Series C Convertible Preferred Stock net of issuance costs and $0.9 million proceeds from our PPP loan.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $4.9 million, primarily due to net proceeds of $5.3 million from the issuance of convertible notes and warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Contract Revenue
The Company accounts for revenue earned from contracts with customers under Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) ("ASC Topic 606"). Under ASC Topic 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC Topic 606, the Company performs the following five steps:
(1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3) Determine the transaction price;
(4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5) Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, the Company assess the goods or services promised within each contract, whether each promised good or service is distinct, and determines those that are performance obligations. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company enters into agreements under which it may obtain upfront payments, milestone payments, royalty payments and other fees. Promises under these arrangements may include licenses of intellectual property, research services, including selection campaign research services for certain replacement targets, the obligation to share information during the research and the participation of alliance managers and in joint research committees, joint patent committees and joint steering committees. The Company assesses these promises within the context of the agreements to determine the performance obligations.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: If a license to its intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring proportional performance for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront payments. The Company evaluates the measure of proportional performance each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone payments: The Company evaluates whether the regulatory and development milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amounts to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. At the end of each reporting period, the Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts the estimate of the overall transaction price.
Sales-based milestones and royalties: For sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, we determine whether the sole or predominant item to which the royalties relate is a license. When the license is the sole or predominant item to which the sales-based royalty relates, the Company recognizes revenue at the later of: (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, the Company has not recognized any sales-based royalty revenue resulting from any license agreement.
Deferred revenue, which is a contract liability, represents amounts received by the Company for which the related revenues have not been recognized because one or more of the revenue recognition criteria have not been met. The current portion of deferred revenue represents the amount expected to be recognized within one year from the consolidated balance sheet date based on the estimated performance period of the underlying performance obligation. The noncurrent portion of deferred revenue represents amounts expected to be recognized after one year through the end of the performance period of the performance obligation.
Grant Revenue
The Company concluded that the Company's government grants are not within the scope of ASC Topic 606 as they do not meet the definition of a contract with a customer. The Company has concluded that the grants meet the definition of a contribution and are non-reciprocal transactions, and have also concluded that Subtopic 958-605, Not-for-Profit-Entities-Revenue Recognition, does not apply, as the Company is a business entity and the grants are with governmental agencies.
In the absence of applicable guidance under GAAP, the Company developed a policy for the recognition of grant revenue when the allowable costs are incurred and the right to payment is realized.
The Company believes this policy is consistent with the overarching premise in ASC Topic 606, to ensure that revenue recognition reflects the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services, even though there is no exchange as defined in ASC Topic 606. The Company believes the recognition of revenue as costs are incurred and amounts become realizable is analogous to the concept of transfer of control of a service over time under ASC Topic 606.
Research and Development
Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, preclinical studies, compound manufacturing costs, consulting costs and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, depreciation and utilities.
The Company has agreements with various Contract Research Organizations ("CROs") and third-party vendors. Research and development accruals of amounts due to the CRO are estimated based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. The estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, are included in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. Payments made to CROs under this arrangement in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets until the services are rendered. The Company makes judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, the Company adjusts its accrued liabilities. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock awards ("RSAs"), restricted stock units ("RSUs"), including restricted stock units with non-market performance and service conditions ("PSUs") to be recognized in the financial statements, based on their respective grant date fair values. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The RSAs, RSUs and PSUs are valued based on the fair value of the Company's common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management's best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment. The Company records expense for stock-based compensation related to stock options, RSAs and RSUs over the requisite service period. As the PSUs have a performance condition, compensation expense is recognized for each vesting tranche over the respective requisite service period of each tranche if and when the Company's management deems probable that the performance conditions will be satisfied. The Company may recognize a cumulative true-up adjustment related to PSUs once a condition becomes probable of being satisfied if the related service period had commenced in a prior period. All share-based compensation costs are recorded in general and administrative or research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations based upon the respective employees or non-employee's roles within the Company. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
Convertible Notes Payable at Fair Value
As permitted under ASC 825, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825"), the Company has elected the fair value option for recognition of its convertible notes. In accordance with ASC 825, the Company recognizes these convertible notes at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value option may be applied instrument by instrument, but it is irrevocable. As a result of applying the fair value option, direct costs and fees related to the convertible notes were recognized in general and administrative expense in earnings as incurred and not deferred. The estimated fair value of the convertible notes is determined by utilizing a present value cash flow model and the values of the equity underlying the conversion options were estimated using company equity values implied from the Subject Company Transaction Method which includes the back-solve and scenario-based methods (Probability Weighted Expected Return Method). See Note 4. Accrued interest for the notes has been included in the change in fair value of convertible notes in the consolidated statements of operations.
Convertible Preferred Stock
Series C convertible preferred stock includes settlement features that result in liability classification. The initial carrying value of the Series C convertible preferred stock is accreted to the settlement value, the fair value of the securities to be issued upon the conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock. The discount to the settlement value is accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method. During 2020, certain convertible notes were exchanged for Series C convertible preferred stock. As the exchange was accounted for as a modification, the Series C convertible preferred stock that was exchanged for the convertible notes (the Exchanged Series C Shares) will continue to be recorded at fair value. The Exchanged Series C Shares are subject to re-measurement at each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our statements of operations.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for certain common stock warrants outstanding as a liability, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each reporting period until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations as a component of other income (expense). The fair value of the warrants issued by the Company has been estimated using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. The underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model was valued based on the equity value implied from sales of preferred and common stock.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"), which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, the Company recognizes the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit would more likely than not be realized assuming examination by the taxing authority. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. To date, there have been no interest or penalties charged in relation to the unrecognized tax benefits.
Emerging growth company and smaller reporting company status
We are a smaller reporting company and an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act for emerging growth companies include presentation of only two years of audited financial statements in a registration statement for an initial public offering, an exemption from the requirement to provide an auditor's report on internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended (Sarbanes-Oxley) an exemption from any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation, and less extensive disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that (i) we are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting standards as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of the IPO, (ii) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more, (iii) the date on which we are deemed to be a "large accelerated filer," as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act), which means the market value of equity securities that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of the issuer's most recently completed second fiscal quarter and (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a "smaller reporting company" which would allow us to take advantage of many of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements including not being required to comply for a period of time with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley, and reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in this Annual Report on From 10-K and our periodic reports and proxy statements.
Item7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The financial statements of Angion Biomedica Corp, listed below are set forth in Item 8 of this Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 2020:
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Deficit
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Angion Biomedica Corp.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Angion Biomedica Corp. (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, stockholders’ deficit and cash flows for the years then ended, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures to respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Moss Adams LLP
Seattle, Washington
March 30, 2021
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2018.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(in thousands, except share and per share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
(in thousands, except share and per share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Deficit
(in thousands, except share amounts)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(in thousands)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1-Description of the Business and Financial Condition
Angion Biomedica Corp. ("Angion" or the "Company") is a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel small molecule therapeutics to address acute organ injuries and fibrotic diseases. The Company was incorporated in Delaware in 1998.
Forward Stock Split
On January 25, 2021, the board of directors of the Company approved an amendment to the Company's certificate of incorporation to effect a forward stock split ("Forward Split") of shares of the Company's common stock on a one-for 1.55583 basis, which was effected on February 1, 2021. All references to common stock, convertible preferred stock, warrants to purchase common stock, stock options, RSAs, RSUs, PSUs, per share amounts and related information contained in the consolidated financial statements have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the effect of the forward stock split for all periods presented. No fractional shares of the Company's common stock were issued in connection with the Forward Split. Any fractional share resulting from the Forward Split was rounded down to the nearest whole share, and any stockholder entitled to fractional shares as a result of the Forward Split will receive a cash payment in lieu of receiving fractional shares. See Note 17.
Initial Public Offering and the Concurrent Private Placement
On February 9, 2021, the Company closed its Initial Public Offering (“IPO”) of 5,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 750,000 shares of common stock. Aggregate net proceeds to Angion were $85.6 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses of $6.4 million. In addition to the shares being sold in IPO, Angion sold an additional 1,562,500 shares of its common stock at the public offering price of $16.00 per share to entities affiliated with Vifor International, Ltd., an existing stockholder (the “Concurrent Private Placement”), for aggregate net proceeds of $24.3 million, after deducting a 3% private placement agent fee of $0.8 million. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, all of the outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock and outstanding convertible notes automatically converted into shares of common stock. The financial statements as of December 31, 2020, including share and per share amounts, do not include the effects of the IPO. See Note 17.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has devoted substantially all of its efforts and financial resources to conducting research and development activities, including drug discovery and pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, establishing and maintaining its intellectual property portfolio, organizing and staffing the Company, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. The Company has incurred losses from operations and negative cash flows from operating activities since inception and expects to continue to incur substantial losses for the next several years as it continues to fully develop and, if approved, commercialize its product candidates. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $34.6 million in cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $160.6 million. Prior to its IPO completed in February 2021, the Company has funded its operations through United States government grants, the issuance of convertible notes (see Note 6), sales of convertible preferred stock and common stock (see Notes 7 and 17) and warrants (see Note 10) and licensing agreements (see Note 12).
The planned expansion of the Company's clinical and discovery programs will require significant funds. Management expects to continue to incur significant expenses and to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future. The Company believes that its existing capital resources, including the cash proceeds received from the IPO and the Concurrent Private Placement in February 2021, will be sufficient to meet the projected operating requirements for at least 12 months from the date of issuance of its financial statements. The Company has evaluated and concluded there are no conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year following the date these financial statements are issued.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The Company's consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") and include the accounts of the Company, its wholly owned subsidiary, Angion Biomedica Europe Limited, which was dissolved on March 16, 2021, and its wholly owned subsidiary, Angion Pty Ltd., which was established on August 22, 2019. The Company established Angion Pty Ltd., an Australian subsidiary, for the purpose of qualifying for research credits for studies conducted in Australia. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates in the Company's consolidated financial statements relate to estimated costs to satisfy performance obligations identified pursuant to Vifor License Agreement, accrued expenses, the valuation of common stock, convertible notes, Series C convertible preferred stock recorded at fair value, stock options and warrants, the valuation allowance of deferred tax assets resulting from net operating losses and revenue. These estimates and assumptions are based on current facts, historical experience and various other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Segments
Operating segments are identified as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete financial information is available for evaluation by the chief operating decision-maker (“CODM”) in making decisions regarding resource allocation and assessing performance. The Company views its operations and manages its business as one operating segment.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
The United States Dollar (“USD”) is the functional currency for the Company’s operations outside the United States. Accordingly, nonmonetary assets and liabilities originally acquired or assumed in other currencies are recorded in USD at the exchange rates in effect at the date they were acquired or assumed. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in other currencies are translated into USD at the exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Translation adjustments are recorded in other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations. Gains and losses realized from non-USD transactions, including intercompany balances not considered as permanent investments, denominated in currencies other than an entity’s functional currency are included in other income (expense) in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. .
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020 or 2019, the Company’s cash equivalents were held in institutions in the United States and include deposits in a money market fund which were unrestricted as to withdrawal or use.
Concentrations of Credit Risk and Off-Balance Sheet Risk
Cash and cash equivalents are financial instruments that are potentially subject to concentrations of credit risk. The Company's cash and cash equivalents are deposited in accounts at large financial institutions, and amounts may exceed federally insured limits. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and believes it is not exposed to significant risk on its cash balances due to the financial position of the depository institution in which those deposits are held.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Additionally, the Company established guidelines regarding approved investments and maturities of investments, which are designed to maintain safety and liquidity.
The Company maintains its cash equivalents in securities and money market funds with original maturities less than three months.
The Company has no financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk of loss.
Grants Receivable
Grants receivable is comprised of unbilled amounts due from various grants from the National Institutes of Health ("NIH") and other U.S. government agencies for costs incurred prior to the period end under reimbursement contracts. All amounts are readily available for draw from the Federal Government Payment Management System and, accordingly, no allowance for doubtful amounts has been established. If amounts become uncollectible, they are charged to operations.
Deferred Offering Costs
Deferred offering costs consist of legal and accounting fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the Company's IPO and will be reflected as issuance costs upon the completion of the offering. As of December 31, 2020, $2.0 million of deferred offering costs were included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the consolidated balance sheet. There were no deferred offering costs as of December 31, 2019.
Property and Equipment
Property, equipment and leasehold improvements are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization is computed using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives as follows:
Normal repairs and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group to be tested for possible impairment, the Company first compares undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. The impairment losses as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $58 thousand and zero.
Fair Value Measurement
Certain assets and liabilities are carried at fair value under GAAP. Fair value is determined using the principles of ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement. Fair value is described as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy prioritizes and defines the inputs to valuation techniques as follows:
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets.
Level 2: Inputs are observable for the asset or liability either directly or through corroboration with observable market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs.
The inputs used to measure the fair value of an asset or a liability are categorized within levels of the fair value hierarchy. The fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the same level of the fair value hierarchy as the lowest level input that is significant to the measurement.
The Company's cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses are carried at cost, which approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
Leases
The Company accounts for its leases under ASC 842, Leases. Under this guidance, arrangements meeting the definition of a lease are classified as operating or finance leases, and are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets as both a right of use asset and a lease liability, calculated by discounting fixed lease payments over the lease term at the rate implicit in the lease or the Company's incremental borrowing rate. Lease liabilities are increased by interest and reduced by payments each period, and the right of use asset is amortized over the lease term. For operating leases, interest on the lease liability and the amortization of the right of use asset results in straight-line rent expense over the lease term. Variable lease expenses are recorded when incurred.
In calculating the right of use assets and lease liabilities, the Company elects to combine lease and non-lease components. The Company excludes short-term leases having initial terms of 12 months or less from the new guidance as an accounting policy election, and recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Investments in Related Party Entities
The Company holds a 10% and a 2.4% interest in two entities, NovaPark, LLC ("NovaPark") and Ohr Cosmetics, LLC ("Ohr"), respectively. There is common ownership between the Executive Chairman of the Company and each entity. See Note 16. In accordance with ASC 323, Investments -Equity Method and Joint Ventures, the Company has significant influence but not control over NovaPark as its ownership in the limited liability company exceeds 3-5%. Accordingly, the Company records the NovaPark investment under the equity method of accounting. The Ohr investment is recorded at cost.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for certain common stock warrants outstanding as a liability, in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each reporting period until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations as a component of other income (expense). The fair value of the warrants issued by the Company has been estimated using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. The underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model was valued based on the equity value implied from sales of preferred and common stock.
Convertible Notes Payable at Fair Value
As permitted under ASC 825, Financial Instruments ("ASC 825"), the Company has elected the fair value option for recognition of its convertible notes. In accordance with ASC 825, the Company recognizes these convertible notes at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value option may be applied instrument by instrument, but it is irrevocable. As a result of applying the fair value option, direct costs and fees related to the convertible notes were recognized in general and administrative expense in earnings as incurred and not deferred. The estimated fair value of the convertible notes is determined by utilizing a present value cash flow model and the values of the equity underlying the conversion options were estimated using company equity values implied from the Subject Company Transaction Method which includes the back-solve and scenario-based methods (Probability Weighted Expected Return Method). See Note 4. Accrued
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
interest for the notes has been included in the change in fair value of convertible notes in the consolidated statements of operations.
Convertible Preferred Stock
Series C convertible preferred stock includes settlement features that result in liability classification. The initial carrying value of the Series C convertible preferred stock is accreted to the settlement value, the fair value of the securities to be issued upon the conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock. The discount to the settlement value is accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method. During 2020, certain convertible notes were exchanged for Series C convertible preferred stock. As the exchange was accounted for as a modification, the Series C convertible preferred stock that was exchanged for the convertible notes will continue to be recorded at fair value and are subject to re-measurement at each reporting period with gains and losses reported through our statements of operations.
Treasury Stock
The Company records the repurchase of shares of common stock at cost based on the settlement date of the transaction. These shares are classified as treasury stock, which is a reduction to stockholders' equity. Treasury stock is included in authorized and issued shares but excluded from outstanding shares.
Revenue
The Company does not have any products approved for sale and has not generated any revenue from product sales. The Company’s revenue to date has been primarily derived from government funding consisting of U.S. government grants and contracts, and revenue under its license agreements.
Contract Revenue
The Company accounts for revenue earned from contracts with customers under Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) ("ASC Topic 606"). Under ASC Topic 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC Topic 606, the Company performs the following five steps:
(1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3) Determine the transaction price;
(4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5) Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, the Company assess the goods or services promised within each contract, whether each promised good or service is distinct, and determines those that are performance obligations. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company enters into agreements under which it may obtain upfront payments, milestone payments, royalty payments and other fees. Promises under these arrangements may include research licenses, research services, including selection campaign research services for certain replacement targets, the obligation to share information during the research and the participation of alliance managers and in joint research committees, joint patent committees and joint steering committees. The Company assesses these promises within the context of the agreements to determine the performance obligations.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: If a license to its intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring proportional performance for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront payments. The Company evaluates the measure of proportional performance each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone payments: The Company evaluates whether the regulatory and development milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amounts to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. The Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. At the end of each reporting period, the Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust the estimate of the overall transaction price.
Sales-based milestones and royalties: For sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, we determine whether the sole or predominant item to which the royalties relate is a license. When the license is the sole or predominant item to which the sales-based royalty relates, the Company recognize revenue at the later of: (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, the Company has not recognized any sales-based royalty revenue resulting from any license agreement.
Deferred revenue, which is a contract liability, represents amounts received by the Company for which the related revenues have not been recognized because one or more of the revenue recognition criteria have not been met. The current portion of deferred revenue represents the amount expected to be recognized within one year from the consolidated balance sheet date based on the estimated performance period of the underlying performance obligation. The noncurrent portion of deferred revenue represents amounts expected to be recognized after one year through the end of the performance period of the performance obligation.
Grant Revenue
The Company concluded that the Company's government grants are not within the scope of ASC Topic 606 as they do not meet the definition of a contract with a customer. The Company has concluded that the grants meet the definition of a contribution and are non-reciprocal transactions, and have also concluded that Subtopic 958-605, Not-for-Profit-Entities-Revenue Recognition, does not apply, as the Company is a business entity and the grants are with governmental agencies.
In the absence of applicable guidance under GAAP, the Company developed a policy for the recognition of grant revenue when the allowable costs are incurred and the right to payment is realized.
The Company believes this policy is consistent with the overarching premise in ASC Topic 606, to ensure that revenue recognition reflects the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services, even though there is no exchange as defined in ASC Topic 606. The Company believes the recognition of revenue as costs are incurred and amounts become realizable is analogous to the concept of transfer of control of a service over time under ASC Topic 606.
Research and Development
Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, preclinical studies, compound manufacturing costs, consulting costs and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, depreciation and utilities.
The Company has agreements with various Contract Research Organizations ("CROs") and third-party vendors. Research and development accruals of amounts due to the CRO are estimated based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. The estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, are included in accrued liabilities on
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
the consolidated balance sheet. Payments made to CROs under this arrangement in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets until the services are rendered. The Company makes judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, the Company adjusts its accrued liabilities. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
Advertising Costs
Advertising costs are expensed as incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019, advertising costs were not significant.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock awards ("RSAs"), restricted stock units ("RSUs"), including restricted stock units with non-market performance and service conditions ("PSUs") to be recognized in the financial statements, based on their respective grant date fair values. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The RSAs, RSUs and PSUs are valued based on the fair value of the Company's common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management's best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment. The Company records expense for stock-based compensation related to stock options, RSAs and RSUs over the requisite service period. As the PSUs have a performance condition, compensation expense is recognized for each vesting tranche over the respective requisite service period of each tranche if and when the Company's management deems probable that the performance conditions will be satisfied. The Company may recognize a cumulative true-up adjustment related to PSUs once a condition becomes probable of being satisfied if the related service period had commenced in a prior period. All share-based compensation costs are recorded in general and administrative or research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations based upon the respective employees or non-employee's roles within the Company. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"), which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, the Company recognizes the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit would more likely than not be realized assuming examination by the taxing authority. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. To date, there have been no interest or penalties charged in relation to the unrecognized tax benefits.
Net Loss Per Share
Basic net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. Diluted net loss per share excludes the potential impact of convertible preferred stock, common stock options, warrants and unvested shares of restricted stock and restricted stock units because their effect would be anti-dilutive due to the Company's net loss. Since the Company had net losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, basic and diluted net loss per common share are the same.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Comprehensive Loss
Comprehensive loss represents the net loss for the period and other comprehensive income. Other comprehensive income reflects certain gains and losses that are recorded as a component of stockholders’ deficit and are not reflected in the statements of operations. The Company’s other comprehensive income consists of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820),-Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which makes a number of changes meant to add, modify or remove certain disclosure requirements associated with the movement amongst or hierarchy associated with Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3 fair value measurements. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted this standard as of January 1, 2020, which did not have material impact on its financial statements and related disclosures.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326) Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (ASU No. 2016-13), which requires an entity to utilize a new impairment model known as the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) model to estimate its lifetime “expected credit loss” and record an allowance that, when deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial assets and certain other instruments, including but not limited to available-for-sale debt securities. Credit losses relating to available-for-sale debt securities will be recorded through an allowance for credit losses rather than as a direct write-down to the security. As an emerging growth company, ASU No. 2016-13 is effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740)-Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (ASU 2019-12), which is intended to simplify accounting for income taxes. It removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. ASU 2019-12 is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within annual periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is in the process of evaluating the impact of this new guidance on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. ASU No. 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of ASU No. 2020-06 on its consolidated financial statements.
Note 3-Revenue and Deferred Revenue
Grant Revenue
Our grants and contracts reimburse us for direct and indirect costs relating to the grant projects and also provide us with a pre-negotiated profit margin on total direct and indirect costs of the grant award, excluding subcontractor costs, after giving effect to directly attributable costs and allowable overhead costs. Funds received
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
from grants and contracts are generally deemed to be earned and recognized as revenue as allowable costs are incurred during the grant or contract period and the right to payment is realized.
Contract Revenue
The Company’s contract revenue has been generated from payments received pursuant to a license agreement (the "Vifor License") with Vifor International, Ltd. ("Vifor Pharma"), where its headquarter is located in Switzerland. We recognized revenue from upfront payments over the term of our estimated period of performance using a cost-based input method under Topic 606. We expect to continue recognizing revenue from upfront payments related to the Vifor License using the cost-based input method in the foreseeable future.
Vifor License Agreement
In November 2020, the Company entered into a license agreement with Vifor Pharma, granting Vifor Pharma global rights (excluding China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau) to develop, manufacture and commercialize ANG-3777 in all therapeutic, prophylactic and diagnostic uses for renal indications, including forms of acute kidney injury (AKI), and congestive heart failure (collectively, the Renal Indications). Pursuant to the Vifor License, the Company is entitled to receive $80 million in upfront and near-term clinical milestone payments, including $30 million in up-front cash that was received in November 2020, and a $30 million equity investment, $5 million of which the company received in January 2021 and $25 million of which was received in the Concurrent Private Placement with its IPO. The Company is also eligible to receive post-approval milestones of up to approximately $260 million and sales-related milestones of up to $1.585 billion, providing a total potential deal value of up to $1.925 billion (subject to certain specified reductions and offsets), plus tiered royalties on net sales of ANG-3777 at royalty rates of up to 40%. Under the Vifor License, the Company is responsible for executing a pre-specified clinical development plan designed to obtain regulatory approvals of ANG-3777 for delayed graft function (DGF) and AKI associated with cardiac surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass (CSA-AKI).
The Vifor License will continue until the expiration of the last royalty term for a licensed product in the licensed territory, unless earlier terminated. The royalty term for a licensed product is, on a country-by-country basis, shall start with the first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country and expire at the latest of (i) expiration of all licensed patents covering the composition of matter of such licensed product or method of use for such licensed product that has obtained regulatory approval in such country, (ii) expiration of all regulatory and data exclusivity applicable to such licensed product in such country, or (iii) the tenth (10th) anniversary of the date of the first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country.
Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License at its sole discretion upon the earlier of (i) the acceptance for filing of an NDA covering products incorporating ANG-3777 filed with the FDA (after completion of the relevant Phase 3 clinical trial for such products), or (ii) the third anniversary of the effective date of the Vifor License. Both we and Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License in its entirety if the other is in material breach of the Vifor License and has not cured the breach (if curable) within 60 days, or 90 days for incurable breach. In certain circumstances, in the event of our material breach of the Vifor License, Vifor Pharma may terminate the Vifor License with respect to certain major markets. In addition, both parties have the right to terminate the Vifor License upon insolvency of the other party.
The Company identified the following performance obligations in the Vifor License: (1) the global license (excluding greater China), (2) the development services, including the clinical development services including a post-approval confirmatory study, the technical development services and regulatory services and (3) the required participation on Joint Committees for coordination and oversight. The Company determined that the license is not capable of being distinct due to the specialized nature of the development services to be provided by the Company, and, accordingly, this promise was combined with the development services and participation in the joint committees as one single performance obligation.
In order to determine the transaction price, the Company evaluated all the payments to be received during the duration of the contract. Certain milestones and additional fees were considered variable consideration, which were not included in the transaction price as of December 31, 2020. The Company determined that the transaction price at the inception of the Vifor License is $15.0 million, which is 50% of the $30.0 million upfront payment due to the potential setoff defined in the contract. The Company will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur. The transaction price is recognized as license revenue using the cost-based input method over the estimated performance period of approximately
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
seven years. The performance period represents the estimated timing of completion of the identified performance obligation.
Using the cost-based input method, the Company recognizes revenue based on actual costs incurred as a percentage of total estimated costs as the Company completes its performance obligation. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimated costs to complete the Company’s performance obligation will be recorded in the period in which changes are identified and amounts can be reasonably estimated. These actual costs consist primarily of internal full time equivalent (FTE) efforts and third-party contract costs related to the Vifor License.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized licenses revenue related to the Vifor License of $0.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, $29.8 million was recorded as deferred revenue, of which $3.9 million was current, on the consolidated balance sheet related to the Vifor License.
Note 4-Fair Value Measurements
The following table classifies the Company's financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis into the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
___________________
(1) Included in cash and cash equivalents on the balance sheet.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
There were no transfers made among the three levels in the fair value hierarchy during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table presents changes in Level 3 liabilities measured at fair value for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Both observable and unobservable inputs were used to determine the fair value of positions that the Company has classified within the Level 3 category. Unrealized gains and losses associated with liabilities within the Level 3 category include changes in fair value that were attributable to both observable (e.g., changes in market interest rates) and unobservable (e.g., changes in unobservable long- dated volatilities) inputs.
The change in the fair value of the convertible notes for which the fair value option was elected (see Note 6) and the warrants (see Note 10) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were primarily attributable to changes in the Company's total equity.
The Company used an option model to measure the fair value of the Notes (on conversion date). The values of the equity underlying the conversion options in the model were estimated using equity values implied from sales of convertible preferred stock. The fair value of the Notes was impacted by the model selected as well as assumptions surrounding unobservable inputs. Key unobservable inputs include the expected volatility of the underlying equity, and the timing of an expected liquidity event.
The fair value of the warrants issued by the Company has been estimated using a variant of the Black Scholes option pricing model. The underlying equity included in the Black Scholes option pricing model was valued based on the equity value implied from sales of preferred and common stock at each measurement date. The fair value of the warrants was impacted by the model selected as well as assumptions surrounding unobservable inputs including the underlying equity value, expected volatility of the underlying equity, risk free interest rate and the expected term.
A summary of the weighted average (in aggregate) significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs) used in measuring the Company's convertible debt that is categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
A summary of the weighted average (in aggregate) significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs) used in measuring the Company's warrant liabilities that are categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Note 5-Balance Sheet Components
Property and Equipment, Net
The Company's property and equipment, net was comprised of the following (in thousands):
Depreciation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.1 million.
Prepaid and Other Current Assets
Prepaid and other current assets were comprised of the following (in thousands):
Accrued Expenses
Accrued expenses were comprised of the following (in thousands):
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Continued)
Note 6-Convertible Notes Payable
During 2020, the Company issued $31.2 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible notes (the "2020 Notes”). During 2019, the Company issued $5.3 million of convertible notes to various investors, all of which are due approximately one year from the date of issuance (the "2019 Notes"). The 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes (collectively referred as the “Additional Convertible Notes”) bore interest at a rate of 12% per annum, had a one-year term and the right to convert at the lesser of a 20% discount to the share price and $11.57 per share. In addition, in December 2020, the Company issued Vifor Pharma a convertible promissory note in aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million, with interest accruing at 2%, on substantially similar terms, but with a maturity date of three years and a conversion price of $11.57 per share (the “Vifor Convertible Note”). The Company received $5.0 million cash from Vifor Pharma in January 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the $5.0 million convertible note was recorded as convertible note receivable which was included in other current asset on the consolidated balance sheet.
The Company has elected the fair value option for recognition of the 2019 Notes, the 2020 Notes and the Vifor Convertible Note. As such, the 2019 Notes, the 2020 Notes and the Vifor Convertible Note are recognized at estimated fair value with changes in fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. Accrued interest for the notes has been included in the change in fair value of convertible notes in the consolidated statements of operations.
In connection with the issuance of the 2020 Notes, the Company issued equity-classified broker warrants to purchase 214,305 shares of common stock, at an exercise price of $0.01, with an initial fair value of $1.7 million which has been recorded as general and administrative expenses. The Company issued broker warrants to purchase 40,087 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 in connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes.
In July and August 2020, the Company exchanged (the "Note Exchange") $7.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes for $7.5 million in aggregate principal amount of new convertible notes (the "New 2020 Notes"). The increase in $0.5 million was the accrued interest balance for the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes upon the Note Exchange. The New 2020 Notes bear interest at a rate of 12% per annum and have a one-year term from the date of the exchange and the right to convert at a 20% discount of the share price, with a price cap of $11.57 per share, from certain qualified financings. The Note Exchange was recognized as a modification, with changes to fair value accounted for on a prospective basis. As the Company had elected the fair value option for the 2019 Notes and 2020 Notes, the changes in fair value from the modification were included in change in fair value of convertible notes in the consolidated statements of operations.
In August 2020, the Company exchanged (the “Series C Exchange”) $1.9 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes, with a fair value of $2.3 million for 3,042 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock at $642.75 per share, or $2.0 million. The increase of $0.1 million was the accrued interest balance for the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes upon this exchange. See Note 7.
Conversion of Convertible Notes Payable
In January 2021, the Company issued 33,798 shares of common stock upon the conversion of certain of the outstanding 2020 Notes. In connection with the IPO in February 2021, with an IPO price of $16.00 per share, the remaining outstanding Additional Convertible Notes and Vifor Convertible Note were converted into 3,636,189 shares of the Company’s common stock based on a conversion price of $11.57 per share. See Note 17.
Note 7- Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
In January 2020, the Company filed an Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, authorizing 12,000 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock (the "Series C Preferred Stock") with 12% per annum cumulative dividends unless the Company fails to redeem any outstanding Series C Preferred Stock in full on the redemption date, then the dividend will increase to 15.0% per annum until the Series C Preferred Stock has been fully redeemed. Unless earlier converted, the Series C Preferred Stock shall be redeemed on the earlier of: (i) the first anniversary of its issuance date, (ii) the date of a change in control, as defined, or (iii) the date of the occurrence of an event of default, as defined. Each share of Series C Preferred Stock and all accrued and unpaid dividends, at the
option of the holders of Series C Preferred Stock, may be converted in whole or in part into equity shares of the Company issued in a future financing at 80% of the fair value of the shares issued in such financing.
In July 2020, the Company filed an Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, increasing the authorized number of shares of Series C Preferred Stock to 40,000 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock and included a cap price of $11.57 per share on the conversion price of the Series C convertible preferred stock into equity shares of the Company issued in a future financing.
In 2020, the Company issued 34,928 shares of Series C Preferred Stock at $642.75 per share for gross proceeds of $22.3 million. In conjunction with the IPO, the Company paid fees to third parties aggregating $2.2 million and issued equity-classified warrants to brokers to purchase 178,982 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 with an initial fair value of $1.4 million. The initial recognition of the warrant liability, direct fees and settlement premium of $5.6 million resulted in a discount of $9.3 million.
Based on management's assessment of the predominant settlement features of the Series C Preferred Stock, the instrument is recognized as a liability in accordance with ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. The initial carrying value of the Series C Preferred Stock is accreted to the settlement value, which is the fair value of the securities to be issued upon the conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock. The discount to the settlement value is accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method.
In August 2020, the Company exchanged $1.9 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes, with a fair value of $2.3 million into 2,804 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock (the "Exchanged Series C Shares"). The Series C Exchange is accounted for as a modification, thus upon the date of the Series C Exchange the fair value of $2.3 million of the exchanged 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes has been included in Series C convertible preferred stock in the consolidated balance sheets. As the Company had elected the fair value option for the 2019 Notes and the 2020 Notes exchanged in the Series C Exchange, the Exchanged Series C Shares will be recognized at fair value pursuant to the prior fair value option election. Changes in the fair value of Series C convertible preferred stock will be recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
The following table summarizes the aggregate values recorded for the Series C Preferred Stock as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Conversion of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
In connection with the IPO in February 2021, with an initial public offering price of $16.00 per share, all Series C convertible preferred stock outstanding plus accrued dividends were automatically converted into an aggregate of 2,234,640 shares of common stock on February 9, 2021 with a conversion price of $11.57 per share. See Note 17.
Note 8-Stockholders' Equity
Equity Issuances
In March 2019, the Company issued an aggregate of 45,419 shares of its common stock with an aggregate fair value of $0.3 million in lieu of compensation earned by Jay Venkatesan, M.D., the Chief Executive Officer and director of the Company, from the period from May 1, 2018 through March 30, 2019.
Treasury Stock
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $1.8 million was included in treasury stock in the consolidated balance sheets.
Note 9-Stock-Based Compensation
2002 Plan
The Company's 2002 Stock Option Plan (the "2002 Plan") permits the granting of incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options. Pursuant to the 2002 Plan, the aggregate number of shares that could be issued during the plan's ten-year term was 326,250. At the conclusion of the ten-year term, in August 2012, 507,588 options were issued and no additional options were to be granted under the 2002 Plan.
In November 2019, in connection with the exercise of 192,872 stock options under the 2002 Plan, certain employees executed loan letter agreements for the cumulative amount of $38,000 payable to the Company in amounts equal to the total exercise price of their stock options (the "Loan Options"). The loans shall be payable in full at the earlier of the payment of an annual bonus to the employee or two years from the date of exercise and bear interest at 1.86%. The loans do not indicate they are collateralized and are therefore considered nonrecourse for accounting purposes. As such, (i) the purchase of common stock with the loan was accounted for as if it remained a stock option grant and (ii) no receivable for amounts due under the loan was recorded on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. Furthermore, although the term for repayment of the loan extended the term of the original options which results in a modification of the options, incremental compensation cost related to the modifications of the extended terms was not material. As of December 31, 2020, other than the Loan Options, there are no other stock options outstanding under the 2002 Plan.
2015 Plan
In June 2019, the Company approved an Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (the "2015 Plan") permitting the granting of incentive stock options, non-statutory stock options, restricted stock and other stock-based awards. The Company increased the number of common shares authorized and available for issuance under the 2015 plan from 507,588 to 3,839,676 shares. Additionally, under the Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan, on the first day of each fiscal year commencing in 2020 until 2025, the number of shares of common stock available for awards shall be increased by an amount equal to the lesser of (i) 5% of the number of outstanding shares of common stock on such date; and (ii) an amount determined by the Board of Directors of the Company but in no event shall such shares reserved for awards, be increased if such awards, together with the number of shares of common stock available for issuance under all other employee or director stock plans would result in the total number of shares of common stock then available for issuance under all employee and director stock plans exceeding 20% of the outstanding shares on a fully diluted basis of the Company on the first day of the applicable fiscal year. The aggregate number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to awards granted under the 2015 Plan is 4,774,170.
Following the effectiveness of the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan ("2021 Plan"), the Company ceased making grants under the 2015 Plan. However, the 2015 Plan continues to govern the terms and conditions of the outstanding awards granted under it. Shares of common stock subject to awards granted under the 2015 Plan that cease to be subject to such awards by forfeiture or otherwise after the termination of the 2015 Plan will be available for issuance under the 2021 Plan. See Note 17.
Stock Options
The fair value of each employee and non-employee stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company determines the estimated fair value of its common stock using the Subject Company Transaction Method which includes the back-solve and scenario-based methods (Probability Weighted Expected Return Method) to arrive at estimated fair values. The Company was a private company as of December 31, 2020 and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, it estimates its expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies. Due to the lack of historical exercise history, the expected term of the Company's stock options for employees has been determined utilizing the "simplified" method for awards. The expected term of stock options granted to non-employees is equal to the contractual term of the option award. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is zero based on the fact that the Company has never paid cash dividends and does not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The following assumptions were used to estimate the fair value of stock option awards:
The following table summarizes information as of December 31, 2020 and activity during 2020 related to our share option plans:
The aggregate intrinsic value in the above table is calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value of the Company's common stock price and the exercise price of the stock options. The weighted average grant date fair value per share for the stock option grants during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $5.41 and $4.20, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the total unrecognized compensation related to unvested stock option awards granted was $5.2 million, which the Company expects to recognize over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.5 years.
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units
The Company's RSA and RSU activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The following table summarizes the total stock-based compensation expense for the stock options, RSUs, RSAs and compensation issued in shares recorded in the consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Performance-based Restricted Stock Units
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 556,530 PSUs outstanding that were granted in June 2019. Vesting of the PSUs is dependent upon the satisfaction of both a service condition and a performance condition, an initial public offering or a change of control, as defined in the 2015 Plan. As the IPO had not occurred as of December 31, 2020, no compensation expense related to these awards has been recorded in 2020.
In connection with the IPO in February 2021, the Company recorded $2.8 million of stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method as the performance condition was satisfied in the first quarter of 2021. See Note 17.
Note 10-Warrants
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the outstanding warrants to purchase the Company's common stock were comprised of the following:
In accordance with ASC 815, the warrants classified as liabilities are recorded at fair value at the issuance date, with changes in the fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations at the end of each reporting period. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the increase in the fair value of the warrants of $5.0 million and the increase in the fair value of the warrants of $2.0 million, respectively, are recognized in change in fair value of warrant liability in the consolidated statements of operations.
In accordance with ASC 815, the warrants classified as equity do not meet the definition of a derivative and are classified in stockholders' deficit in the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company's warrant activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 was as follows:
Conversion of Warrants
In February 2021, all warrants outstanding issued with 2015 Notes, 2016 Notes, 2017 Notes, and 2018 Notes with a $6.43 exercise price were net exercised into an aggregate of 844,335 shares of common stock upon the IPO with a conversion price of $11.57 per share. See Note 17.
Note 11-Commitments and Contingencies
Operating Leases
The Company leases office and laboratory space in Uniondale, New York from NovaPark, a related party, under an agreement classified as an operating lease that expires June 20, 2026. The Company's lease does not require any contingent rental payments, impose any financial restrictions, or contain any residual value guarantees. Variable expenses generally represent the Company's share of the landlord's operating expenses, including management fees. The Company does not act as a lessor or have any leases classified as financing leases.
The Company leases office space in Fort Lee, New Jersey, comprising approximately 2,105 square feet for approximately $0.1 million per year, under a non-cancelable operating lease through March 31, 2022 however, this arrangement is excluded from the calculation of lease liabilities and right of use assets as its term is less than one year. The lease is subject to charges for common area maintenance and other costs.
During 2018, the Company entered into agreements for office space in Boston, Massachusetts (the “Boston lease”) and San Francisco, California for a term of two months with continual renewals. These agreements do not meet the definition of a lease in accordance with Topic 842. The Company did not renew the Boston lease after September 2020.
During 2019, the Company entered into a sublease agreement for office space in San Francisco, California. This lease commenced in February 2020 and subsequently cancelled on June 30, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $0.1 million of expense for this lease. There are no additional payments due under this lease.
In July 2020, the Company entered into a lease for office furniture in San Francisco, California set to expire in July 2025, with an annual lease payment of approximately $13,000. As of December 31, 2020, a $0.1 million impairment of leased assets is included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations for the remaining payments due under the lease as the San Francisco office space lease was cancelled.
The following table provides the components of the Company's rent expense (in thousands):
The following table summarizes quantitative information about the Company's NovaPark operating leases (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, maturities of lease liabilities were as follows (in thousands):
Litigation
The Company is not a party to any material legal proceedings and is not aware of any pending or threatened claims. From time to time, the Company may be subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of its business activities.
Indemnification
The Company enters into standard indemnification arrangements in the ordinary course of business. Pursuant to these arrangements, the Company indemnifies, holds harmless and agrees to reimburse the indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party, in connection with any trade secret, copyright, patent or other intellectual property infringement claim by any third party with respect to its technology. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual any time after the execution of the agreement. The maximum potential amount of future payments the Company could be required to make under these arrangements is not determinable. The Company has never incurred costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification agreements. As a result, the Company believes the fair value of these agreements is minimal.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, the Company received funds in the amount of $0.9 million pursuant to a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program of the 2020 CARES Act ("PPP") administered by the Small Business Association. The loan has an interest rate of 1.0% and a term of 24 months. No payments are due for the first 16 months, although interest accrues, and monthly payments are due over the next 8 months to retire the loan plus accrued interest. Funds from the loan may only be used for certain purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and a portion of the loan used to pay certain costs may be forgivable, all as provided by the terms of the PPP. The loan is evidenced by a promissory note, which contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties. The Company may prepay the loan at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties.
Note 12-Significant Agreements
License Agreement
In November 2020, the Company entered into a license agreement with Vifor Pharma, granting Vifor Pharma global rights (excluding China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau) to develop, manufacture and commercialize ANG-3777 in all therapeutic, prophylactic and diagnostic uses for the Renal Indications. Pursuant to the Vifor License, the Company is entitled to receive $80 million in upfront and near-term clinical milestone payments, including $30 million in up-front cash that was received in November 2020, and a $30 million equity investment, $5 million of which the company received in January 2021 and $25 million of which the Company received in the Concurrent Private Placement with its IPO. The Company is also eligible to receive post-approval milestones of up to approximately $260 million and sales-related milestones of up to $1.585 billion, providing a total potential deal value of up to $1.925 billion (subject to certain specified reductions and offsets), plus tiered royalties on net sales of ANG-3777 at royalty rates of up to 40%. Under the Vifor License, the Company is responsible for executing a pre-specified clinical development plan designed to obtain regulatory approvals of ANG-3777 for DGF and CSA-AKI. See Note 3.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized license revenue related to the Vifor License of $0.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, $29.8 million was recorded as deferred revenue, of which $3.9 million was current, on the consolidated balance sheet related to the Vifor Agreement. See Note 3.
In December 2020, the Company issued Vifor Pharma a convertible promissory note in the aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million and received cash in January 2021. See Note 6.
Subcontractor Agreement
In September 2019, in connection with a grant to the Company from the U.S. Department of Defense ("DOD"), the Company entered into a subcontractor agreement with The Regents of the University of Michigan ("UM"), to obtain access to the Nephrotic Syndrome Study Network ("NEPTUNE"), to perform a portion of the research related to the DOD grant, for approximately $0.5 million. The amount will be paid as work is performed over the three year agreement period. These costs are reimbursable from the DOD grant. The agreement may be terminated by UM with 90 days' written notice. The Company may terminate the agreement with 30 days' written notice to UM or immediately upon termination of cancellation of the grant from the DOD. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, $0.1 million and $11,000 were recorded in cost of grant revenue, respectively.
Sinovant
In August 2018, the Company entered into a collaboration and licensing agreement with Sinovant Sciences HK Limited (Sinovant and the Sinovant License) for the development and commercialization of ANG-3777 in Greater China (China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau). The agreement includes an upfront payment, milestone payments and royalties. Pursuant to the Sinovant License, if the Company achieves the agreed upon development and commercial milestones, Sinovant is obligated to make payments totaling up to $171 million, and tiered royalties on net sales of ANG-3777 at rates ranging from low-double digit percentages to percentages in the low-twenties. Such royalties are further subject to certain specified reductions and offsets. No revenue was recognized for the years presented.
Note 13-Income Taxes
The Company recorded $800 and zero for state tax for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The difference between the Company's effective tax rate of 0% and the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% is largely due to the Company's net operating losses, which are offset by the corresponding valuation allowance. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The Company has established a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty that such assets will be realized. The Company periodically evaluates the recoverability of the deferred assets. At such time as it is determined that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will be realized, the valuation allowance will be reduced.
The provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consists of the following (in thousands):
The reconciliations between the federal statutory income tax rate and the Company's effective income tax rate were as follows:
Significant components of the Company's deferred tax asset at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $106.8 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any, for federal income tax purposes. Approximately $9.6 million of federal net operating losses can be carried forward to future tax years and begin to expire in 2035. The federal net operating losses generated for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately $97.2 million in total, can be carried forward indefinitely. The Company has state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $57.8 million.
The NOL carryforward may be subject to an annual limitation under Section 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and similar state provisions if the Company experienced one or more ownership changes which would limit the amount of NOL and tax credit carryforwards that can be utilized to offset future taxable income and tax respectively. In general, an ownership change as defined by Section 382 and 383, results from the transactions increasing ownership of certain stockholders or public groups in the stock of the corporation of more than 50 percentage points over a three-year period. The Company has not completed a Section 382 and 383 analysis to assess whether an ownership change has occurred or whether there have been multiple ownership changes since the Company's formation due to the complexity and cost associated with such study and the fact there may be additional such ownership changes in the future. If a change in ownership were to have occurred or occurs in the future, the NOL and tax credits carryforwards could be eliminated or restricted. If eliminated, the related asset would be removed from the deferred tax asset schedule with a corresponding reduction in the valuation allowance. Due to the existence of the valuation allowance, limitations created by future ownership changes, if any, will not impact the Company's effective tax rate.
The Company files income tax returns in the United States, California, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey and Australia. Due to the Company's losses incurred, the Company is subject to the income tax examination by authorities since inception. The Company's policy is to recognize interest expense and penalties related to income tax matters as tax expense. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no significant accruals for interest related to unrecognized tax benefits or tax penalties.
At December 31, 2020, the Company's reserve for unrecognized tax benefits is approximately $2.6 million. Due to the full valuation allowance at December 31, 2020, current adjustments to the unrecognized benefits will have no impact to the Company's effective income tax rate.
Reconciliation of uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows (in thousands):
Total amount of unrecognized tax benefits, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate was as follows: (in thousands)
The Company does not anticipate material changes to its uncertain tax positions for the next twelve months.
In conjunction with the 2018 Act that amends the Internal Revenue Code that reduced the U.S. corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018 and modified policies, credits, and deductions (the "Tax Act"), the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 ("SAB 118") to address the application of GAAP in situations when a registrant does not have the necessary information available, prepared, or analyzed (including computations) in reasonable detail to complete the accounting for certain income tax effects of the Tax Act. The Company has completed its evaluation and determined that there was no net impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as the corresponding adjustment was made to the valuation allowance.
Note 14-Employee Benefit Plan
Simple IRA plan
The Company maintained a simple IRA plan (the "Plan") for employees, including named executive officers, who satisfy certain eligibility requirements. The Company has elected to make matching contributions to the Plan of 100% of every dollar each participant defers into the plan up to a maximum deferral of 3% of the participant's eligible wages. The Company made matching contributions to the Plan totaling $0.1 million and $46,000 for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Starting January 1, 2021, the Company no longer offers the simple IRA plan and has transitioned to the 401(k) plan. See Note 17.
Note 15-Net Loss Per Share
The following table sets forth the computation of the Company’s basic and diluted net loss per share attributable to common stockholders, which excludes shares which are legally outstanding but subject to repurchase by the Company (in thousands, except share and per share data):
The table below provides potentially dilutive securities not included in the calculation of the diluted net loss per share because to do so would be anti-dilutive:
___________________________________
(1)The number of shares issuable upon conversion of the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes and Series C preferred stock has been estimated using the Company's common stock fair value at December 31, 2020, discounted by 20%.
For the years presented, the PSUs are not included in the above table as awards with performance conditions are not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share until the performance conditions for the PSUs are considered probable.
Note 16-Related Party Transactions
Ohr Investment
In a series of investments in November 2013 and July 2017, the Company invested a total of $150,000 to acquire a membership interest in Ohr Cosmetics, LLC ("Ohr"), an affiliated company.
The Company owns and the family of the Company's Executive Chairman owns approximately 2.4% and 81.3%, respectively, of the membership interests in Ohr. The Executive Chairman's son is the manager of Ohr.
In November 2013, the Company granted Ohr an exclusive worldwide license, with the right to sublicense, under the Company's patent rights covering one of the Company's CYP26 inhibitors, ANG-3522, for the use in treating conditions of the skin or hair. Sublicensees may not grant further sublicenses under the Company's patent rights other than to affiliates of such sublicensees and entities with which sublicensees are collaborating for the research, development, manufacture and commercialization of the products. Ohr will pay the Company a royalty at a rate in the low single digits on gross revenue of products incorporating ANG-3522, and milestone payments potentially totaling up to $9 million based on achievement of sales milestones. Royalties and milestone payments will be paid until the later of 15 years from the first commercial sale of a licensed product or the last to expire licensed patent rights. The royalty rate is subject to adjustments under certain circumstances. The Company believes that the Ohr License was made on terms no less favorable to the Company than those that the Company could obtain from unaffiliated third parties.
No revenue from this license agreement was recognized for the years presented.
NovaPark Investment and Lease
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a 10% interest in NovaPark. Members of the Company's Executive Chairman's immediate family own a majority of the membership interests of NovaPark. The Company accounts for its aggregate 10% investment in NovaPark under the equity method. The following table provides the activity for the NovaPark investment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The Company rents office and laboratory space in Uniondale, New York from NovaPark under a lease that expires June 20, 2026. The Company recorded rent expense for fixed lease payments of $1.0 million in each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company recorded rent expense for variable expenses related to the lease of $0.6 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 11. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance on the mortgage debt was approximately $9.0 million and $5.1 million, respectively.
Convertible Notes
In connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes and the exchange to New 2020 Notes (see Note 6), as of December 31, 2020, Victor Ganzi, Gilbert Omenn and Karen Wilson, directors of the Company, and Raj Venkatesan, brother of the Chief Executive Officer and director of the Company, hold $0.7 million, $0.7 million,$0.2 million and $0.1 million of aggregated principal amounts of convertible notes, respectively, that accrue interest at a rate of 12% interest per annum. All outstanding convertible notes were converted into an aggregate of 149,500 shares of common stock upon the IPO in February 2021. (see Note 17)
Series C Convertible Preferred Stock
In connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes and the exchange to New 2020 Notes and Series C convertible preferred stock (see Note 7), as of December 31, 2020, Jay Venkatesan, M.D., the Chief Executive Officer and director of the Company, holds 2,804 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock, which were converted into an aggregate of 165,094 shares of common stock with a conversion price of $11.57 per share upon the IPO in February 2021. (See Note 17)
Consultant Fees
Angion pays consulting fees under an agreement with the wife of the Executive Chairman of the Company for Company management services. Consultant fees paid to the wife were approximately $0.1 million in each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Other
Dr. Michael Yamin, a former member of the Board of Directors of the Company, is a Scientific Advisor for Pearl Cohen Zedek Latzer Baratz LLP (Pearl Cohen). In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company paid Pearl Cohen approximately $0.2 million and $0.1 million in legal fees, respectively.
In January 2018, the Company also entered into a consulting agreement with Dr. Yamin pursuant to which he agreed to provide consulting services to the Company in the areas of biomedical research and development. Pursuant to the terms of the consulting agreement, Dr. Yamin, in his capacity as a consultant, received $0.1 million during each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Dr. Yamin resigned from the Company's Board of Directors in March 2020. Dr. Yamin's resignation was not due to any disagreement with the Company, the Board or management of the Company.
Note 17-Subsequent Events
Forward Stock Split
On January 25, 2021, the board of directors of the Company approved an amendment to the Company's certificate of incorporation to effect a forward stock split ("Forward Split") of shares of the Company's common stock on a one-for 1.55583 basis, which was effected on February 1, 2021. In connection with the Forward Split, the authorized shares were increased to 46,674,809 for common stock and 1,555,827 for the preferred stock, but there was no adjustment to the par value of the common stock and the preferred stock and 62,223 for the Series C convertible preferred stock. All references to common stock, convertible preferred stock, warrants to purchase common stock, stock options, RSAs, RSUs, PSUs, per share amounts and related information contained in the consolidated financial statements have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the effect of the forward stock split for all periods presented. No fractional shares of the Company's common stock were issued in connection with the Forward Split. Any fractional share resulting from the Forward Split was rounded down to the nearest whole share, and any stockholder entitled to fractional shares as a result of the Forward Split will receive a cash payment in lieu of receiving fractional shares.
Employee Benefit Plan
Starting on January 1, 2021, the Company no longer offers the simple IRA plan and has transitioned to the 401(k) Plan.
The Company sponsors a retirement savings plan that is intended to qualify for favorable tax treatment under Section 401(a) of the Code, and contains a cash or deferred feature that is intended to meet the requirements of Section 401(k) of the Code. Participants may make pre-tax and certain after-tax (Roth) salary deferral contributions to the plan from their eligible earnings up to the statutorily prescribed annual limit under the Code. Participants who are 50 years of age or older may contribute additional amounts based on the statutory limits for catch-up contributions. Participant contributions are held in trust as required by law. No minimum benefit is provided under the plan. An employee’s interest in his or her salary deferral contributions is 100% vested when contributed. Contributions are matched at a dollar for dollar rate up to 3% of an individual’s earnings and fifty cents on the dollar on the next 4-5% of earnings.
Equity Incentive Plans
On January 25, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved the 2021 Plan which permits the granting of incentive stock options, non-statutory stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other stock-based awards to employees, directors, officers and consultants. On January 25, 2021, shares of common stock equal to 11% of the post-IPO capitalization, with annual increases, up to a maximum of 60,000,000 shares of common stock were authorized for issuance under the 2021 Plan.
Following the effectiveness of the 2021 Plan, the Company ceased making grants under the 2015 Plan. However, the 2015 Plan continues to govern the terms and conditions of the outstanding awards granted under it.
Shares of common stock subject to awards granted under the 2015 Plan that cease to be subject to such awards by forfeiture or otherwise after the termination of the 2015 Plan will be available for issuance under the 2021 Plan.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
In January 2021, the board of directors of the Company approved the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the "ESPP"). The ESPP will become effective on the date immediately prior to the effectiveness of the Company's registration statement on Form S-1 for its proposed IPO. The ESPP provides for the issuance of shares of common stock equal to 1% of the post-IPO capitalization.
The Initial Public Offering
On February 9, 2021, we closed our IPO of 5,750,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 750,000 shares of common stock. All of the shares of common stock issued and sold in our IPO were registered under the Securities Act pursuant to registration statements on Form S-1, as amended (Registration No. 333-252177), which was declared effective by the SEC on February 4, 2021. Aggregate net proceeds to Angion were $85.6 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses of $6.4 million.
The Concurrent Private Placement
On February 4, 2021, the Company entered into a stock purchase agreement (the Stock Purchase Agreement) with Vifor Pharma, pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell 1,562,500 shares of common stock to Vifor Pharma at a purchase price of $16.00 per share, equal to the offering price per share in the Company’s IPO, for net proceeds of $24.3 million, after deducting a 3% placement agent fee. Cowen and Company, LLC and Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated served as placement agents for the Concurrent Private Placement and received a placement agent fee equal to 3% of the total purchase price of the private placement shares.
The Initial Public Offering and Concurrent Private Placement, which both closed on February 9, 2021, generated aggregate net proceeds of approximately $109.9 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, private placement fee and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company.
Equity Transactions Prior to IPO
Convertible Notes Conversion
In January 2021, we issued 33,798 shares of common stock upon the conversion of certain of the outstanding 2020 Notes.
Warrants Exercised
In January 2021, we issued 200,018 shares of common stock upon the exercise of certain of the outstanding warrants.
Equity Transactions after IPO and the Concurrent Private Placement
The number of shares of common stock outstanding after the IPO and the Concurrent Private Placement as of February 9, 2021 is as below:
Performance-based Restricted Stock Units
In 2019, the Company granted 556,530 PSUs, with a grant date fair value of $6.05. Vesting of the PSUs is dependent upon the satisfaction of both a service condition and a performance condition, an initial public offering or a change of control, as defined in the 2015 Plan. As the performance condition is met upon closing of the IPO in February 2021, the Company recorded $2.8 million of stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method as the performance condition was satisfied in the first quarter of 2021.
Angion Biomedica Europe Limited (Dissolved)
Angion Biomedica Europe Limited was formally dissolved on March 16, 2021.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our President and Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer, our principal executive officer and principal accounting and financial officer, respectively, have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) as of December 31, 2020.
Disclosure controls and procedures are controls and other procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our reports filed or submitted under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported, within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Disclosure controls and procedures include controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our reports filed under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to management, including our President and Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. Based on the evaluation of our disclosure controls and procedures, our President and Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective as of December 31, 2020 due to the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting described below. In light of this fact, our management has performed additional analyses, reconciliations, and other post-closing procedures and has concluded that, notwithstanding the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting, the consolidated financial statements for the periods covered by and included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K fairly present, in all material respects, our financial position, results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented in conformity with U.S. GAAP.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Except for the changes in connection with the ongoing remediation of the previously identified material weakness discussed below, there has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting during the quarter ended December 31, 2020, that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
In connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we identified control deficiencies in the design and operation of our internal control over financial reporting that constituted material weaknesses. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
The material weaknesses identified in our internal control over financial reporting related to (i) insufficient resources with knowledge and expertise in U.S. GAAP to properly evaluate certain complex transactions, including debt instruments and equity instruments; and (ii) insufficient financial reporting and close controls to ensure that incurred expenses are accrued at period end and deliverables from third party contractors are reviewed for accuracy. During 2020, we took a number of actions to remediate these material weaknesses, including:
•engaging SEC compliance and technical accounting consultants to assist in evaluating transactions for conformity with the U.S. GAAP;
•hiring additional finance and accounting personnel to augment accounting staff and to provide more resources for complex accounting matters and financial reporting; and
•strengthening our financial reporting and close relating to incurred expenses by ensuring our data capture procedures are clearly defined and that responsible personnel, including supervisory personnel, have adequate training regarding the process and expectation.
We are still in the process of implementing these controls. We intend to continue to take steps to remediate the material weaknesses through formalizing documentation of policies and procedures and further evolving our accounting processes.
While we believe that these efforts will improve our internal control over financial reporting, the design and implementation of our remediation is ongoing and will require validation and testing of the design and operating effectiveness of our internal controls over a sustained period of financial reporting cycles. The actions that we are taking are subject to ongoing senior management review, as well as audit committee oversight. We will not be able to conclude whether the steps we are taking will fully remediate the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting until we have completed our remediation efforts and subsequent evaluation of their effectiveness.
Inherent Limitation on the Effectiveness Over Financial Reporting
The effectiveness of any system of internal control over financial reporting, including ours, is subject to inherent limitations, including the exercise of judgment in designing, implementing, operating, and evaluating the controls and procedures, and the inability to eliminate misconduct completely. Accordingly, any system of internal control over financial reporting, including ours, no matter how well designed and operated, can only provide reasonable, not absolute assurances. In addition, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. We intend to continue to monitor and upgrade our internal controls as necessary or appropriate for our business, but there can be no assurance that such improvements will be sufficient to provide us with effective internal control over financial reporting.
Exemption from Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
This Annual Report on Form 10-K does not include a report of management’s assessment regarding internal control over financial reporting or an attestation report of our independent registered public accounting firm due to a transition period established by the rules of the SEC for newly public companies.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Management
Executive Officers
The following table sets forth information regarding our executive officers and directors as of March 1, 2021:
________________________
(1) Member of the audit committee.
(2) Member of the compensation committee.
(3)Member of the nominating and corporate governance committee.
Executive Officers and Employee Directors
Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D., President, Chief Executive Officer and Director. Dr. Venkatesan has been our Chief Executive Officer and director since May 2018. Dr. Venkatesan has served as a Managing Partner of Alpine BioVentures, an investment firm, since July 2015. From July 2015 to August 2018, Dr. Venkatesan served as President of Alpine Immune Sciences, an immunotherapy company that he co-founded as a Managing Partner of Alpine BioVentures, and also served as its Chief Executive Officer from July 2015 to June 2016. Additionally, as Managing Partner of Alpine BioVentures, from January 2014 to August 2014, Dr. Venkatesan served as Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Alpine BioSciences, a biotechnology company, which was acquired by Cascadian Therapeutics, where he then served as Executive Vice President and General Manager from August 2014 to May 2015 (subsequently acquired by Seagen, Inc.). Since January 2008, Dr. Venkatesan has served as the founder and managing member of Ayer Capital, a global healthcare fund. Prior to that, he served as a director at Brookside Capital, part of Bain Capital, where he co-managed healthcare investments. He was also a consultant at McKinsey & Co., a consulting firm, and a venture investor with Patricof & Co. Ventures (now Apax Partners), an investment firm. Dr. Venkatesan has served on the board, of Alpine Immune Sciences, Inc. (Nasdaq: ALPN) since June 2015. Dr. Venkatesan previously served on the board of Exicure Inc. (Nasdaq: XCUR) from March 2014 to December 2020 and Iovance Biotherapeutics Inc. (Nasdaq: IOVA) from September 2013 to March 2018. He has an M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, an M.B.A. from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and a B.A. from Williams College. We believe that Dr. Venkatesan's leadership experience and investment experience in the biopharmaceutical industry qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Itzhak D. Goldberg, M.D., Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer. Dr. Goldberg has been our Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer since March 2018 and after serving as our Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer and Scientific Director since our founding in April 1998. Dr. Goldberg was formerly a faculty member at Harvard Medical School, Radiation Oncologist-in-Chief for the North Shore-LIJ (Northwell) Health System, and Professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. He is a Fellow of the American College of Radiology. Dr. Goldberg has an M.D. from Albert Einstein College of Medicine, was a postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard Medical School and was subsequently trained as a radiation oncologist at the Harvard Joint Center for
Radiation Therapy. We believe that Dr. Goldberg's extensive experience in the biopharmaceutical industry qualifies him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
John F. Neylan, M.D. Dr. Neylan has been our Senior Vice President and Chief Medical Officer since December 2018. From April 2015 to December 2018, Dr. Neylan served as Chief Medical Officer of Keryx, a biopharmaceutical company focused on nephrology. From May 2008 to April 2015, Dr. Neylan served as Senior Vice President, Clinical Development, at Genzyme Corporation, a biopharmaceutical company focusing on specialty metabolic diseases. From 2000 to 2008, Dr. Neylan served as Vice President, Research and Development for Wyeth Research, a pharmaceutical company, overseeing the clinical development of transplantation therapeutics and providing medical affairs support to the transplant franchise. Dr. Neylan has also held prestigious positions in academia, including Professor of Medicine at Emory University and Assistant Professor of Medicine at University of California, Davis, serving at both institutions as Medical Director of the respective Renal Transplant Programs, with oversight of the clinical research programs. Dr. Neylan has a B.S. from Duke University and an M.D. from Rush Medical School in Chicago. He completed his Internal Medicine residency at Vanderbilt University and fellowships in Nephrology and in Transplantation and Immunogenetics at Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard University. He was formerly the President of the American Society of Transplantation, past Board Member of the National Kidney Foundation and a past Industry Representative on the FDA Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee.
Jennifer J. Rhodes, J.D. Ms. Rhodes has been our Senior Vice President, General Counsel, Chief Compliance Officer and Corporate Secretary since January 2020. In February 2019, Ms. Rhodes also became a director of Legal Aid at Work, a non-profit legal services organization. Ms. Rhodes previously served as General Counsel and Corporate Secretary at Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a public pharmaceutical company, from April 2016 until January 2020, during which time she also served as Chief Compliance Officer since August 2016 and Chief Business Officer since January 2017. Prior to that, Ms. Rhodes served as General Counsel at Medivation, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company, from June 2012 to September 2015, where she was responsible for Medivation's legal matters, and also served as Corporate Secretary from April 2013 to September 2015 and as Chief Compliance Officer from July 2012 to October 2014. From May 2006 to June 2012, Ms. Rhodes was an Assistant General Counsel at Pfizer Inc., a biopharmaceutical company, where she supported the U.S. Primary Care Business and its Primary Care Medicines Development Group and served as a global product lead for Pfizer Inc.'s primary care medicines. Prior to joining Pfizer Inc., she was an associate in the regulatory law and international trade practice areas at Weil, Gotshal & Manges, LLP from October 2000 to April 2006. Ms. Rhodes has a J.D. from Wake Forest University School of Law and a B.A. in Economics from Newcomb College of Tulane University.
Gregory S. Curhan. Mr. Curhan has served as our interim Chief Financial Officer since June 2020 through his capacity as a partner at FLG Partners, LLC (FLG Partners), a Silicon Valley chief financial officer services firm. Prior to joining FLG Partners, LLC, Mr. Curhan was Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President Corporate Development of Providence Medical Technology, a venture-backed medical device manufacturer, December 2016 until January 2020. Prior to that, Mr. Curhan was a Business Development Officer Brighton Jones, a financial planning company, from December 2012 to December 2016. Mr. Curhan has a B.A. in Economics from Dartmouth College.
Non-Employee Directors
Victor F. Ganzi. Mr. Ganzi has been a member of our board of directors since April 2018. He has served as Non-Executive Chairman of the board of directors of Willis Towers Watson (Nasdaq: WLTW), a global advisory, broking and solutions company, since January 2019 and as a director since January 2016. Previously, he served as a director of Towers Watson beginning on January 1, 2010, as Chairman of Towers Watson's Audit Committee, and a member of its Nominating and Governance Committee. Mr. Ganzi is presently a consultant and corporate director, serving on the boards of numerous private and not-for-profit organizations, including PGA Tour, Inc., the Partnership to End Addiction, the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club. Mr. Ganzi was the President and Chief Executive Officer of The Hearst Corporation, a private diversified communications company, from 2002 to 2008. He served as Hearst's Executive Vice President from 1997 to 2002 and as its Chief Operating Officer from 1998 to 2002. Prior to joining Hearst in 1990, Mr. Ganzi was the managing partner at the international law firm of Rogers & Wells (now part of Clifford Chance). Mr. Ganzi previously served as a director of Gentiva Health Services, Inc., Wyeth and Hearst-Argyle Television, Inc. Mr. Ganzi has a B.S. in Accounting summa cum laude, from Fordham University, a J.D. from Harvard Law School and an L.L.M. in Taxation from New York
University. We believe that Mr. Ganzi's years of experience serving on boards and legal expertise qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Allen R. Nissenson, M.D. Dr. Nissenson has been a member of our board of directors since January 2020. He is currently the Emeritus Chief Medical Officer of DaVita Kidney Care, where he has served since January 2020 and where he previously served as Chief Medical Officer from August 2008 to January 2020. He is currently an Emeritus Professor of Medicine at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, where he has served since August 2008 and where he previously served as Director of the Dialysis Program from July 1977 to August 2008 and Associate Dean from July 2005 to August 2008. Dr. Nissenson is also currently on the board of directors of Rockwell Medical Inc., a public biopharmaceutical company, which he joined in June 2020. Dr. Nissenson is the immediate past chair of Kidney Care Partners and immediate past co-chair of the Kidney Care Quality Alliance. He is a former president of the Renal Physicians Association (RPA) and current member of the Government Affairs Committee. Dr. Nissenson also previously served as president of the Southern California End-Stage Renal Disease Network, as well as chair of the Medical Review Board. He served as a Robert Wood Johnson Health Policy Fellow of the National Academy of Medicine from 1994 to 1995 and worked in the office of the late Senator Paul Wellstone. Dr. Nissenson has an M.D. from Northwestern University Medical School and is the recipient of various awards, including the President's Award of the National Kidney Foundation, the Lifetime Achievement Award in Hemodialysis, the American Association of Kidney Patients' (AAKP) Medal of Excellence Award and, in 2017, the RPA Distinguished Nephrology Service Award. We believe that Dr. Nissenson's years of experience in the healthcare industry qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Gilbert S. Omenn, M.D., Ph.D. Dr. Omenn has been a member of our board of directors since January 2020. Since 1997, Dr. Omenn has been a faculty member at the University of Michigan, where he is currently the Harold T. Shapiro Distinguished University Professor of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, Internal Medicine, Human Genetics, and Public Health. Earlier, he was the dean of the School of Public Health and Community Medicine and professor of medicine at the University of Washington. Dr. Omenn served as Executive Vice President for Medical Affairs of the University of Michigan and as Chief Executive Officer of the University of Michigan Health System from 1997 to 2002. Dr. Omenn is a member of the National Academy of Medicine and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He chaired the Presidential/Congressional Commission on Risk Assessment and Risk Management, the NAS/NAE/IOM Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, and the Advisory Committee for the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. He served on the National Commission on the Environment, the NIH Scientific Management Review Board, and the CDC Director's Advisory Committee. He is a past president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and a member of the National Academy of Medicine. Since 2014, Dr. Omenn has served as a director of Galectin Therapeutics Inc., a biotechnology company (Nasdaq: GALT). Dr. Omenn previously served as a director of Amgen, Inc. for 27 years and Rohm & Haas Company for 22 years. Dr. Omenn was a director of Esperion Therapeutics (Nasdaq: ESPR) from August 2014 to May 2018. Dr. Omenn has a B.A. summa cum laude from Princeton University, M.D. magna cum laude from Harvard Medical School and Ph.D. in genetics from the University of Washington. We believe that Dr. Omenn's years of experience in the healthcare industry qualify him to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Karen J. Wilson. Ms. Wilson has been a member of our board of directors since April 2020. Ms. Wilson is also currently a member of the boards of directors of Connect Biopharma, LAVA Therapeutics and Vaxart, Inc. Ms. Wilson previously served as Senior Vice President of Finance at Jazz Pharmaceuticals plc, a biopharmaceutical company, until September 2020 after serving as Principal Accounting Officer and Vice President of Finance. Prior to joining the Jazz Pharmaceuticals organization in February 2011, she served as Principal Accounting Officer and Vice President of Finance at PDL BioPharma, Inc., a life sciences company. She also previously served as a Principal at the consulting firm of Wilson Crisler LLC, Chief Financial Officer of ViroLogic, Inc., a biosciences company, Chief Financial Officer and Vice President of Operations for Novare Surgical Systems, Inc., a medical device manufacturer, and as a consultant and auditor for Deloitte & Touche LLP, a professional services firm. Ms. Wilson is a Certified Public Accountant and received a B.S. in Business from the University of California, Berkeley. We believe that Ms. Wilson is qualified to serve on our Board due to her extensive background in financial and accounting matters for public companies and her leadership experience in the life science industry.
Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our directors, executive officers, and persons holding more than 10% of our common stock to report their initial ownership of the common stock and other equity securities and any
changes in that ownership in reports that must be filed with the SEC. The SEC has designated specific deadlines for these reports, and we must identify in our Annual Report on Form 10-K those persons who did not file these reports when due.
No reports were required to be filed by our directors, executive officers and 10% holders during the year ended December 31, 2020 as we had not yet completed our IPO and become subject to the reporting obligations of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act.
Board Composition
Classified Board of Directors
In accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation, our board of directors is divided into three classes with staggered, three-year terms. At each annual meeting of stockholders, the successors to directors whose terms then expire will be elected to serve from the time of election and qualification until the third annual meeting following election. Our directors are divided among the three classes as follows:
•the Class I directors are Dr. Venkatesan and Ms. Wilson, and their terms will expire at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2022;
•the Class II directors are Dr. Goldberg and Dr. Nissenson, and their terms will expire at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2023; and
•the Class III directors are Dr. Omenn and Mr. Ganzi, and their terms will expire at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2024.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that the authorized number of directors may be changed only by resolution of the board of directors. Any additional directorships resulting from an increase in the number of directors will be distributed among the three classes so that, as nearly as possible, each class will consist of one-third of the directors. The division of our board of directors into three classes with staggered three-year terms may delay or prevent a change of our board of directors or a change in control of our company.
Audit Committee
Our audit committee oversees our corporate accounting and financial reporting process. Among other matters, the audit committee:
•appoints our independent registered public accounting firm;
•evaluates the independent registered public accounting firm's qualifications, independence and performance;
•determines the engagement of the independent registered public accounting firm;
•reviews and approves the scope of the annual audit and pre-approves the audit and non-audit fees and services;
•reviews and approves all related party transactions on an ongoing basis;
•establishes procedures for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints received by the Company regarding accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing matters;
•discusses with management and the independent registered public accounting firm the results of the annual audit and the review of our quarterly financial statements;
•approves the retention of the independent registered public accounting firm to perform any proposed permissible non-audit services;
•monitors the rotation of partners of the independent registered public accounting firm on our engagement team in accordance with requirements established by the SEC;
•discusses on a periodic basis, or as appropriate, with management the Company's policies and procedures with respect to risk assessment and risk management;
•is responsible for reviewing our financial statements and our management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations to be included in our annual and quarterly reports to be filed with the SEC;
•annually reviews and assesses internal controls and treasury functions including cash management procedures;
•investigates any reports received through the ethics hotline and report to the Board periodically with respect to the information received through the ethics hotline and any related investigations;
•reviews our critical accounting policies and estimates; and
•reviews the audit committee charter and the committee's performance at least annually.
The members of our audit committee are Karen Wilson, Victor Ganzi, Allen Nissenson and Gilbert Omenn. Ms. Wilson serves as the chairperson of the committee. All members of our audit committee meet the requirements for financial literacy under the applicable rules and regulations of the SEC and The Nasdaq Global Market. Our board of directors has determined that Ms. Wilson is an audit committee financial expert as defined under the applicable rules of the SEC and has the requisite financial sophistication as defined under the applicable rules and regulations of The Nasdaq Global Market. Under the rules of the SEC, members of the audit committee must also meet heightened independence standards. Our board of directors has determined that each of Ms. Wilson, Mr. Ganzi, Dr. Nissenson and Dr. Omenn are independent under the applicable rules of the SEC and The Nasdaq Global Market. The audit committee operates under a written charter that satisfies the applicable standards of the SEC and The Nasdaq Global Market.
Compensation Committee
Our compensation committee oversees policies relating to compensation and benefits of our officers and employees. The compensation committee reviews and approves or recommend to our board of directors corporate goals and objectives relevant to compensation of our executive officers (other than our Chief Executive Officer), evaluates the performance of these officers in light of those goals and objectives and approve the compensation of these officers based on such evaluations. The compensation committee also reviews and approves or makes recommendations to our board of directors regarding the issuance of stock options and other awards under our stock plans to our executive officers (other than our Chief Executive Officer). The compensation committee reviews the performance of our Chief Executive Officer and makes recommendations to our board of directors with respect to his compensation and our board of directors retains the authority to make compensation decisions relative to our Chief Executive Officer. The compensation committee reviews and evaluates, at least annually, the performance of the compensation committee and its members, including compliance by the compensation committee with its charter. The members of our compensation committee are Allen Nissenson, Victor Ganzi, Gilbert Omenn and Karen Wilson. Dr. Nissenson serves as the chairman of the committee. Each of the members of our compensation committee is independent under the applicable rules and regulations of The Nasdaq Global Market and is a "non-employee director" as defined in Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the Exchange Act. The compensation committee operates under a written charter that satisfies the applicable standards of the SEC and The Nasdaq Global Market.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
The nominating and corporate governance committee is responsible for making recommendations to our board of directors regarding candidates for directorships and the size and composition of our board of directors. In addition, the nominating and corporate governance committee is responsible for overseeing our corporate governance policies and reporting and making recommendations to our board of directors concerning governance matters. The members of our nominating and corporate governance committee will be Gilbert Omenn, Victor Ganzi, Allen Nissenson and Karen Wilson. Dr. Omenn serves as the chairman of the committee. Each of the members of our nominating and corporate governance committee is an independent director under the applicable rules and regulations of The Nasdaq Global Market relating to nominating and corporate governance committee independence. The nominating and corporate governance committee operates under a written charter that satisfies the applicable standards of the SEC and The Nasdaq Global Market.
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
Our Board of directors has adopted a code of business conduct and ethics that applies to all of our employees, officers and directors, including those officers responsible for financial reporting. The code of business conduct and
ethics is available on our website. We expect that any amendments to the code, or any waivers of its requirements, will be disclosed on our website.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The following is a discussion and analysis of compensation arrangements of our named executive officers (NEOs). This discussion contains forward looking statements that are based on our current plans, considerations, expectations and determinations regarding future compensation programs. Actual compensation programs that we adopt may differ materially from currently planned programs as summarized in this discussion. As an "emerging growth company" as defined in the JOBS Act, we are not required to include a Compensation Discussion and Analysis section and have elected to comply with the scaled disclosure requirements applicable to emerging growth companies.
We seek to ensure that the total compensation paid to our executive officers is reasonable and competitive. Compensation of our executives is structured around the achievement of individual performance and near-term corporate targets as well as long-term business objectives.
Our NEOs for fiscal year 2020 were as follows:
▪Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D., President and Chief Executive Officer;
▪Jennifer J. Rhodes, Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Compliance Officer; and
▪Gregory S. Curhan, interim Chief Financial Officer.
Ms. Rhodes commenced service as our Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Compliance Officer in January 2020.
Mr. Curhan commenced services as our interim Chief Financial Officer in June 2020, whereby we contracted with FLG Partners, LLC (FLG) for his services.
2020 Summary Compensation Table
The following table sets forth total compensation paid to our named executive officers for the fiscal year ending on December 31, 2020.
___________________________________
(1)For the bonus awards column, amount shown for Ms. Rhodes represents a sign-on bonus of $100,000, half of which was paid in March 2020 and the remaining portion was paid in September 2020. The bonus column includes discretionary annual bonuses paid to each of our NEOs in connection with their service in the applicable fiscal year. For fiscal year 2020, these amounts will be paid to our NEOs once achievement has been determined by the Company, which is expected to occur in March 2021. Please see the descriptions of the bonuses paid to our NEOs under "2020 Bonuses" below, including target amounts for the discretionary annual bonuses.
(2)For the stock awards and option awards columns, amounts shown represents the grant date fair value of restricted stock units and options granted during fiscal year 2020 as calculated in accordance with ASC Topic 718. See Note 2 of the financial statements included in this registration statement for the assumptions used in calculating this amount. Note that the amount included for Mr. Curhan's December 2020 stock option award has been estimated based on our recent calculations, but has not yet been audited for confirmation.
(3)For the all other compensation column, amounts shown for Mr. Curhan represent the consulting fees paid by the Company to Mr. Curhan in consideration for his services as our interim Chief Financial Officer.
(4)Mr. Curhan commenced service as our interim Chief Financial Officer in June 2020.
Narrative to Summary Compensation Table
2020 Salaries
Our NEOs each receive a base salary to compensate them for services rendered to our company. The base salary payable to each named executive officer is intended to provide a fixed component of compensation reflecting the executive's skill set, experience, role and responsibilities. For fiscal year 2020, Dr. Venkatesan's base salary increased from $300,000 to $570,000, effective as of September 2020, and Ms. Rhodes base salary was $400,000. For fiscal year 2020, Mr. Curhan received $450 per hour of work under FLG's consulting agreement with the Company. Our board of directors and compensation committee may adjust base salaries from time to time in their discretion.
2020 Bonuses
In connection with her commencement of services with us in January 2020, we paid to Ms. Rhodes a sign-on bonus in the aggregate amount of $100,000, 50% of which was paid to her in March 2020 and the remaining 50% of which was paid to her in September 2020. We also intend to pay to each of our NEO's a discretionary cash bonus in connection with their contributions to our company in 2020 (except for Mr. Curhan since he provides services to the Company through a consulting agreement with the Company and FLG (Consulting Agreement) and is not an employee of the Company), with initial targets based on 50% and 40% of Dr. Venkatesan's and Ms. Rhodes' base salary, respectively.
On March 8, 2021, the Board of Directors of Angion (the “Board”), approved, on recommendation of the Compensation Committee of the Board, annual base salaries for 2021 and cash performance bonuses for 2020 for the following named executive officers, including the principal executive officer:
Equity-Based Compensation
In fiscal year 2020, we made equity award grants to each of our NEOs. In February 2020, in connection with her commencement of employment with the Company, we granted Ms. Rhodes an option to purchase 116,687 shares of our common stock and 38,895 restricted stock units. Ms. Rhodes' option and restricted stock units vests as to 25% of the shares on January 13, 2021 and vests as to the remaining 75% of the shares in 24 equal monthly installments thereafter, subject to Ms. Rhodes continued service to the Company through such vesting date. In June 2020, we granted each of Dr. Venkatesan and Ms. Rhodes an option to purchase 124,466 and 58,343 shares of our common stock, respectively. Each of Dr. Venkatesan's and Ms. Rhodes' options vest as to 1/48th of the shares subject to the option on each monthly anniversary of June 18, 2020, subject to the applicable NEO's the Company through such vesting date. In August 2020, in connection with the commencement of Mr. Curhan's services with the Company, we granted Mr. Curhan an option to purchase 56,009 shares of our common stock (2,800 shares of which were granted via an option and attributed to FLG per the terms of the Consulting Agreement). Mr. Curhan's option vests as to 25% of the shares on the vesting commencement date and thereafter as to 1/9th of the remaining shares on each monthly anniversary of August 31, 2020, subject to Mr. Curhan continued service to the Company through such vesting date. In addition, the stock option will be exercisable for one year after termination of the applicable Consulting Agreement. Finally, in December 2020, we granted Mr. Curhan an option to purchase 168,028 shares of our common stock (8,401 shares of which were granted via an option and attributed to FLG per the terms of the Consulting Agreement). Mr. Curhan's option vests as to 4,667 shares on each monthly anniversary of June 1, 2021, subject to Mr. Curhan continued service to the Company through such vesting date. The stock option shall cease vesting on the earlier of (i) the termination of the consulting agreement between FLG and the Company and (ii) the first month after the Company employs a full-time Chief Financial Officer. In addition, the stock option will be exercisable for 90 days after termination of the applicable consulting agreement between FLG and the Company for Mr. Curhan's services.
We have adopted the 2021 Plan, which became effective on the day prior to the first public trading date of our common stock. The principal purpose of the 2021 Plan is to attract, retain and motivate selected employees,
consultants and directors through the granting of stock-based compensation awards and cash-based performance bonus awards. The material terms of the 2021 Plan, as it is currently contemplated, are summarized below. For additional information about the 2021 Plan, please see the section titled "Equity Incentive Plans" below.
Other Elements of Compensation
Retirement Savings and Health and Welfare Benefits
We currently maintain a simple IRA plan for our employees, including our named executive officers, who satisfy certain eligibility requirements. Our NEOs are eligible to participate in the simple IRA plan on the same terms as other full-time employees. We match 100% of the first 3% of a participant's annual eligible contributions to their simple IRA plan. We believe that providing a vehicle for tax-deferred retirement savings though our simple IRA plan adds to the overall desirability of our executive compensation package and further incentivizes our employees, including our NEOs, in accordance with our compensation policies. None of our NEOs participated in our simple IRA plan in 2019.
All of our full-time employees, including our NEOs, are eligible to participate in our health and welfare plans, including medical, dental and vision benefits; short-term and long-term disability insurance; and life and AD&D insurance.
Perquisites and Other Personal Benefits
We determine perquisites on a case-by-case basis and will provide a perquisite to an NEO when we believe it is necessary to attract or retain the NEO. In 2020, we did not provide any perquisites or personal benefits to our NEOs not otherwise made available to our other employees.
Outstanding Equity Awards at 2020 Fiscal Year End
The following table lists all outstanding equity awards held by our NEOs as of December 31, 2020.
___________________________________
(1)Except as otherwise noted, options and stock awards vest as to 25% of the shares on the first anniversary of the vesting commencement date and vest as to the remaining 75% of the shares in 24 substantially equal monthly installments thereafter, such that all awards will be vested on the third year anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the holder's continued service to the Company through such vesting date.
(2)The market value of shares that have not vested is calculated based on the fair market value of our common stock as of December 31, 2020 which our board of directors determined to be $11.32.
(3)The stock option vests as to 25% of the shares on the vesting commencement date and thereafter 10% of the shares vest on each quarterly anniversary, subject to Dr. Venkatesan's continued service to the Company through such vesting date; provided that an additional 25% of the shares can vest if certain financing goals were achieved.
(4)The restricted stock units vest upon the occurrence of two vesting conditions, which must be achieved within seven years from the date of grant, a service vesting condition (the Service-Based Requirement) and a liquidity event requirement (the Liquidity Event Requirement). The Liquidity Event Requirement will be satisfied as to any then-outstanding RSUs that have not terminated earlier on the first to occur of (i) a change in control of the Company or (ii) the six month anniversary of or, if earlier, March 15 of the year following an initial public offering of the Company. The Service-Based Requirement will be satisfied, subject to the holder's continued service through the date of grant, as follows: as to 25% of the shares on the first anniversary of the vesting commencement date and as to the remaining 75% of the shares in 24 substantially equal monthly installments thereafter.
(5)The equity award shall vest as to 1/48th of the shares subject to the award on each monthly anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the holder's continued service to the Company through each vesting date.
(6)The stock option vests as to 25% of the shares on the vesting commencement date and thereafter as to 1/9th of the remaining shares on each monthly anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the holder's continued service to the Company through each vesting date. The stock option shall be exercisable for one year after termination.
(7)The stock option shall vest as to 4,667 shares on each monthly anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the holder's continued service to the Company through each vesting date. The stock option shall cease vesting on the earlier of (i) the termination of the consulting agreement between FLG and the Company and (ii) the first month after the Company employs a full-time chief financial officer. In addition, the stock option will be exercisable for 90 days after termination of the applicable consulting agreement between FLG and the Company for Mr. Curhan's services.
Executive Compensation Arrangements
We previously entered into offer letter agreements with each of our named executive officers in connection with his or her employment with us. These agreements set forth the terms and conditions of employment of each named executive officer, including initial base salary, equity grants and employee benefits eligibility.
Severance Plan
In connection with our IPO, we entered into new severance and change in control plan that will cover all of our NEOs (except for Mr. Curhan since he provides services to the Company through the Consulting Agreement and is not an employee of the Company) that supersedes and replaces the severance benefits they would otherwise be entitled to receive.
Under our severance plan that encompasses each of our NEOs (except Mr. Curhan), if such NEO's employment with us is terminated without "cause" or such NEO resigns for "good reason" (as each is defined in the severance plan), the applicable NEO will be entitled to receive: (i) nine months of continued base salary (or 12 months for Dr. Venkatesan) and (ii) payment or reimbursement of the cost of continued healthcare coverage for nine months (or 12 months for Dr. Venkatesan). In lieu of the foregoing benefits, if each NEO's employment with us is terminated without "cause" or such NEO resigns for "good reason" during the 12-month period following a Change in Control (as defined in the 2021 Plan), the applicable NEO will be entitled to receive: (i) 12 months of continued base salary (or 18 months for Dr. Venkatesan), (ii) payment or reimbursement of the cost of continued healthcare coverage for 12 months (or 18 months for Dr. Venkatesan), (iii) an amount equal to 12 months of such NEO's annual bonus for the year of termination assuming 100% of target performance (or 18 months for Dr. Venkatesan) and (iv) full accelerated vesting of any of unvested equity awards (except for any performance awards). The foregoing severance benefits are subject to the applicable NEO's delivery of an executed release of claims against us and continued compliance with the NEO's confidentiality obligations under the severance plan.
Equity Compensation Plans
The following summarizes the material terms of our 2021 Incentive Award Plan (the 2021 Plan) and our 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (the 2015 Plan), under which we have previously made periodic grants of equity and equity-based awards to our named executive officers and other key employees.
2021 Incentive Award Plan
We adopted the 2021 Plan as of February 4, 2021 in conjunction our IPO, and it will be the only equity compensation plan used to make periodic grants of equity and equity-based awards to employees, consultants and directors after our IPO. The principal purpose of the 2021 Plan is to attract, retain and motivate selected employees, consultants and directors through the granting of stock-based compensation awards and cash-based performance bonus awards. The material terms of the 2021 Plan, as it is currently contemplated, are summarized below.
Share Reserve. Under the 2021 Plan, 4,280,000 shares of our common stock will be initially reserved for issuance pursuant to a variety of stock-based compensation awards, including stock options, stock appreciation rights (SARs) restricted stock awards, restricted stock unit awards and other stock-based awards. The number of shares initially reserved for issuance or transfer pursuant to awards under the 2021 Plan will be increased by an annual increase on the first day of each fiscal year beginning in 2021 and ending in 2031, equal to the lesser of (A) 5.0% of the shares of stock outstanding (on an as converted basis) on the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year and (B) such smaller number of shares of stock as determined by our board of directors; provided, however, that no more than 60,000,000 shares of stock may be issued upon the exercise of incentive stock options.
The following counting provisions will be in effect for the share reserve under the 2021 Plan:
▪to the extent that an award terminates, expires or lapses for any reason or an award is settled in cash without the delivery of shares, any shares subject to the award at such time will be available for future grants under the 2021 Plan;
▪to the extent shares are tendered or withheld to satisfy the grant, exercise price or tax withholding obligation with respect to any award under the 2021 Plan, such tendered or withheld shares will be available for future grants under the 2021 Plan;
▪to the extent shares subject to stock appreciation rights are not issued in connection with the stock settlement of stock appreciation rights on exercise thereof, such shares will be available for future grants under the 2021 Plan;
▪to the extent that shares of our common stock are repurchased by us prior to vesting so that shares are returned to us, such shares will be available for future grants under the 2021 Plan;
▪the payment of dividend equivalents in cash in conjunction with any outstanding awards will not be counted against the shares available for issuance under the 2021 Plan; and
▪to the extent permitted by applicable law or any exchange rule, shares issued in assumption of, or in substitution for, any outstanding awards of any entity acquired in any form of combination by us or any of our subsidiaries will not be counted against the shares available for issuance under the 2021 Plan.
Administration. The compensation committee of our board of directors is expected to administer the 2021 Plan unless our board of directors assumes authority for administration. The compensation committee must consist of at least three members of our board of directors, each of whom is intended to qualify as a "non-employee director" for purposes of Rule 16b-3 under the Exchange Act and an "independent director" within the meaning of the rules of the applicable stock exchange, or other principal securities market on which shares of our common stock are traded. The 2021 Plan provides that the board or compensation committee may delegate its authority to grant awards to employees other than executive officers and certain senior executives of the company to a committee consisting of one or more members of our board of directors or one or more of our officers, other than awards made to our non-employee directors, which must be approved by our full board of directors.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the 2021 Plan, the administrator has the authority to select the persons to whom awards are to be made, to determine the number of shares to be subject to awards and the terms and conditions of awards, and to make all other determinations and to take all other actions necessary or advisable for the administration of the 2021 Plan. The administrator is also authorized to adopt, amend or rescind rules relating to administration of the 2021 Plan. Our board of directors may at any time remove the compensation committee as the administrator and revest in itself the authority to administer the 2021 Plan. The full board of directors will administer the 2021 Plan with respect to awards to non-employee directors.
Eligibility. Options, SARs, restricted stock and all other stock-based and cash-based awards under the 2021 Plan may be granted to individuals who are then our officers, employees or consultants or are the officers, employees or consultants of certain of our subsidiaries. Such awards also may be granted to our directors. Only employees of our company or certain of our subsidiaries may be granted incentive stock options (ISOs).
Awards. The 2021 Plan provides that the administrator may grant or issue stock options, SARs, restricted stock, restricted stock units, other stock- or cash-based awards and dividend equivalents, or any combination thereof. Each award will be set forth in a separate agreement with the person receiving the award and will indicate the type, terms and conditions of the award.
▪Nonstatutory Stock Options will provide for the right to purchase shares of our common stock at a specified price which may not be less than fair market value on the date of grant, and usually will become exercisable (at the discretion of the administrator) in one or more installments after the grant date, subject to the participant's continued employment or service with us and/or subject to the satisfaction of corporate performance targets and individual performance targets established by the administrator. NSOs may be granted for any term specified by the administrator that does not exceed ten years.
▪Incentive Stock Options will be designed in a manner intended to comply with the provisions of Section 422 of the Code and will be subject to specified restrictions contained in the Code. Among such restrictions, ISOs must have an exercise price of not less than the fair market value of a share of common stock on the date of grant, may only be granted to employees, and must not be exercisable
after a period of ten years measured from the date of grant. In the case of an ISO granted to an individual who owns (or is deemed to own) at least 10% of the total combined voting power of all classes of our capital stock, the 2021 Plan provides that the exercise price must be at least 110% of the fair market value of a share of common stock on the date of grant and the ISO must not be exercisable after a period of five years measured from the date of grant.
▪Restricted Stock may be granted to any eligible individual and made subject to such restrictions as may be determined by the administrator. Restricted stock, typically, may be forfeited for no consideration or repurchased by us at the original purchase price if the conditions or restrictions on vesting are not met. In general, restricted stock may not be sold or otherwise transferred until restrictions are removed or expire. Purchasers of restricted stock, unlike recipients of options, will have voting rights and will have the right to receive dividends, if any, prior to the time when the restrictions lapse, however, extraordinary dividends will generally be placed in escrow, and will not be released until restrictions are removed or expire.
▪Restricted Stock Units may be awarded to any eligible individual, typically without payment of consideration, but subject to vesting conditions based on continued employment or service or on performance criteria established by the administrator. Like restricted stock, restricted stock units may not be sold, or otherwise transferred or hypothecated, until vesting conditions are removed or expire. Unlike restricted stock, stock underlying restricted stock units will not be issued until the restricted stock units have vested, and recipients of restricted stock units generally will have no voting or dividend rights prior to the time when vesting conditions are satisfied.
▪Stock Appreciation Rights may be granted in connection with stock options or other awards, or separately. SARs granted in connection with stock options or other awards typically will provide for payments to the holder based upon increases in the price of our common stock over a set exercise price. The exercise price of any SAR granted under the 2021 Plan must be at least 100% of the fair market value of a share of our common stock on the date of grant. SARs under the 2021 Plan will be settled in cash or shares of our common stock, or in a combination of both, at the election of the administrator.
▪Other Stock or Cash Based Awards are awards of cash, fully vested shares of our common stock and other awards valued wholly or partially by referring to, or otherwise based on, shares of our common stock. Other stock or cash based awards may be granted to participants and may also be available as a payment form in the settlement of other awards, as standalone payments and as payment in lieu of base salary, bonus, fees or other cash compensation otherwise payable to any individual who is eligible to receive awards. The plan administrator will determine the terms and conditions of other stock or cash based awards, which may include vesting conditions based on continued service, performance and/or other conditions.
▪Dividend Equivalents represent the right to receive the equivalent value of dividends paid on shares of our common stock and may be granted alone or in tandem with awards other than stock options or SARs. Dividend equivalents are credited as of dividend payments dates during the period between a specified date and the date such award terminates or expires, as determined by the plan administrator. In addition, dividend equivalents with respect to shares covered by a performance award will only be paid to the participant at the same time or times and to the same extent that the vesting conditions, if any, are subsequently satisfied and the performance award vests with respect to such shares.
Any award may be granted as a performance award, meaning that the award will be subject to vesting and/or payment based on the attainment of specified performance goals.
Change in Control. In the event of a change in control, unless the plan administrator elects to terminate an award in exchange for cash, rights or other property, or cause an award to accelerate in full prior to the change in control, such award will continue in effect or be assumed or substituted by the acquirer, provided that any performance-based portion of the award will be subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable award agreement. In the event the acquirer refuses to assume or replace awards granted, prior to the consummation of such transaction, awards issued under the 2021 Plan will be subject to accelerated vesting such that 100% of such awards will become vested and exercisable or payable, as applicable. The administrator may also make appropriate adjustments to awards under the 2021 Plan and is authorized to provide for the acceleration, cash-out, termination, assumption, substitution or conversion of such awards in the event of a change in control or certain other unusual or nonrecurring events or transactions.
Adjustments of Awards. In the event of any stock dividend or other distribution, stock split, reverse stock split, reorganization, combination or exchange of shares, merger, consolidation, split-up, spin-off, recapitalization, repurchase or any other corporate event affecting the number of outstanding shares of our common stock or the share price of our common stock that would require adjustments to the 2021 Plan or any awards under the 2021 Plan in order to prevent the dilution or enlargement of the potential benefits intended to be made available thereunder, the administrator will make appropriate, proportionate adjustments to: (i) the aggregate number and type of shares subject to the 2021 Plan; (ii) the number and kind of shares subject to outstanding awards and terms and conditions of outstanding awards (including, without limitation, any applicable performance targets or criteria with respect to such awards); and (iii) the grant or exercise price per share of any outstanding awards under the 2021 Plan.
Amendment and Termination. The administrator may terminate, amend or modify the 2021 Plan at any time and from time to time. However, we must generally obtain stockholder approval to the extent required by applicable law, rule or regulation (including any applicable stock exchange rule). Notwithstanding the foregoing, an option may be amended to reduce the per share exercise price below the per share exercise price of such option on the grant date and options may be granted in exchange for, or in connection with, the cancellation or surrender of options having a higher per share exercise price without receiving additional stockholder approval.
No incentive stock options may be granted pursuant to the 2021 Plan after the tenth anniversary of the effective date of the 2021 Plan, and no additional annual share increases to the 2021 Plan's aggregate share limit will occur from and after such anniversary. Any award that is outstanding on the termination date of the 2021 Plan will remain in force according to the terms of the 2021 Plan and the applicable award agreement.
2015 Equity Incentive Plan
2015 Plan
The 2015 Plan became effective on January 28, 2015, and was last amended and restated on August 30, 2019. We have previously granted stock options, stock awards and restricted stock units to our NEOs and some members of our board of directors under the 2015 Plan, as described in more detail above. The principal purpose of the 2015 Plan is to enhance our ability to attract, retain and motivate its service providers by providing such individuals with equity ownership opportunities and aligning their interests with those of our stockholders.
Share Reserve. The aggregate number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to awards granted under the 2015 Plan is 4,774,179. The number of shares initially reserved for issuance or transfer pursuant to awards under the 2015 Plan may be increased by an annual increase on the first day of each fiscal year beginning in 2021 and ending in 2025, equal to the lesser of (A) 5% of the shares of stock outstanding on the first day of the applicable fiscal year and (B) such smaller number of shares of stock as determined by our board of directors; provided, however, that in no event may the aggregate number of shares under the 2015 Plan, combined with any other equity plan, cannot exceed 20% of the outstanding shares on a fully diluted basis of the Company on the first day of the applicable fiscal year.
Administration. Our board is authorized to administer the 2015 Plan, but consistent with its authority under the 2015 Plan, the board has delegated some of its administrative authority to the compensation committee of our board. Subject to the terms and conditions of the 2015 Plan, the plan administrator has the authority to select the persons to whom awards are to be made, to determine the number of shares to be subject to awards and the terms and conditions of awards, and to make all other determinations and to take all other actions necessary or advisable for the administration of the 2015 Plan. The administrator is also authorized to adopt, amend or repeal rules relating to administration of the 2015 Plan.
Eligibility. Options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and other stock-based awards under the 2015 Plan may be granted to officers, employees, directors and consultants of the Company and its affiliates. Only employees of the Company or certain of its affiliates who are deemed to be residents of the United States for tax purposes may be granted incentive stock options.
Awards. The 2015 Plan provides for the grant of stock options (including incentive stock options (or ISOs) and non-qualified stock options (or NSOs)), restricted stock, restricted stock units (or RSUs), other stock-based awards or any combination thereof. No determination has been made as to the types or amounts of awards that will
be granted to specific individuals in the future pursuant to the 2015 Plan. Each award will be set forth in a separate agreement and will indicate the type and terms and conditions of the award.
▪Non-Qualified Stock Options. NSOs will provide for the right to purchase shares of our common stock at a specified price which may not be less than fair market value on the date of grant, and usually will become exercisable (at the discretion of the administrator) in one or more installments after the grant date, subject to the participant's satisfaction of corporate performance targets and the attainment of stated goals or events, as established by the administrator. NSOs may be granted for any term specified by the administrator that does not exceed ten years.
▪Incentive Stock Options. ISOs will be designed in a manner intended to comply with the provisions of Section 422 of the Code and will be subject to specified restrictions contained in the Code. Among such restrictions, ISOs must have an exercise price of not less than the fair market value of a share of common stock on the date of grant, may only be granted to employees, and must not be exercisable after a period of ten years measured from the date of grant. In the case of an ISO granted to an individual who owns (or is deemed to own) at least 10% of the total combined voting power of all classes of our capital stock, the 2015 Plan provides that the exercise price must be at least 110% of the fair market value of a share of common stock on the date of grant and the ISO must not be exercisable after a period of five years measured from the date of grant.
▪Restricted Stock. Restricted stock is an award of shares of our common stock that remains forfeitable unless and until specified vesting conditions are met. In general, restricted stock may not be sold or otherwise transferred until restrictions are removed or expire. Holders of restricted stock will have voting rights and will have the right to receive dividends, if any, prior to the time when the restrictions lapse.
▪Restricted Stock Units. RSUs are contractual promises to deliver shares of our common stock (or the fair market value of such shares in cash) in the future, which may also remain forfeitable unless and until specified vesting conditions are met. RSUs generally may not be sold or transferred until vesting conditions are removed or expire. The shares underlying RSUs will generally not be issued until the RSUs have vested, and recipients of RSUs generally will have no voting or dividend rights prior to the time when the RSUs are settled in shares, unless the RSU includes a dividend equivalent right (in which case the holder may be entitled to dividend equivalent payments under certain circumstances). Delivery of the shares underlying RSUs may be deferred under the terms of the award or at the election of the participant, if the plan administrator permits such a deferral.
▪Other Stock-Based Awards. Other stock-based awards are awards denominated in shares of our common stock and other awards that are valued by reference to, or are based on, shares of our common stock or other property. Other stock-based awards may be paid in shares, cash or other property, as determined by the plan administrator. The plan administrator will determine the terms and conditions of other stock-based awards, including any purchase price, transfer, vesting and/or other conditions.
Adjustments of Awards. In the event of any merger, consolidation, acquisition of property or shares, stock rights offering, liquidation, disaffiliation (other than a spinoff) or similar event affecting the Company or any of its affiliates (each a corporate transaction), the administrator may in its discretion make substitutions or adjustments as it deems appropriate and equitable to: (i) the aggregate number and type of shares subject to the 2015 Plan; (ii) the various limitations set forth in the 2015 Plan; (iii) the number and kind of shares subject to outstanding awards and terms and conditions of outstanding stock rights; and (iv) the exercise price per share of any outstanding options or stock appreciation rights. In the event of any stock dividend, stock split, reverse stock split, separation, spin-off, reorganization, extraordinary dividend of cash or other property, share combination or recapitalization or similar event affecting the capital structure of the Company, the administrator will make substitutions or adjustments as it deems appropriate and equitable to: (i) the aggregate number and type of shares subject to the 2015 Plan; (ii) the various limitations set forth in the 2015 Plan; (iii) the number and kind of shares subject to outstanding awards and terms and conditions of outstanding stock rights; and (iv) the exercise price per share of any outstanding options or stock appreciation rights.
In the case of a corporate transaction, the adjustments contemplated as described in the first sentence above may include, without limitation, (i) the cancellation of stock rights in exchange for payments having an aggregate value equal to the value of such stock rights, as determined by the plan administrator, (ii) the substitution of other property for the shares subject to outstanding stock rights, and (iii) in connection with any disaffiliation, arranging for the assumption of stock rights, or replacement of rights with new stock rights. The plan administrator may also adjust performance goals applicable to any stock rights.
Transferability and Restrictions. With limited exceptions for the laws of descent and distribution, awards under the 2015 Plan are generally non-transferable prior to vesting unless otherwise determined by the plan administrator and set forth in the applicable agreement, and are exercisable only by the participant.
Amendment and Termination. The plan administrator may terminate, amend or modify the 2015 Plan at any time. However, we must generally obtain stockholder approval to the extent required by applicable law In addition, no amendment of the 2015 Plan may, without the consent of the holder, materially and adversely affect any award previously granted. No award may be granted pursuant to the 2015 Plan after the June 26, 2029 (or earlier, as approved by our stockholders)
2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan
We have adopted the 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, which we refer to as our ESPP, which became effective on the day prior to the first public trading date of our common stock. The ESPP is designed to allow our eligible employees to purchase shares of our common stock, at semi-annual intervals, with their accumulated payroll deductions. The ESPP is intended to qualify under Section 423 of the Code. The material terms of the ESPP, as it is currently contemplated, are summarized below.
Administration. Subject to the terms and conditions of the ESPP, our compensation committee will administer the ESPP. Our compensation committee can delegate administrative tasks under the ESPP to the services of an agent and/or employees to assist in the administration of the ESPP. The administrator will have the discretionary authority to administer and interpret the ESPP. Interpretations and constructions of the administrator of any provision of the ESPP or of any rights thereunder will be conclusive and binding on all persons. We will bear all expenses and liabilities incurred by the ESPP administrator.
Share Reserve. The maximum number of shares of our common stock which will be authorized for sale under the ESPP is equal to the sum of (i) 390,000 shares of common stock and (ii) an annual increase on the first day of each year beginning in 2022 and ending in 2031, equal to the lesser of (a) 1.0% of the shares of common stock outstanding (on an as converted basis) on the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year and (b) such number of shares of common stock as determined by our board of directors; provided, however, no more than 8,000,000 shares of our common stock may be issued under the ESPP. The shares reserved for issuance under the ESPP may be authorized but unissued shares or reacquired shares.
Eligibility. Employees eligible to participate in the ESPP for a given offering period generally include employees who are employed by us or one of our subsidiaries on the first day of the offering period, or the enrollment date. Our employees (and, if applicable, any employees of our subsidiaries) who customarily work less than five months in a calendar year or are customarily scheduled to work less than 20 hours per week will not be eligible to participate in the ESPP. Finally, an employee who owns (or is deemed to own through attribution) 5% or more of the combined voting power or value of all our classes of stock or of one of our subsidiaries will not be allowed to participate in the ESPP.
Participation. Employees will enroll under the ESPP by completing a payroll deduction form permitting the deduction from their compensation of at least 1% of their compensation but not more than the lesser of 15% of their compensation or $50,000. Such payroll deductions may be expressed as either a whole number percentage or a fixed dollar amount, and the accumulated deductions will be applied to the purchase of shares on each purchase date. However, a participant may not purchase more than 15,000 shares in each offering period and may not subscribe for more than $25,000 in fair market value of shares of our common stock (determined at the time the option is granted) during any calendar year. The ESPP administrator has the authority to change these limitations for any subsequent offering period.
Offering. Under the ESPP, participants are offered the option to purchase shares of our common stock at a discount during a series of successive offering periods, the duration and timing of which will be determined by the ESPP administrator. However, in no event may an offering period be longer than 27 months in length.
The option purchase price will be the lower of 85% of the closing trading price per share of our common stock on the first trading date of an offering period in which a participant is enrolled or 85% of the closing trading price per share on the purchase date, which will occur on the last trading day of each offering period.
Unless a participant has previously canceled his or her participation in the ESPP before the purchase date, the participant will be deemed to have exercised his or her option in full as of each purchase date. Upon exercise, the
participant will purchase the number of whole shares that his or her accumulated payroll deductions will buy at the option purchase price, subject to the participation limitations listed above.
A participant may cancel his or her payroll deduction authorization at any time prior to the end of the offering period. Upon cancellation, the participant will have the option to either (i) receive a refund of the participant's account balance in cash without interest or (ii) exercise the participant's option for the current offering period for the maximum number of shares of common stock on the applicable purchase date, with the remaining account balance refunded in cash without interest. Following at least one payroll deduction, a participant may also decrease (but not increase) his or her payroll deduction authorization once during any offering period. If a participant wants to increase or decrease the rate of payroll withholding, he or she may do so effective for the next offering period by submitting a new form before the offering period for which such change is to be effective.
A participant may not assign, transfer, pledge or otherwise dispose of (other than by will or the laws of descent and distribution) payroll deductions credited to a participant's account or any rights to exercise an option or to receive shares of our common stock under the ESPP, and during a participant's lifetime, options in the ESPP shall be exercisable only by such participant. Any such attempt at assignment, transfer, pledge or other disposition will not be given effect.
Adjustments upon Changes in Recapitalization, Dissolution, Liquidation, Merger or Asset Sale. In the event of any increase or decrease in the number of issued shares of our common stock resulting from a stock split, reverse stock split, stock dividend, combination or reclassification of the common stock, or any other increase or decrease in the number of shares of common stock effected without receipt of consideration by us, we will proportionately adjust the aggregate number of shares of our common stock offered under the ESPP, the number and price of shares which any participant has elected to purchase under the ESPP and the maximum number of shares which a participant may elect to purchase in any single offering period. If there is a proposal to dissolve or liquidate us, then the ESPP will terminate immediately prior to the consummation of such proposed dissolution or liquidation, and any offering period then in progress will be shortened by setting a new purchase date to take place before the date of our dissolution or liquidation. We will notify each participant of such change in writing at least ten business days prior to the new exercise date. If we undergo a merger with or into another corporation or sell all or substantially all of our assets, each outstanding option will be assumed or an equivalent option substituted by the successor corporation or the parent or subsidiary of the successor corporation. If the successor corporation refuses to assume the outstanding options or substitute equivalent options, then any offering period then in progress will be shortened by setting a new purchase date to take place before the date of our proposed sale or merger. We will notify each participant of such change in writing at least ten business days prior to the new exercise date.
Amendment and Termination. Our board of directors may amend, suspend or terminate the ESPP at any time. However, the board of directors may not amend the ESPP without obtaining stockholder approval within 12 months before or after such amendment to the extent required by applicable laws.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
No member of our compensation committee is currently, or has at any time, one of our officers or employee. None of our executive officers currently serves, or have served during the past fiscal year, as a member of another entity's board of directors or compensation committee (or other board committee performing equivalent functions or, in the absence of any such committee, the entire board of directors) that has one or more executive officers serving as a member of our board of directors or compensation committee.
Director Compensation
Historically, we have not had a formalized non-employee director compensation program. However, at the end of 2020, we approved an annual cash retainer to all of our non-employee directors of $40,000 for their service in 2020 (pro-rated for any partial service). Dr. Yamin did not receive the annual cash retainer since he was no longer a director on the date of payment. In February 2020, we granted each non-employee director (except Dr. Yamin) an option to purchase 38,895 shares of our common stock. In April 2020, in connection with her commencement of service with us, Ms. Wilson was granted an option to purchase 38,895 shares of our common stock. All options held by directors vest as to one-third of the shares on each anniversary of the applicable date of grant, subject to the director's continued service with the Company through the applicable vesting date. In addition, we reimburse our non-employee directors for travel and other necessary business expenses incurred in the performance of their services for us. In January 2018, we also entered into a consulting agreement with Dr. Yamin pursuant to which he
agreed to provide consulting services to us in the areas of biomedical research and development. Pursuant to the terms of the consulting agreement, Dr. Yamin, in his capacity as a consultant, received $108,000 in the aggregate during fiscal year 2020. Dr. Yamin resigned from our board of directors in March 2020. Dr. Yamin's resignation was not due to any disagreement with us, our board of directors or our management.
We have approved a compensation policy for our non-employee directors (Director Compensation Program) to be effective in connection with the consummation of the IPO. Pursuant to the Director Compensation Program, our non-employee directors will receive cash compensation as follows:
•Each non-employee director will receive an annual cash retainer in the amount of $40,000 per year.
•The Non-Executive Chairperson will receive an additional annual cash retainer in the amount of $35,000 per year.
•The lead non-employee director will receive an additional annual cash retained in the amount of $20,000 per year.
•The chairperson of the audit committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $15,000 per year for such chairperson's service on the audit committee. Each non-chairperson member of the audit committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $7,500 per year for such member's service on the audit committee.
•The chairperson of the compensation committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $10,000 per year for such chairperson's service on the compensation committee. Each non-chairperson member of the compensation committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $5,000 per year for such member's service on the compensation committee.
•The chairperson of the nominating and corporate governance committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $8,000 per year for such chairperson's service on the nominating and corporate governance committee. Each non-chairperson member of the nominating and corporate governance committee will receive additional annual cash compensation in the amount of $5,000 per year for such member's service on the nominating and corporate governance committee.
Under the Director Compensation Program, each non-employee director will automatically be granted an option to purchase 30,000 shares of our common stock upon the director's initial appointment or election to our board of directors (Initial Grant) and an option to purchase 15,000 shares of our common stock automatically on the date of each annual stockholder's meeting thereafter, (Annual Grant). The Initial Grant will vest as to 1/36th of the underlying shares on a monthly basis over three years, subject to continued service through each applicable vesting date. The Annual Grant will vest on the earlier of the first anniversary of the date of grant or the date of the next annual stockholder's meeting to the extent unvested as of such date, subject to continued service through each applicable vesting date. The exercise price per share of director options is equal to the fair market value of a share of our common stock on the grant date, and the director options will vest in full upon (i) a termination of service due to the director's death or Disability (as defined in the 2021 Plan) and (ii) the consummation of a Change in Control (as defined in the 2021 Plan).
The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation earned by our non-employee directors during the year ended December 31, 2020.
__________________________
(1) Amounts shown represents the grant date fair value of options granted during fiscal year 2020 as calculated in accordance with ASC Topic 718. See note 2 of the financial statements included in this registration statement for the assumptions used in calculating this amount. As of December 31, 2020, Messrs. Ganzi, Nissenson and Omenn and Ms. Wilson each held options to purchase an aggregate of 38,895 shares of our common stock.
(2) Amount shown represents the payments made to Dr. Yamin for his consulting services to us pursuant to the terms of his consulting agreement.
(3) Dr. Yamin resigned as a member of the board in March 2020.
(4) Ms. Wilson commenced services as a member of the board in April 2020, and her board fees were pro-rated for her partial service on the board.
Item 12. Security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the beneficial ownership of our common stock as of March 1, 2021 by:
•each person, or group of affiliated persons, known by us to beneficially own more than 5% of our outstanding shares of our common stock;
•each of our directors;
•each of our named executive officers; and
•all directors and executive officers as a group.
The number of shares beneficially owned by each entity, person, director or executive officer is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC, and the information is not necessarily indicative of beneficial ownership for any other purpose. Under such rules, beneficial ownership includes any shares over which the individual has sole or shared voting power or investment power as well as any shares that the individual has the right to acquire within 60 days after March 1, 2021 through the exercise of any stock option, warrants or other rights. Except as otherwise indicated, and subject to applicable community property laws, the persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to all shares of our common stock held by that person.
The percentage of shares beneficially owned is computed on the basis of [22,170,926] shares of our common stock outstanding as of March 1, 2021. Shares of our common stock that a person has the right to acquire within 60 days after March 1, 2021 are deemed outstanding for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of the person holding such rights, but are not deemed outstanding for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of any other person, except with respect to the percentage ownership of all directors and executive officers as a group.
Unless otherwise indicated below, the address for each beneficial owner listed is c/o Angion Biomedica Corp., 51 Charles Lindbergh Boulevard, Uniondale, New York 11553.
_______________________________________________________
* Represents beneficial ownership of less than 1% of the shares of our common stock.
(1) Consists of 3,654,637 shares of our common stock. Elisha Y. Goldberg, Irit Sandler, Shlomit Stein and Avital Pines share voting power and dispositive power over the shares held by EISA-ABC LLC.
(2) Consists of (i) 195,429 shares of our common stock held by Therese Heidi Schuler Trust; (ii) 195,429 shares of our common stock held by Tenya Eva Schuler Trust; (iii) 195,429 shares of our common stock held by Tino Hans Schuler Trust; and (iv) 479,315 shares of our common stock held by Schuler Grandchildren LLC; and (iv) 1,521,993 shares of our common stock held by Jack W Schuler Trust.
(3) Consists of (i) 1,827,566 shares of our common stock held directly by Dr. Goldberg, (ii) 233,374 shares of our common stock held by Itzhak D. Goldberg's Grandchildren's Trust #1 and 116,687 shares of our common stock held by the Itzhak D. Goldberg's Grandchildren's Trust #2, both in which Dr. Goldberg disclaims any pecuniary interest and (iii) 139,087 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(4) Consists of (i) 1,193,226 shares of our common stock and (ii) 1,179,180 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(5) Consists of the shares described in footnote 3 above.
(6) Consists of the shares described in footnote 4 above.
(7) Consists of 68,552 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(8) Consists of (i) 928,970 shares of our common stock held directly by Victor F. Ganzi and 155,581 shares of our common stock held by Victor F Ganzi 2012 GST Family Trust held by Victor Ganzi; (ii) 105,853 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021
(9) Consists of (i) 80,326 shares of our common stock held by the Gilbert S. Omenn Revocable Trust and (ii) 12,965 shares of common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(10) Consists of 12,965 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(11) Consists of (i)18,718 shares of our common stock held directly by Karen Wilson and (ii) 12,965 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(12) Consists of 51,338 shares of common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
(13) Consists of (i)38,895 shares of our common stock held directly by John Neylan and (ii)109,879 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021
(14) Consists of (i) the shares described in footnotes 5 through 13 above, (ii) 4,487,490 shares of our common stock and (iii) 1,692,784 shares of our common stock that may be acquired pursuant to the exercise of stock options within 60 days of March 1, 2021.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The following is a description of transactions since January 1, 2020 to which we have been a party, in which the amount involved exceeds or will exceed $120,000, and in which any of our directors, executive officers or beneficial owners of more than 5% of our capital stock, or an affiliate or immediate family member thereof, had or will have a direct or indirect material interest, other than compensation, termination and change-in-control arrangements, which are described under "Executive Compensation." We also describe below certain other transactions with our directors, executive officers and stockholders.
All of the transactions set forth below were approved by a majority of our board of directors. We believe that we have executed all of the transactions set forth below on terms no less favorable to us than we could have obtained from unaffiliated third parties. It is our intention to ensure that all future transactions between us and our officers, directors and principal stockholders and their affiliates are approved by our audit committee, once it is constituted, and a majority of the members of our board of directors, including a majority of the independent and disinterested members of our board of directors, and are on terms no less favorable to us than those that we could obtain from unaffiliated third parties.
Convertible Note Financings
In December 2019 and during the first nine months of 2020, we issued additional convertible promissory notes (collectively referred as the Additional Convertible Notes) to certain investors in aggregate principal amount of $5.3 million and $31.2 million, respectively. The Additional Convertible Notes accrue interest at a rate of 12% per annum, and converted into shares of our common stock upon our IPO or otherwise pursuant to the terms of the Additional Convertible Notes.
The table below sets forth the number of shares of issuable upon conversion of the Additional Convertible Notes sold to our directors, executive officers or owners of more than 5% of a class of our capital stock, or an
affiliate or immediate family member thereof:
_____________________________________
(1)The terms of the Additional Convertible Notes provide that the notes and accrued dividends will convert at a price that is equal to a 20% discount to the price of the common stock offered in the Company's IPO. The number of shares reflected are based on an initial public offering price of $16.00 per share and assuming the conversion occurs on February 9, 2021.
(2)Dr. Omenn is a member of our board of directors. Amount shown includes Additional Convertible Notes held by the Gilbert S. Omenn Revocable Trust, an estate planning instrument for which Mr. Omenn is trustee.
(3)Consists of Additional Convertible Notes described under "-Loans from Directors" that were converted into Additional Convertible Notes in February 2020. In August 2020, these Additional Convertible Notes were exchanged for Series C convertible preferred stock.
(4)Dr. Venkatesan is our chief executive officer and a member of our board of directors.
(5)Mr. Ganzi is a member of our board of directors.
(6)Ms. Wilson is a member of our board of directors.
Transactions with NovaPark LLC
We rent office and laboratory space in Uniondale, New York from NovaPark LLC (NovaPark), an affiliated company, under a lease that expires on June 20, 2026. The space that we rent is part of a 110,000-square-foot general laboratory and development facility (the NovaPark Facility) for biological and chemistry research owned by NovaPark. We recorded rent expense for fixed lease payments of $1.0 million in each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We recorded rent expense for variable expenses related to the lease of $0.6 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Variable expenses include NovaPark management fees of $0.1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We, Dr. Goldberg and Rina Kurz, Dr. Goldberg's spouse, own 10%, 45% and 45%, respectively, of the membership interests in NovaPark LLC.
The NovaPark Facility has been financed by a mortgage pursuant to which NovaPark's payment obligations are guaranteed by Dr. Goldberg, including a limited personal guarantee up to an amount of $2.1 million. In 2016, in connection with the refinancing of the mortgage, we entered into an indemnification agreement with Dr. Goldberg, pursuant to which we agreed to indemnify Dr. Goldberg from any loss arising out of any claim or action asserted by the mortgage lender against Dr. Goldberg related to Dr. Goldberg's personal limited guarantee of the mortgage. In February 2020, we and Dr. Goldberg terminated the indemnification agreement. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance on the mortgage debt was approximately $9.0 million and $5.1 million, respectively. The increase as of December 31, 2020 was due to increases costs for landlord improvements for a new tenant.
Consultant Fees and Employment of Immediate Family
We have paid consulting fees under an agreement with Rina Kurz, Dr. Goldberg's spouse, for management and administrative services relating to our U.S. government grants and contracts. For the year ended December 31, 2020, consultant fees paid to Ms. Kurz were approximately $0.1 million. We believe the consulting arrangement with Ms. Kurz was made on terms no less favorable to us than those that we could obtain from unaffiliated third parties.
Elisha Goldberg, Dr. Goldberg's son, serves as our Vice President and Director of Strategy For the year ended December 31, 2020, Elisha Goldberg was paid $0.2 million in salary and total award of options representing 2.0% of the Company's fully diluted capitalization.
Transactions with Dr. Michael Yamin
Dr. Michael Yamin, a former member of our board of directors, is a Scientific Advisor for Pearl Cohen Zedek Latzer Baratz LLP (Pearl Cohen). In the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid Pearl Cohen approximately $0.2 million in legal fees.
In January 2018, we also entered into a consulting agreement with Dr. Yamin pursuant to which he agreed to provide consulting services to us in the areas of biomedical research and development. Pursuant to the terms of the consulting agreement, Dr. Yamin, in his capacity as a consultant, received approximately $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Dr. Yamin resigned from our board of directors in March 2020. Dr. Yamin's resignation was not due to any disagreement with us, our board of directors or our management.
Director and Executive Officer Compensation
Please see "Executive Compensation" for information regarding compensation of directors and executive officers.
Employment Agreements
Please see "Executive Compensation Employment Arrangements" for information regarding employment agreements with our named executive officers.
Indemnification Agreements and Directors' and Officers' Liability Insurance
We have entered into indemnification agreements with certain of our current directors, executive officers and certain other employees. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and our amended and restated bylaws provide that we will indemnify our directors and officers to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law.
Stock Option Grants to Executive Officers and Directors
We have granted stock options to our executive officers and certain of our directors as more fully described in the section entitled "Management-Director Compensation" and "Executive Compensation."
Policies and Procedures for Related Party Transactions
Our board of directors has adopted a related party transaction policy setting forth the policies and procedures for the identification, review and approval or ratification of related party transactions. This policy covers, with certain exceptions set forth in Item 404 of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act, any transaction, arrangement or relationship, or any series of similar transactions, arrangements or relationships, in which we and a related party were or will be participants and the amount involved exceeds $120,000, including purchases of goods or services by or from the related party or entities in which the related party has a material interest, indebtedness and guarantees of indebtedness. In reviewing and approving any such transactions, our audit committee will consider all relevant facts and circumstances as appropriate, such as the purpose of the transaction, the availability of other sources of comparable products or services, whether the transaction is on terms comparable to those that could be obtained in an arm's length transaction, management's recommendation with respect to the proposed related party transaction, and the extent of the related party's interest in the transaction.
Director Independence
Our board of directors currently consists of six members. Our board of directors has determined that all of our directors, other than Dr. Venkatesan and Dr. Goldberg, qualify as "independent" directors in accordance with The Nasdaq Global Market listing requirements. Dr. Venkatesan and Dr. Goldberg are not considered independent because they are employees of Angion Biomedica Corp. The Nasdaq Global Market's independence definition includes a series of objective tests, such as that the director is not, and has not been for at least three years, one of our employees and that neither the director nor any of his or her family members has engaged in various types of business dealings with us. In addition, as required by The Nasdaq Global Market rules, our board of directors has made a subjective determination as to each independent director that no relationships exists that, in the opinion of our board of directors, would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director. In making these determinations, our board of directors reviewed and discussed information provided by the directors and us with regard to each director's business and personal activities and relationships as they may
relate to us and our management. There are no family relationships among any of our directors or executive officers.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees
The following table sets forth all fees billed for professional audit, tax and other services rendered by Moss Adams LLP (in thousands):
__________________________
(1) Audit fees are for professional services for the audit of the Company’s financial statements, the review of quarterly interim financial statements, and for services that are normally provided by the accountant in connection with other regulatory filings or engagements. Fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 include services associated with our IPO. Fees for the year ended December 31, 2019 include services rendered for the initial 2019 and 2018 audits.
(2) Tax fees are for compliance and consultation.
(3) Other fees are for grant compliance audit fee in 2020
Part IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a)Financial Statements: See “Index to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
(b)Exhibits.
Exhibit
Number Exhibit
Description Incorporated by
Reference Filed Herewith
Form Date Number
1.1* Form of Underwriting Agreement.
3.1 Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation
8-K 2/9/2021 3.1
3.2 Amended and Restated Bylaws
8-K 2/9/2021 3.2
4.1 Reference is made to exhibits 3.1 through 3.2.
4.2 Form of Common Stock Certificate.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 4.2
4.3 Form of Warrant to Purchase Common Stock.
S-1 1/15/2021 4.3
4.4 Form of Convertible Promissory Note.
S-1 1/15/2021 4.4
4.5 Form of Broker Warrant to Purchase Common Stock.
S-1 1/15/2021 4.5
4.6 Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of March 31, 2020, by and among Angion Biomedica Corp. and the investors party thereto.
S-1 1/15/2021 4.6
4.7 Description of Registrant’s Securities Registered Pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
X
10.1 Agreement of Lease, dated June 21, 2011, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and NovaPark LLC, as amended.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.1
10.2† Licensing Agreement, dated August 22, 2018, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Sinovant Sciences HK Limited.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.2
10.3† Subcontractor Agreement, dated November 15, 2019, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and The Regents of the University of Michigan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.3
10.4† Licensing Agreement, dated November 6, 2020, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Vifor (International) Ltd.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.4
10.5(a)# Second Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(a)
10.5(b)#
Form of Incentive Stock Option Grant under 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(b)
10.5(c)#
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Grant under 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(c)
10.5(d)#
Form of Stock Option Exercise under 2015 Equity Incentive Plan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.5(d)
10.6(a)#
2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(a)
10.6(b)#
Form of Stock Option Grant Notice and Stock Option Agreement under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(b)
10.6(c)#
Form of Restricted Stock Award Grant Notice and Restricted Stock Award Agreement under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(c)
10.6(d)#
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant Notice and Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.6(d)
10.7# 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.7
10.8# Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated March 29, 2019, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Jay R. Venkatesan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.8
10.9# Executive Employment Agreement, dated May 1, 2018, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Itzhak D. Goldberg.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.9
Exhibit
Number Exhibit
Description Incorporated by
Reference Filed Herewith
Form Date Number
10.10# Executive Employment Agreement, dated December 17, 2018, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and John F. Neylan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.10
10.11# Offer Letter, dated November 27, 2019, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Jennifer J. Rhodes.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.11
10.12# Consulting Agreement, dated June 3, 2020, as amended, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Gregory S. Curhan.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.12
10.13# Non-Employee Director Compensation Program.
S-1/A 2/1/2021 10.13
10.14 Form of Indemnification Agreement for directors and officers.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.14
10.15 Promissory Note and Agreement, dated April 21, 2020, by and between Angion Biomedica Corp. and Hanmi Bank.
S-1 1/15/2021 10.15
21.1 Subsidiaries of the registrant.
S-1 1/15/2021 21.1
23.1 Consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
X
24.1 Power of Attorney (reference is made to the signature page hereto)
X
31.1 Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
31.2 Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
32.1^ Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
32.2^ Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
X
__________________________________
†Portions of this exhibit have been omitted in accordance with Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K.
# Indicates management contract or compensatory plan.
^ The certification that accompanies this Annual Report on Form 10-K pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, is not deemed “filed” by the Registrant for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
Not applicable.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
ANGION BIOMEDICA CORP.
By: /s/ JAY R. VENKATESAN, M.D.
Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D.
President and Chief Executive Officer and Director
Power of Attorney
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D. and Jennifer J. Rhodes, and each of them acting individually, as his or her true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, each with full power of substitution, for him or her in any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments to this Registration Statement on Form 10-K and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the SEC, granting unto said attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of each to act alone, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully for all intents and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or his or their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this Registration Statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature Title Date
/s/ JAY R. VENKATESAN, M.D. President and Chief Executive Officer and Director (Principal Executive Officer)
March 30, 2021
Jay R. Venkatesan, M.D.
/s/ GREGORY S. CURHAN
Interim Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
March 30, 2021
Gregory S. Curhan
/s/ ITZHAK D. GOLDBERG, M.D.
Executive Chairman and Chief Scientific Officer
March 30, 2021
Itzhak D. Goldberg, M.D.
/s/ VICTOR F. GANZI Director March 30, 2021
Victor F. Ganzi
/s/ ALLEN R. NISSENSON, M.D. Director March 30, 2021
Allen R. Nissenson, M.D.
/s/ GILBERT S. OMENN, M.D., PH.D. Director March 30, 2021
Gilbert S. Omenn, M.D., Ph.D.
/s/ KAREN J. WILSON Director March 30, 2021
Karen J. Wilson