ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following section contains statements that are not statements of historical fact and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievement to differ materially from anticipated results, performance, or achievement, expressed or implied in such forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events, are based on assumptions, and are subject to risks and uncertainties. We discuss many of these risks and uncertainties at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and under the sections captioned “Business” and “Risk Factors.” The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the Notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management Overview
Founded in 1992, Anika Therapeutics, Inc. is a global joint preservation company that creates and delivers meaningful advancements in early intervention orthopedic care. Based on our collaborations with clinicians to understand what they need most to treat their patients, we develop minimally invasive products that restore active living for people around the world. We are committed to leading in high opportunity spaces within orthopedics, including osteoarthritis (“OA”) pain management, regenerative solutions, soft tissue repair and bone preserving joint technologies.
We have nearly thirty years of global expertise developing, manufacturing and commercializing products based on our hyaluronic acid, or HA, technology platform. HA is a naturally occurring polymer found throughout the body that is vital for proper joint health and tissue function. Our proprietary technologies for modifying the HA molecule allow product properties to be tailored specifically to multiple uses, including enabling longer residence time to support OA pain management and creating a solid form of HA called Hyaff, which is the platform for our regenerative solutions portfolio.
In early 2020, we expanded our overall technology platform and significantly enhanced our commercial infrastructure, especially in the United States, through our strategic acquisitions of Parcus Medical, LLC, or Parcus Medical, a sports medicine implant and instrumentation solutions provider focused on sports medicine and soft tissue repair, and Arthrosurface, Inc., or Arthrosurface, a company specializing in less invasive, bone preserving partial and total joint replacement solutions. Through these acquisitions, we have transformed our company. We have expanded our addressable market from the over $1 billion global OA pain management market to the over $8 billion joint preservation market (which includes the faster growing sports medicine and extremities segments), improved our commercial capabilities, and expanded our product pipeline and research and development expertise in our target markets.
As we look towards the future, our business is positioned to capture value within our target market of joint preservation. We believe our success will be driven by our:
●
Decades of experience in HA-based regenerative solutions and early intervention orthopedics combined under new, common management in 2020 with a strong financial foundation for future investment in meaningful solutions for our customers;
●
Robust network of stakeholders in our target markets to identify evolving unmet patient treatment needs;
●
Prioritized investment in differentiated research and development programs;
●
Expansion of our commercial capabilities globally within joint preservation;
●
Opportunity to pursue strategic inorganic growth opportunities, including potential partnerships and acquisitions, leveraging our strong financial foundation and operational capabilities; and
●
Energized and experienced team focused on strong values, talent, and culture.
For additional information regarding our business, please refer to “Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Developments during the Year Ended December 31, 2020
●
We completed the acquisitions of Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical thereby substantially expanding our product portfolio, commercial capabilities, and addressable market.
●
We strengthened our executive team and our Board of Directors through the appointment of multiple industry veterans, including Cheryl R. Blanchard, Ph.D. as our President and Chief Executive Officer and Michael Levitz as our Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Treasurer.
●
We dramatically enhanced our commercial infrastructure by adding over 30 direct sales representatives in the U.S. market trained to sell our entire Joint Preservation and Restoration family of products and by augmenting our already-strong network of distributors.
●
We completed the launch activities for seven Joint Preservation and Restoration surgical devices and instruments. The new products enable procedures ranging from rotator cuff repair to arthroscopic knee repairs and treating arthritis damage in the hand and wrist.
●
We commenced our Cingal Pilot Study and enrolled the first patients in the study. We continued patient enrollment in our Hyalofast clinical trial.
●
We managed the COVID-19 pandemic environment without interruption to supply to our customers. As a precaution, we drew down $50 million from our credit facility in April 2020 and then repaid the entire $50 million prior to December 31, 2020 as we delivered positive cash flows during the year.
COVID-19 Pandemic
As discussed more fully in the section captioned “Results of Operations - Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019” below, the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our full year financial condition and operations. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the spread of the COVID-19 virus a pandemic. This pandemic has caused an economic downturn on a global scale, as well as significant volatility in the financial markets. There has been significant volatility in our results on a quarterly basis due to the worldwide cancellation or delay of elective procedures as well as the impact on timelines associated with certain clinical studies. While elective procedure volume had a limited recovery after the initial pandemic impacts seen in the first and early parts of second quarter of 2020 due to the easing of COVID-19 related restrictions in certain jurisdictions, areas of the United States and other countries have recently seen and continue to see fluctuating infection rates, which makes future results difficult to predict despite recent advances in vaccinations for certain parts of the population. Please see the section captioned “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information with respect to the risks faced by our business in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. In this time of uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken many precautions to provide a safe work environment for our employees and customers, including the establishment and implementation a work from home policy where possible. We may have to take further actions that we determine are in the best interests of our employees or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. To date, we do not anticipate disruption to our ability to supply products to our customers. Our commercial day-to-day operations have been impacted due to the worldwide cancellation or delay of elective procedures, and timelines associated with certain clinical studies and research and development programs have been delayed. While the impact has been limited to these items to date, we caution that there continues to be a possibility for potential future implementation of certain additional restrictions in certain jurisdictions. The impact of these restrictions on our operations, if implemented, is currently unknown but could be significant.
Product Categories
Joint Pain Management
Our Joint Pain Management product family consists of Monovisc, Orthovisc, Cingal, and Hyvisc our injectable, HA-based viscosupplement offerings that are indicated to provide pain relief from osteoarthritis conditions.
Joint Preservation and Restoration
Our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family consists of: (a) our portfolio of over 150 bone preserving joint technology products, including partial joint replacement, joint resurfacing, and minimally invasive and bone sparing implants, designed to treat upper and lower extremity orthopedic conditions caused by trauma, injury and arthritic disease; (b) our line of soft tissue repair solutions used to repair and reconstruct damaged ligaments and tendons due to sports injuries, trauma and disease; and (c) several orthopedic regenerative solutions products, including Hyalofast and Tactoset.
Other
Our Other product family consists of legacy HA-based products that do not fit into one of our other primary product categories, including our adhesion barrier product, advanced wound care products, our ear, nose and throat products, and our ophthalmic products.
For additional information with respect to our products, including information related to how they are sold and new product development initiatives, please see the sections captioned “Products,” “Sales Channels,” and “Research and Development” contained within “Part I. Item I. Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Statement of Operations Detail
Total and Product revenue
Total and Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $130.5 million, an increase of $15.9 million, or 14%, compared to prior year. This increase was primarily driven by growth in our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family, as a result of our acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface in early 2020, offset by a decrease in revenue from our Joint Pain Management products due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective procedure volumes worldwide. The following table presents product revenue by product family for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue from our Joint Pain Management product family decreased, primarily due to the worldwide impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective procedure volumes. Revenue from our Joint Preservation and Restoration products increased primarily from the addition of revenue from the Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical product portfolios following their early 2020 acquisition by us, offset in part by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on elective surgery procedure volumes worldwide. Revenue from our Other product family decreased due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on procedure volumes worldwide.
Gross profit and margin
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $69.0 million, or gross margin of 53%, as compared with $85.9 million, or gross margin of 75%, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to the inventory step-up associated with the Arthrosurface and Parcus Medical acquisitions, as well as acquisition-related amortization expenses, which together increased cost of revenue by $16.9 million, or 13 points of gross margin, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin also decreased due to lower volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, gross profit decreased due to a non-cash inventory impairment charge of $1.9 million following our determination not to pursue CE Mark renewals for certain of our legacy HA-based products primarily in the Other product family.
Research and development
Research
For additional information on our research and development activities, please see the section captioned “Part I. Item 1. Business. Research and Development” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $60.1 million, an increase of $25.1 million, or 72%, as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily related to expenses associated with operating Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface following their acquisition in the first quarter of 2020, including incremental expenses to integrate our commercial infrastructure, as well as incentive compensation, partially offset by a decrease in stock compensation expense due to the forfeiture of unvested equity awards.
Goodwill Impairment Charge
We assess goodwill for impairment annually, or, under certain circumstances, more frequently, such as when events or changes in circumstances indicate there may be impairment. U.S. government policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting changes in healthcare guidelines caused a temporary suspension of domestic elective surgical procedures. As a result of these events during the first quarter of 2020, we performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment related to the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit as of March 31, 2020. The results of these interim impairment tests indicated that the estimated fair value of this reporting unit was less than its carrying value. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $18.1 million was recorded in the quarter ended March 31, 2020. The decline in fair value was primarily due to decreases in immediate term revenue and related cash flows as a result of the temporary suspension of domestic elective procedures which directly impact the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit. We also performed our annual impairment testing related to the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface reporting unit in the fourth quarter of 2020. The results of the annual impairment test indicated that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value. This was primarily due to a decline in projected net cash flows as a result of the continued impact of COVID-19 on revenue and related cash flows, the expectation that the economic recovery will take longer than expected to materialize, and additional projected investment to support future growth. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge was recorded in the amount of $24.4 million during the fourth quarter of 2020. The total non-cash goodwill impairment charge with respect to the reporting unit amounted to $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contingent Consideration Fair Value Change
In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $28.7 million net benefit related to the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities incurred as a result of the acquisition of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface in the first quarter of 2020. The liability for contingent consideration is remeasured at each reporting period until the contingency is resolved. The decrease in fair value of the contingent consideration was largely due to a decrease in revenue projections related primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic. On October 15, 2020, we received FDA clearance for the WristMotion Total Arthroplasty System, triggering a $5 million regulatory-based milestone payment per the Arthrosurface merger agreement.
Income taxes
The benefit from income taxes was $4.6 million for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, based on an effective tax rate of 16.2%. The provision for income taxes was $8.9 million for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2019, based on an effective tax rate of 24.7%. The net decrease in the effective tax rate benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to the $4.8 million tax expense on the impairment of non-tax deductible goodwill, partially offset by the $1.9 million tax benefit on the decrease in the fair value of the contingent consideration.
Net income (loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss was $23.9 million, or $1.69 net loss per diluted share, compared to net income of $27.2 million, or $1.89 net income per diluted share, for the prior year. The decrease in net income and diluted earnings per share was primarily a result of the increased expenses associated with acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface previously discussed, in addition to the unfavorable impact on sales and gross profit from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present certain information with respect to adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income, and adjusted earnings per share, which are financial measures not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
We have presented adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income (loss), and adjusted earnings per share because they are key measures used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and to develop operational goals for managing our business. We believe these financial measures help identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of the expenses eliminated in calculating these measures can provide a useful tool for period-to-period comparisons of our core operating performance. Accordingly, we believe that these measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision-making.
Adjusted EBITDA
We present information below with respect to adjusted EBITDA, which we define as our net income (loss) excluding interest and other income, net, income tax benefit (expense), depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, product rationalization, and acquisition related expenses. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have also excluded the impacts of goodwill impairment charges and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration associated with our acquisition transactions in early 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of adjusted EBITDA rather than net income (loss), which is the nearest GAAP equivalent. Some of these limitations are:
•
adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization, and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated or amortized may have to be replaced in the future, the cash requirements for which are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA;
•
we exclude stock-based compensation expense from adjusted EBITDA although (a) it has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy and (b) if we did not pay out a portion of our compensation in the form of stock-based compensation, the cash salary expense included in operating expenses would be higher, which would affect our cash position;
•
we exclude acquisition related expenses, including transaction costs and other related expenses, amortization and depreciation of acquired assets, and the impact of inventory fair-value step up on cost of revenue;
•
we exclude certain impairment charges, including impairment related to In-Process Research and Development, or IPR&D, assets, certain product rationalization charges related to non-core legacy assets as a result of managing our financial position in light of our recent acquisitions, the impact of COVID-19 and changing regulatory requirements;
•
we exclude goodwill impairment charges and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration;
•
the expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculation of adjusted EBITDA may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from adjusted EBITDA when they report their operating results;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect provision for (benefit from) income taxes or the cash requirements to pay taxes; and
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments.
The following is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Adjusted EBITDA in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $25.2 million as compared with the prior year. The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for the period was primarily due to the unfavorable impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenues, unfavorable revenue mix and higher expenses following our acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EPS
We present information below with respect to adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted diluted earnings per share, which we refer to as adjusted EPS. We define adjusted net income (loss) as our net income (loss) excluding acquisition-related expenses, amortization and depreciation of acquired assets, the impact of inventory fair-value step up on cost of revenue and the impacts of goodwill impairment charges and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, as well as certain impairment charges, including impairment related to IPR&D assets and non-cash product rationalization charges associated with certain non-core legacy products, each on a tax effected basis. Acquisition related expenses are those that the we would not have incurred except as a direct result of acquisition transactions. Acquisition related expenses consist of investment banking, legal, accounting, and other professional and related expenses. The amortized assets contribute to revenue generation, and the amortization of such assets will recur in future periods until such assets are fully amortized. These assets include the estimated fair value of certain identified assets acquired in acquisitions, including in-process research and development, developed technology, customer relationships and acquired tradenames. We define adjusted EPS as GAAP diluted earnings per share excluding the above adjustments to net income used in calculating adjusted net income, each on
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted net income to net income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted diluted EPS to diluted EPS for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively (in thousands, expect per share data):
Adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $19.2 million and $1.34 per share, respectively, as compared with the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to the unfavorable impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenues, unfavorable revenue mix and higher expenses following our acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface.
Year ended December 31, 2019 compared to year ended December 31, 2018
Statement of Operations Detail
Total revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $9.1 million, as compared to the prior year, to $114.6 million. This increase was primarily due to increase in global Joint Pain Management revenue and the recovery from the 2018 voluntary recall of certain production lots of certain of our HYAFF-based products.
Product revenue
Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $114.5 million, an increase of $9.0 million, or 9%, compared to the prior year. The following table presents comparative product revenue analysis by product franchise:
Joint Pain Management
Overall, revenue from our Joint Pain Management product family increased by $6.7 million in 2019 as compared to 2018, primarily driven by increased revenue from Monovisc domestically and internationally, as well as increased revenue from Cingal in international markets.
Joint Preservation and Restoration
Revenue from our Joint Preservation and Restoration product family increased by $0.9 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due to recovery from our 2018 voluntary product recall and the U.S. commercial launch of Tactoset.
Other
Overall, revenue from our Other product family increased by $1.3 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due to our recovery from 2018 voluntary recall of certain production lots.
Gross profit and margin
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $85.9 million, or gross margin of 75%, as compared with $74.3 million, or gross margin of 70%, for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by more favorable changes in revenue mix, including an increase in domestic royalty revenue from our viscosupplement products and the recovery from the 2018 voluntary product recall.
Research and development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $1.5 million, or 8%, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in clinical trial expenses related to the Cingal phase III clinical trial partially offset by higher pre-clinical product development activities associated with the development of product candidates in our research and development pipeline, including our rotator cuff therapy.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $0.6 million, or 2%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to costs related to the acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface, which totaled $2.9 million in 2019, the buildout of our U.S. commercial infrastructure, and the launch of Tactoset, as well as increased personnel-related costs and external professional fees.
Income taxes
Provisions for income taxes were $8.9 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate in 2019 of 5.4%, as compared to 2018, is primarily due to a windfall tax benefit in 2018 related to exercises of employee equity awards resulting in an income tax benefit of $1.5 million compared to an insignificant amount in 2019.
Net income
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net income was $27.2 million, or $1.89 per diluted share, compared to $18.7 million, or $1.27 per diluted share, for the same period in the prior year. The increase in net income and diluted earnings per share was primarily a result of increased total revenue, increased gross profit and a decrease in one-time expenses associated with the retirement of a former CEO and the 2018 voluntary product recall.
Concentration of Risk
We have historically derived the majority of our revenues from a small number of customers, most of whom resell our products to end-users and are significantly larger companies than us. For the year ended December 31, 2020, five customers accounted for 58% of product revenue, with Mitek alone accounting for 49% of product revenue. While we believe that our expanded commercial infrastructure will substantially diversify our revenue base, we expect to continue to be dependent on a small number of large customers, especially Mitek, for a sizeable portion of our revenues in the near-term future. The failure of these customers to purchase our products in the amounts they historically have or in amounts that we expect could materially impact our business.
In addition, if present and future customers terminate their purchasing arrangements with us, significantly reduce or delay their orders, or seek to renegotiate their agreements on terms less favorable to us, our business, financial condition, and results of operations will be adversely affected. If we accept terms less favorable than the terms of the current agreements, such renegotiations may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and/or results of operations. Furthermore, in any future negotiations we may be subject to the perceived or actual leverage that these customers may have given their relative size and importance to us. Any termination, change, reduction, or delay in orders could seriously harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Accordingly, unless and until we diversify and expand our customer base, our future success will significantly depend upon the timing and size of future purchases by our largest customers and the financial and operational success of these customers. The loss of any one of our major customers or the delay of significant orders from such customers, even if only temporary, could reduce or delay our recognition of revenues, harm our reputation in the industry, and reduce our ability to accurately predict cash flow, and, as a consequence, it could seriously harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
See Note 13, Revenue by Product Group, by Significant Customer and by Geographic Location; Geographic Information, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding significant customers.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We require cash to fund our operating expenses and to make capital expenditures. We expect that our requirements for cash to fund these uses will increase as our operations expand. Historically we have generated positive cash flow from operations, which, together with our available cash, investments, and debt, have met our cash requirements. Cash, cash equivalents, and investments aggregated $98.3 million and $184.9 million, and working capital totaled $140.5 million and $218.0 million, at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We are closely monitoring our liquidity and capital resources for any potential impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our operations. As a precautionary measure, we executed a drawdown of $50 million from our existing credit facility with Bank of America in April 2020, all of which we repaid during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings and we are in compliance with the terms of the existing credit facility. During 2020, we also implemented a number of internal short-term expense controls and prioritized business initiatives to conserve cash flow.
Cash provided by operating activities was $13.1 million, $37.0 million, and $34.9 million for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales and gross profit, as well as increased operational spending following the acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface.
Investing activities used $71.3 million of cash in 2020, provided $39.7 million of cash in 2019, and used $50.3 million of cash in 2018. The change in 2020 was primarily due to the acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface.
Cash used in financing activities was $3.8 million, $8.1 million, and $28.9 million for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The financing activities in 2020 were primarily associated with a $5 million regulatory-based milestone paid per the Arthrosurface merger agreement, of which $4.5 million was recorded within financing activities and the remainder within operating activities. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 we executed $30 million accelerated share repurchase programs each year. The decrease in cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily the result of a decrease in share repurchase partially offset by a decrease in proceeds from the exercise of employee equity awards as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments
The table below summarizes our non-cancelable operating leases, purchase commitments, and contractual obligations related to future periods which are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. Purchase commitments relate primarily to non-cancellable inventory commitments and capital expenditures entered in the normal course of business:
(1)
Includes purchase commitments for materials, clinical trials, and other day to day business requirements.
Under the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface merger agreements, there are earn-out milestones totaling up to $100 million payable from 2020 to 2022. Parcus Medical has net sales earn-out milestones annually from 2020 to 2022, while Arthrosurface has both regulatory and net sales earn-out milestones in 2020 and 2021. Projected contingent payment amounts are discounted back to the current period using a discounted cash flow model or a Monte Carlo simulation approach. As of December 31, 2020, the Company estimated total remaining earn-outs to be $35.4 million, of which $13.1 million is due within one year and $22.3 million due thereafter.
Accounting for Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not use special purpose entities or other off-balance sheet financing techniques, except for operating leases as disclosed in the contractual obligations table above, that we believe have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies; Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We monitor our estimates on an ongoing basis for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout this section captioned “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Combinations and Contingent Consideration
Amounts paid for acquisitions are allocated to the intangible and tangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. This purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets and deferred revenue obligations. Critical estimates include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, including projected revenues and expenses, and the applicable discount rates. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions determined by management. Any excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. The fair value of contingent consideration includes estimates and judgments made by management regarding the probability that future contingent payments will be made.
We use the income approach to determine the fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets including developed technology and IPR&D. This approach determines fair value by estimating after-tax cash flows attributable to these assets over their respective useful lives and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. The estimated economic lives were determined using a variety of indicators including historical usage, evolutionary changes and other observable market data. We base our assumptions on estimates of future cash flows, expected growth rates and expected trends in technology. We base the discount rate used to arrive at the present value used in this method as of the date of acquisition on the time value of money and certain industry-specific risk factors. We use the relief-from-royalty method of the income approach to determine the fair value of trade names. This approach determines fair value by estimating the after-tax royalty savings attributable to owning the intangible asset and then discounting these after-tax royalty savings back to a present value. We base our assumptions on the estimated revenue attributable to the trade name and the estimated royalty rate attributable to the trade name. We use the avoided costs/lost profits method to determine the fair of customer relationships. This approach determines fair value by estimating the projected revenues related to the asset and estimated costs to recreate the intangible asset. We believe the estimated purchased customer relationships, developed technologies, trade name, and in process research and development amounts so determined represent the fair value at the date of acquisition and do not exceed the amount a third party would pay for the assets.
We use the comparative sales method to determine the fair value of work-in-process and finished goods inventory acquired and ultimately the inventory step- up required. The fair value of WIP inventory was estimated as the selling price less the sum of (a) costs to complete, (b) costs of disposal, and (c) a reasonable profit allowance for the selling effort of the acquiring entity based on profit for similar products. The fair value of finished goods inventory was estimated as the selling price less the sum of (a) costs of disposal and (b) a reasonable profit allowance for the selling effort of the acquiring entity based on profit for similar products.
For contingent consideration, management updates these estimates and the related fair value of contingent consideration at each reporting period based on the estimated probability of achieving the earn-out targets and applying a discount rate that captures the risk associated with the expected contingent payments. Under the Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface merger agreements, there are earn-out milestones totaling $100 million payable from 2020 to 2022. Parcus Medical has net sales earn-out milestones annually from 2020 to 2022, while Arthrosurface has both regulatory and net sales earn-out milestones in 2020 and 2021. Projected contingent payment amounts are discounted back to the current period using a discounted cash flow model or a Monte Carlo simulation approach. To the extent our estimates change in the future regarding the likelihood of achieving these targets we may need to record material adjustments to our accrued contingent consideration. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration are recorded in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue Recognition - General
Pursuant to ASC 606, we recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue that is recorded reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We apply the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are capable of being distinct or distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
We generate sales principally through three types of customers: (i) commercial partnerships (ii) hospitals and surgery centers, and (iii) distributors, referred to as distribution model.
For commercial partnership sales, we sell our products directly to these partners, who perform the vast majority of the downstream sales and marketing activities to customers and end-users. These arrangements may include the grant of certain licenses, performance of development services, and the supply of product. Our largest such customer, Mitek, represented 49% of total revenues for the year-ended December 31, 2020. We recognize revenue from product sales when the customer obtains control of our product, which typically occurs upon shipment to the customer. Commercial partnership agreements may also include sales-based royalties and milestones. As we considered the license to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate for these agreements, sales-based royalties and milestones are only recognized when the later of the underlying sale occurs or the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based royalty has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). This is generally in the same period that our licensees complete their product sales in their territory, for which we are contractually entitled to a percentage-based royalty. We record royalty revenues based on estimated net sales of licensed products as reported to us by our commercial partners. Differences between actual and estimated royalty revenues have not been material and are typically adjusted in the following quarter when the actual amounts are known. Revenue from sales-based royalties is included in product revenues.
For sales to hospitals and surgery centers, which generally pairs an in-house team of regional sales directors with local or regional distributors, the inventory is generally consigned to sales agents so that products are available when needed for surgical procedures. No revenue is recognized upon the placement of inventory into consignment, as we retain the ability to control the inventory. Revenue is recognized typically as of the date of surgical implantation of the product.
For distributor sales, we sell our products to our distributors, generally outside the United States, who subsequently resell the products to sub-distributors and health care providers, among others. We recognize revenue from product sales when the distributor obtains control of our product, which typically occurs upon shipment to the distributor, in return for agreed-upon, fixed-price consideration. Performance obligations are generally settled quickly after purchase order acceptance; therefore, the value of unsatisfied performance obligations at the end of any reporting period is generally insignificant. We sell to a diversified base of distributors and, therefore, believes there is no material concentration of credit risk.
Certain of our supply agreements contain terms that represent a promise to deliver product at the customer’s discretion that are considered distributor options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee, and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations. Our supply agreements do not provide options that are considered material rights.
Our payment terms are consistent with prevailing practice in the respective markets in which we do business. Most of our customers make payments based on contract terms, which are not affected by contingent events that could impact the transaction price. Payment terms fall within the one-year guidance for the practical expedient, which allows us to forgo adjustment of the contractual payment amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component. Our contracts with customers do not customarily provide a right of return, unless certain product quality standards are not met.
Some of our distributor agreements have volume-based discounts with tiered pricing which are generally prospective in nature. These prospective discounts together with any free-of-charge sample units offered are evaluated as potential material rights. If the prospective discounts or free-of-charge sample units are considered material rights, these would be separate performance obligations and a portion of the sales transaction price is allocated to the material right. Revenue allocated to the material right is recognized when the additional goods are transferred to the customer or when the option expires. During 2020, the consideration allocated to material rights was not significant.
We receive payments from our customers based on billing schedules established in each contract. Up-front payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. Deferred revenue was $0.2 million and $0 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Generally, customer contracts contain Free on Board (FOB) or Ex-Works (EXW) shipping point terms where the customer pays the shipping company directly for all shipping and handling costs. In those contracts in which we pay for the shipping and handling, the associated costs are generally recorded along with the product sale at the time of shipment in cost of revenue when control over the products has transferred to the customer. Value-add and other taxes we collected concurrently with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Our general product warranty does not extend beyond an assurance that the product or services delivered will be consistent with stated contractual specifications, which does not create a separate performance obligation. We recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred as the amortization period of the assets that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less in accordance with the practical expedient in paragraph ASC 340-40-25-4. These costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Inventories
Inventories are primarily stated at the lower of standard cost and net realizable value, with approximate cost determined using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Work-in-process and finished goods inventories include materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead. Inventory costs associated with product candidates that have not yet received regulatory approval are capitalized if we believe there is probable future commercial use and future economic benefit.
Our policy is to write-down inventory when conditions exist that suggest inventory may be in excess of anticipated demand or is obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand for our products and market conditions. We regularly evaluate the ability to realize the value of inventory based on a combination of factors including, but not limited to, historical usage rates, forecasted sales or usage, product end of life dates, and estimated current or future market values. Purchasing requirements and alternative usage avenues are explored within these processes to mitigate inventory exposure.
When recorded, inventory write-downs are intended to reduce the carrying value of inventory to its net realizable value. If actual demand for our products deteriorates, or if market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional inventory write-downs may be required. Other long-term assets include inventory expected to remain on hand beyond one year.
Goodwill and Acquired In-Process Research and Development
Goodwill is the amount by which the purchase price of acquired net assets in a business combination exceeded the fair values of net identifiable assets on the date of acquisition. Acquired IPR&D represents the fair value assigned to research and development assets that we acquire that have not been completed at the date of acquisition or are pending regulatory approval in certain jurisdictions. The value assigned to the acquired IPR&D is determined by estimating the costs to develop the acquired technology into commercially viable products, estimating the resulting revenue from the projects, and discounting the net cash flows to present value.
Goodwill and IPR&D are not amortized but are evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Our goodwill impairment assessment is performed by reporting unit. A reporting unit is the operating segment, or a business one level below that operating segment (the component level) if discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by segment management. However, components are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. We have two reporting units: the legacy Anika reporting unit, which specializes in therapies based on our HA technology platform, and a joint preservation and restoration reporting unit established in 2020 upon the acquisitions of Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface. Factors we consider important, on an overall company basis, that could trigger an impairment review include significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, significant negative industry or economic trends, a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period, or a reduction of our market capitalization relative to net book value.
To conduct impairment tests of goodwill, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, we record an impairment loss to the extent that the carrying value of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, not to exceed the recorded amount of goodwill. We estimated the fair value of the reporting units using a discounted cash flow method, which is based on the present value of projected cash flows and a terminal value, which represents the expected normalized cash flows of the reporting units beyond the cash flows from the discrete projection period. We determined that a discounted cash flow model provided the best approximation of fair value of the reporting units for the purpose of performing the impairment test. This approach incorporates significant estimates and assumptions related to the forecasted results including revenues, expenses, the achievement of certain cost synergies, terminal growth rates and discount rates to estimate future cash flows. Rates used to discount cash flows are dependent upon interest rates and the cost of capital based on our industry and capital structure, adjusted for equity and size risk premiums based on market capitalization, as well as other financial inputs from a selection of comparable publicly-traded companies with product offerings similar to those of the reporting unit. While assumptions utilized are subject to a high degree of judgment and complexity, we made our best estimate of future cash flows under a high degree of economic uncertainty that existed as of November 30, 2020. In developing the assumptions, we also considered observed trends of our industry participants.
U.S. and international government policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting changes in healthcare guidelines caused a temporary suspension of global elective surgical procedures. As a result, the widespread economic volatility triggered impairment testing in the first quarter of 2020, and accordingly, we performed interim impairment testing on the goodwill balances of our reporting units. We also performed our annual impairment testing in the fourth quarter of 2020.
For the legacy Anika reporting unit, we performed an interim qualitative assessment in the first quarter including consideration of (i) general macroeconomic factors, (ii) industry and market conditions, and (iii) the extent of the excess of the fair value over the carrying value indicated in prior impairment testing. We determined it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the legacy Anika reporting unit is less than its carrying amount and thus goodwill was not impaired as of March 31, 2020. As part of our annual impairment testing, we decided to perform a quantitative assessment related to the legacy Anika reporting unit as of November 30, 2020, due to the expectation that the economic recovery would take longer than expected to materialize. The results of the impairment test indicated that the estimated fair value of the legacy Anika reporting unit was greater than its carrying value, and therefore we did not record any impairment charges related to the legacy Anika reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For our newly created reporting unit, which includes Parcus Medical and Arthrosurface, we also performed an interim quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment as of March 31, 2020. We estimated the fair value of the reporting unit using a discounted cash flow method. The results of the interim impairment test indicated that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value. This was primarily due to decreases in near term revenue and related cash flows as a result of the temporary suspension of domestic elective procedures which directly impact the reporting unit. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge was recorded in the amount of $18.1 million during the first quarter of 2020. As part of our annual impairment testing, we also performed a quantitative assessment related to the new reporting unit as of November 30, 2020. The results of the annual impairment test indicated that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value. This was primarily due to a decline in projected net cash flows as a result of the continued impact of COVID-19 on revenue and related cash flows, the expectation that the economic recovery will take longer than expected to materialize, and additional projected investment to support future growth. Consequently, a non-cash goodwill impairment charge was recorded in the amount of $24.4 million during the fourth quarter of 2020. The total non-cash goodwill impairment charge with respect to the reporting unit amounted to $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we decided not to further invest in our HyaloBone and HyaloNect IPR&D projects as they were no longer aligned with our core strategic focus. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge in the period totaling $1.4 million recorded in research and development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations.
We performed our annual assessment of the remaining IPR&D intangible assets as of November 30, 2020. We estimated the fair value of the IPR&D intangible assets using the income approach which is based on the Multi-Period Excess Earnings Method, or MPEEM. MPEEM measures economic benefit indirectly by calculating the income attributable to an asset after appropriate returns are paid to complementary assets used in conjunction with the subject asset to produce the earnings associated with the subject asset, commonly referred to as contributory asset charges. This approach incorporates significant estimates and assumptions related to the forecasted results including revenues, expenses, expected economic life of the asset, contributory asset charges and discount rates to estimate future cash flows. While assumptions utilized are subject to a high degree of judgment and complexity, we made our best estimate of future cash flows under a high degree of economic uncertainty that existed as of November 30, 2020. In developing the assumptions, we also considered observed trends of our industry participants. No impairment existed as the estimated fair value of the remaining IPR&D intangible assets was greater than their carrying value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.