Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Company Overview
We are a clinical stage, drug platform company addressing neurodegeneration such as Alzheimer’s disease (“AD”), Parkinson’s disease (“PD”) and Alzheimer’s disease in Down Syndrome (“AD-DS”). Our lead compound, ANVS401, is a small molecule administered orally that attacks neurodegeneration by entering the brain and inhibiting the translation of neurotoxic proteins-amyloid precursor protein APP/Aβ (“APP”), tau/phospho-tau (“tau”) and α-Synuclein (“αSYN”)-thereby improving axonal transport. Human studies in four mildly cognitive impaired patients have shown that ANVS401 lowered the levels of neurotoxic proteins and inflammatory factors. In preclinical studies, lower neurotoxic protein levels led to improved axonal transport, reduced inflammation, lower nerve cell death and improved function.
AD is a substantial market affecting over 30 million people worldwide and is expected to grow to over 100 million by 2050. While the market for neurodegeneration is over $100 billion, to date there are no disease modifying drugs for any neurodegenerative condition. Enormous efforts have gone into developing better drugs to treat neurodegeneration and the outcomes have been sobering. The results of clinical trials in AD, the two AD orphan indications AD-DS and early onset familial AD or in PD have not supported the development of successful disease modifying therapies.
ANVS401 is a small lipophilic molecule that is orally available and readily enters the brain, as demonstrated by preclinical pharmacokinetics analyses showing brain concentrations approximately six to eight times higher than plasma concentrations. ANVS401 has a mechanism of action that we believe to be unique, in that it inhibited the over-translation of and, therefore, reduced the levels of several neurotoxic proteins both in vitro and in vivo including APP, tau and αSYN.
By targeting multiple neurotoxic proteins, ANVS401 resembles a combination therapy approach, with the added convenience of being a single drug with a single drug target. Therefore, we have worked to understand how ANVS401 is able to inhibit the translation of more than one neurotoxic protein.
We are presently conducting two Phase 2a clinical trials. In collaboration with the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study (“ADCS”) we are conducting a trial in 24 early AD patients (the “ADCS Trial”). We are also conducting a Phase 2a clinical trial in 14 AD and 54 PD patients (the “AD/PD Trial”) which began treating patients in August 2020. Both clinical trials are double-blind, placebo controlled studies. Under an agreement with UC San Diego, where ADCS is located, we have contracted to provide study supplies at our cost but the remaining costs of the ADCS Trial are paid for by the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”). We have designed the two Phase 2a studies by applying our understanding of the underlying disease states in neurodegeneration and by measuring not just target, but also pathway validation in the spinal fluid of these patients. This means that we are proposing to measure as many factors as possible associated with the toxic cascade precipitated by impaired axonal transport. If we are able to show both target and pathway validation in two patient populations, we believe that our opportunity for successful Phase 3 studies is better than if we merely demonstrated target validation in one patient population.
We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses since inception. Our net losses were $5,462,047 and $990,980 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and our accumulated deficit at December 31, 2020 was $14,239,075. We expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect these losses to increase as we continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in development and clinical studies relating to our product candidates, including:
● expenses associated with clinical development;
● personnel-related expenses, such as salaries, benefits, travel and other related expenses, including stock-based compensation;
● payments to third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”), contractor laboratories and independent contractors; and
● depreciation, maintenance and other facility-related expenses.
We expense all research and development costs as incurred. Clinical development expenses for our product candidates are a significant component of our current research and development expenses. Product candidates in later stage clinical development generally have higher research and development expenses than those in earlier stages of development, primarily due to increased size and duration of the clinical trials. We track and record information regarding external research and development expenses for each study or trial that we conduct. From time to time, we use third-party CROs, contractor laboratories and independent contractors in clinical studies. We recognize the expenses associated with third parties performing these services for us in our clinical studies based on the percentage of each study completed at the end of each reporting period.
Our research and development expenses in 2020 primarily related to the AD/PD Trial which began treating patients in August 2020 and two long-term animal toxicology studies which began in November 2019-a six-month study in rats and a nine-month study in dogs. We expect that our research and development expenses in 2021 and for the next several years will be higher than in 2020 as a result of the continuation of our AD/PD Trial and costs associated with the initiation of our planned Phase 3 trial in AD-DS. These expenditures are subject to numerous uncertainties regarding timing and cost to completion. Completion of our clinical development and clinical trials may take several years or more and the length of time generally varies according to the type, complexity, novelty and intended use of our product candidates. The cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during clinical development, including, among others:
● the number of sites included in the clinical trials;
● the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
● the size of patient populations participating in the clinical trials;
● the duration of patient follow-ups;
● the development stage of the product candidates; and
● the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidates.
Due to the early stage of our research and development, we are unable to determine the duration or completion costs of our development of ANVS401. As a result of the difficulties of forecasting research and development costs of ANVS401 as well as the other uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine when and to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of approved product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our executive, finance, accounting, legal and human resource functions. Our general and administrative expenses also include facility and related costs not included in research and development expenses, professional fees for legal services, including patent-related expenses, consulting, tax and accounting services, insurance and general corporate expenses. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase with the continued development and potential commercialization of our product candidates.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses in 2021 and for the next several years will be higher than in 2020 as we increase our employee count. Following our IPO in January 2020, we also anticipate increased expenses relating to our operation as a public company, including increased costs for the hiring of additional personnel, and for payment to outside consultants, including lawyers and accountants, to comply with additional regulations, corporate governance, internal control and similar requirements applicable to public companies, as well as increased costs for insurance.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest income (expense) consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and interest expense on our convertible promissory notes, including amortization of deferred financing fees and debt discount.
Grant Income
Grants received are recognized as grant income in the statements of operations as and when they are earned for the specific research and development projects for which these grants are designated. In September 2019, as modified in September 2020, we received a Notice of Award for a $1.9 million grant from the National Institute on Aging of the NIH to cover the costs of long-term toxicology studies on ANVS401 in rats and dogs. The costs of the studies and the grant income were substantially completed as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had U.S. federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of $7,821,413, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities. Federal NOL carryforwards generated in 2017 and prior of $2,764,240 will expire beginning 2032. The remaining federal NOL carryforwards generated in 2018 through 2020, do not expire, and following the enactment of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act in March 2020, are permitted to offset 100% of taxable income in future years.
NOL and tax credit carryforwards are subject to review and possible adjustment by the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) and may become subject to an annual limitation in the event of certain cumulative changes in the ownership interest of significant shareholders over a three-year period in excess of 50% as defined under Sections 382 and 383 in the Internal Revenue Code. This could substantially limit the amount of tax attributes that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income or tax liabilities. The amount of the annual limitation is determined based on our value immediately prior to the ownership change. Subsequent ownership changes may further affect the limitation in future years.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
We have based our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to clinical development expenses and stock-based compensation.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully discussed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
We rely on third parties to conduct our preclinical studies and to provide services, including data management, statistical analysis and electronic compilation. Once our clinical trials begin, at the end of each reporting period, we will compare the payments made to each service provider to the estimated progress towards completion of the related project. Factors that we will consider in preparing these estimates include the number of patients enrolled in studies, milestones achieved and other criteria related to the efforts of our vendors. These estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, we will record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Fair Value of Common Stock and Stock-Based Compensation
We account for grants of stock options to employees and non-employees based on their grant date fair value and recognize compensation expense over the vesting periods. We estimate the fair value of stock options as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculations, including the expected term, the expected volatility of our common stock, the risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend rate.
Prior to our IPO, in the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, on each grant date, we developed an estimate of the fair value of our common stock underlying the option grants. We determined the fair value of our common stock using methodologies, approaches and assumptions consistent with the AICPA Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, and based in part on input from an independent third-party valuation firm. Following the closing of our IPO on January 31, 2020, we no longer have to estimate the fair value of the common stock, rather we determine the value based on quoted market prices.
Grant Income
Grants received are recognized as grant income in the statements of operations as and when they are earned for the specific research and development projects for which these grants are designated. Grants payments received in excess of grant income earned are recognized as deferred grant on the balance sheet and grant income earned in excess of grant payments received is recognized as grant receivable on the balance sheets.
Results of Operations
Operating expenses and other income (expense) were comprised of the following:
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $2,277.7 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of an increase of $1,878.7 thousand in costs related to our AD/PD Trial which began treating patients in August 2020, an increase of $61.7 thousand in costs associated with our long-term toxicology studies in rats and dogs which began in November of 2019, an increase in share-based compensation expense of $138.7 thousand and an increase of $130.1 thousand in personnel expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $2,756.8 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of increases of $1,717.7 thousand in share-based compensation expense, $650.9 thousand in other personnel expenses, $307.5 thousand in insurance expense and $134.1 thousand in stock listing fees and other financial filing and printing fees.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
The derivative liability represents an embedded derivative in our convertible promissory notes which were issued in March 2019. At each balance sheet date, we estimated the fair value of the derivative liability and recognized any change in our statements of operations. The fair value of the derivative liability was adjusted to $132.5 thousand immediately prior to the closing of our IPO on January 31, 2020. Effective upon the closing of the IPO, the derivative liability was eliminated, and the amount was reclassified to additional paid-in capital on the balance sheet.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net increased $88.1 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of interest income generated on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds of our IPO which closed on January 31, 2020 and the conversion of our convertible promissory notes to common stock in conjunction with the IPO.
Grant Income
Grant income increased $422.3 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was the result of income recognized related to a grant from the NIH to reimburse the
costs of our long-term toxicology studies in rats and dogs, which studies began in November 2019 and were substantially completed as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2008, we have devoted most of our cash resources to research and development and general and administrative activities. We have financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from the sale of common stock, convertible preferred stock and convertible promissory notes. To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sale of products, and we do not anticipate generating any revenues from the sales of products for the foreseeable future. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020, our principal source of liquidity was our cash, which totaled $8,074.7 thousand.
Equity Financings
We closed our IPO on January 31, 2020, raising gross proceeds of $13,800.0 thousand and net proceeds of $12,034.4 thousand, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Debt Financings
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had outstanding $0.0 and $530.0 thousand principal amount of convertible promissory notes, which were issued in March 2019. Upon the closing of our IPO on January 31, 2020, the outstanding convertible promissory notes plus accrued interest converted into 118,470 shares of our common stock at a 20% discount to the public offering price.
Future Capital Requirements
We expect that current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations and capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. We believe that these available funds will be sufficient to complete our Phase 2a clinical trial for ANVS401 and commence the planning of our Phase 3 study in AD-DS for this product candidate. However, it is difficult to predict our spending for our product candidates prior to obtaining FDA approval. Moreover, changing circumstances may cause us to expend cash significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more cash than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control.
To the extent that our capital resources are insufficient to meet our future operating and capital requirements, we will need to finance our cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements or other financing alternatives. We have no committed external sources of funds. Additional equity or debt financing or collaboration and licensing arrangements may not be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities.
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operations was $3,970.8 thousand compared to $476.5 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in operations was primarily the result of the costs associated with our AD/PD Trial, higher personnel expenses and insurance expense, and the payment of accounts payable, accrued license fees and other accrued expenses as of the end of the prior year.
We expect cash used in operating activities to increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to an expected increase in our operating losses associated with ongoing development of our product candidates, including our AD/PD Trial.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $12,043.6 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2020, attributable to net proceeds from our IPO of $12,034.4 thousand, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, and $9.2 thousand proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Cash provided by financing activities was $443.1 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2019, attributable to $530.0 thousand proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes partially offset by the payment of $78.6 thousand deferred offering costs associated with our IPO and $8.3 thousand of fees on the issuance of the convertible promissory notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, except for short-term operating leases, or relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-5-Income Taxes (Topic 740): Amendments to SEC Paragraphs pursuant to SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118. This ASU provided guidance related to Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (“SAB 118”), which addresses the accounting implications of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2107 (the “Tax Act”). SAB 118 allows a company to record provisional amounts during a measurement period not to extend beyond one year of the enactment date and was effective upon issuance. The Tax Act did not have a significant impact on our financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820)-Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. The new guidance improves and clarifies the fair value measurement disclosure requirement of ASC 820. The new disclosure requirements include the changes in unrealized gains or losses included in other comprehensive income for recurring Level 3 fair value measurement held at the end of reporting period and the explicit requirement to disclose the range and weighted average used to develop significant unobservable inputs for Level 3 fair value measurements. The other provisions of ASU 2018-13 also include eliminated and modified disclosure requirements. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 with early adoption permitted. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 in the first quarter of 2020 did not have a significant impact on our financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and clarifying and amending existing guidance. The new standard is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating ASU 2019-12 but do not believe the adoption of this standard will have a significant impact on our financial statements.
Significant Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We lease our office facilities under a month-to-month operating lease.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
JOBS Act
Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.