Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of the financial condition and results of our operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this annual report. Our consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Overview
We are a designer, developer and global supplier of a broad portfolio of power semiconductors. Our portfolio of power semiconductors includes approximately 2,400 products, and has grown significantly with the introduction of over 160 new products in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and 200 new products in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019, respectively. Our teams of scientists and engineers have developed extensive intellectual properties and technical knowledge that encompass major aspects of power semiconductors, which we believe enables us to introduce and develop innovative products to address the increasingly complex power requirements of advanced electronics. We have an extensive patent portfolio that consists of 863 patents and 58 patent applications in the United States as of June 30, 2021. We also have a total of 898 foreign patents, which primarily were based on our research and development efforts through June 30, 2021. We differentiate ourselves by integrating our expertise in technology, design and advanced manufacturing and packaging to optimize product performance and cost. Our portfolio of products targets high-volume applications, including personal computers, graphic cards, game consoles, flat panel TVs, home appliances, smart phones, battery packs, consumer and industrial motor controls and power supplies for TVs, computers, servers and telecommunications equipment.
Our business model leverages global resources, including research and development and manufacturing in the United States and Asia. Our sales and technical support teams are localized in several growing markets. We operate an 8-inch wafer fabrication facility located in Hillsboro, Oregon, or the Oregon fab, which is critical for us to accelerate proprietary technology development, new product introduction and improve our financial performance. To meet the market demand for the more mature high volume products, we also utilize the wafer manufacturing capacity of selected third party foundries. For assembly and test, we primarily rely upon our in-house facilities in China. In addition, we utilize subcontracting partners for industry standard packages. We believe our in-house packaging and testing capability provides us with a competitive advantage in proprietary packaging technology, product quality, cost and sales cycle time.
We operate a power semiconductor packaging, testing and wafer fabrication facility in the Liangjiang New Area of Chongqing, China through our joint venture (the “JV Company”) with two investment funds owned by the Municipality of Chongqing (the “Chongqing Funds”). We currently own 51%, and the Chongqing Funds own 49%, of the equity interest in the JV Company. The Company’s consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 reflect net losses attributable to the non-controlling interest in the JV Company of $1.8 million, $11.7 million and $16.5 million, respectively. While the JV Company is our consolidated subsidiary for purpose of financial reporting, it operates as an independent and separate legal entity. As a result, the JV Company’s assets and liabilities are segregated from our company's assets and liabilities. For example, the JV Company incurs debt through its own financing and bank loan agreements, and our parent company and other subsidiaries are not parties to these agreements and do not provide any guarantee or security for the JV Company’s debt, nor do we have direct access to any cash proceeds borrowed from such loan agreements. As part of our strategic plan, we formed the JV Company to fulfill growing customer demand. During the fiscal year 2021, the additional capacity at the JV Company contributed significantly to meeting the increasing demand for our products. The JV Company has reached its targeted production of assembly and testing, and is expected to ramp up its Phase I target run rate of the 12-inch wafer fabrication in the quarter ending September 30, 2021. But our goal may be affected by various factors, including the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic and related economic downturn, intensified geopolitical tensions between China and U.S., logistical difficulties, the JV Company’s ability to obtain financing and other risk factors beyond our control. We will continue to monitor and evaluate market conditions closely during this period and react quickly to the changing environment as necessary to achieve an optimal production level at the JV Company. In addition, the JV Company is currently pursuing various financing options to fund its future expansion and repay its debt obligations, and there is no guarantee that the JV Company will be able obtain such financing with favorable terms, or at all. We expect the joint venture to provide important capacity to support our future growth, enhance our market positions in China, and drive improvements in capital expenditures.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, we continued our diversification program by developing new silicon and packaging platforms to expand our serviceable available market, or SAM and offer higher performance products. Our metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors, or MOSFET, and power IC product portfolio expanded significantly. Our high performance products and deepened customer relationships with our OEM and ODM customers have contributed to the achievement of our record high revenue of $656.9 million for the fiscal year 2021, a 41.3% growth compared to the last fiscal year.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic to our Business
Our business operations have been impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic downturn. Numerous governmental jurisdictions, including the States of California, Oregon and Texas in the U.S. and countries throughout the Asia Pacific region have imposed “stay-at-home” orders, quarantines, travel bans and similar governmental orders and restrictions to control the spread of COVID-19. Such orders and restrictions have resulted in business closures, work stoppages, slowdowns and delays in commercial activities, unprecedented and widespread unemployment, disruptions to ports and other shipping infrastructure, border closures, and other travel or health-related restrictions, thereby negatively impacting our customers, suppliers, distributors, employees, offices, and the entire semiconductor ecosystem.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and changing consumer behaviors due to various government restrictions, including "stay-at-home" orders, we have experienced shifting market trends, including an increasing demand in markets for notebooks, PCs, gaming devices and other products. While we have recently benefited from the increasing demand for PC related products, there is no guarantee that this trend will continue, and such increasing demand may discontinue or decline if government authorities relax or terminate COVID-19 related restrictions and consumer behaviors change in response to the reopening of certain economic activities. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees and to comply with various government and regulatory guidelines, we took proactive actions to adopt policies and protocols at our locations around the world, including social distancing guidelines, working from home, limiting the number of employees attending meetings, reducing the number of people in our sites at any one time, and suspending employee travel, and these measures may result in difficulties and logistical challenges in our business operations.
Since the start of the second quarter of 2021, there have been increasing availability and administration of vaccines against COVID-19, as well as an easing of restrictions on social, business, travel, and government activities and functions, and a gradual resumption of economic activities and consumer spending in our industries. On the other hand, infection rates continue to fluctuate in various regions and new strains of the virus remain a risk. In addition, there are ongoing global impacts resulting from the pandemic, including disruption of the product supply chains, shortages of semiconductor components, and delays in shipments, product development, and product launches. The full extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance is uncertain and will depend on many factors outside the Company’s control, including, without limitation, the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic; the availability, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines; the spread of new variants of COVID-19; the continued and renewed imposition of protective public safety measures; and the impact of the pandemic on the global economy and demand for consumer products. Although we are unable to predict the full impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we are actively managing our business operations and financial expenditures in response to continued uncertainty.
Other Factors affecting our performance
In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic and related events as described above, our performance is affected by several key factors, including the following:
The global, regional economic and PC market conditions: Because our products primarily serve consumer electronic applications, any significant change in global and regional economic conditions could materially affect our revenue and results of operations. For example, because a significant amount of our revenue is derived from sales of products in the personal computing ("PC") markets, such as notebooks, motherboards and notebook battery packs, a substantial decline or downturn in the PC market could have a material adverse effect on our revenue and results of operations. The PC markets have experienced a modest global decline in recent years due to continued growth of demand in tablets and smart phones, worldwide economic conditions and the industry inventory correction which had and may continue to have a material impact on the demand for our products. However, we recently have experienced a significant increase of demand in PC market due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting shift in market trend and consumer behaviors. We cannot predict whether and how long this trend will continue due to the uncertainty and unpredictability of COVID-19 pandemic. A decline of the PC market may have a negative impact on our revenue, factory utilization, gross margin, our ability to resell excess inventory, and other performance measures. We have executed and continue to execute strategies to diversify our product portfolio, penetrate other market segments, including the consumer, communications and industrial markets, and improve gross margins and profit by implementing cost control measures. While making efforts to reduce our reliance on the computing market, we continue to support our computing business and capitalize on the opportunities in this market with a more focused and competitive PC product strategy to gain market share.
Manufacturing costs: Our gross margin is affected by a number of factors including our manufacturing costs, utilization of our manufacturing facilities, the product mixes of our sales, pricing of wafers from third party foundries and pricing of semiconductor raw materials. Capacity utilization affects our gross margin because we have certain fixed costs associated with our packaging and testing facilities at our Oregon fab and our Chongqing fabrication facility operated by the JV Company. We expect that in the long term our JV Company will reduce our cost of manufacturing. If we are unable to utilize our manufacturing facilities at a desired level, our gross margin may be adversely affected. In addition, from time to time, we may experience wafer capacity constraints, particularly at third party foundries, that may prevent us from meeting fully the demand
of our customers. For example, the recent global shortage of semiconductor manufacturing capacity has provided us with both challenges and opportunities in the market, and highlighted the importance of maintaining sufficient and independent in-house manufacturing capabilities to meet increasing customer demands. While we can mitigate these constraints by increasing and re-allocating capacity at our own fab, we may not be able to do so quickly or at sufficient level, which could adversely affect our financial conditions and results of operations. In addition, we recently commenced a plan to enhance the manufacturing capability and capacity of our Oregon fab by investing in new equipment and expanding our factory facilities, which we expect will have a positive impact on our future new product development and revenue, particularly during the period of global shortage of capacity.
Erosion and fluctuation of average selling price: Erosion of average selling prices of established products is typical in our industry. Consistent with this historical trend, we expect our average selling prices of existing products to decline in the future. However, in the normal course of business, we seek to offset the effect of declining average selling price by introducing new and higher value products, expanding existing products for new applications and new customers and reducing the manufacturing cost of existing products. These strategies may cause the average selling price of our products to fluctuate significantly from time to time, thereby affecting our financial performance and profitability.
Product introductions and customers' product requirements: Our success depends on our ability to introduce products on a timely basis that meet or are compatible with our customers' specifications and performance requirements. Both factors, timeliness of product introductions and conformance to customers' requirements, are equally important in securing design wins with our customers. As we accelerate the development of new technology platforms, we expect to increase the pace at which we introduce new products and seek and acquire design wins. If we were to fail to introduce new products on a timely basis that meet customers' specifications and performance requirements, particularly those products with major OEM customers, and continue to expand our serviceable markets, then we would lose market share and our financial performance would be adversely affected. We believe that the JV Transaction will increase and diversify our customer base, particularly in China, in the long term. However, the ramp-activities and production schedule of our JV Company have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related events, as discussed above. Even if we are able to ramp up the operation of the JV Company timely, we may not be successful in acquiring or maintaining a sufficient number of new customers to offset additional costs due to various factors, including but are not limited to, competition from other semiconductor companies in the region, our lack of history and prior relationships with customers as a new entrant, difficulties in executing our joint venture strategies and the general economic conditions in Chongqing and China.
Distributor ordering patterns, customer demand and seasonality: Our distributors place purchase orders with us based on their forecasts of end customer demand, and this demand may vary significantly depending on the sales outlook and market and economic conditions of end customers. Because these forecasts may not be accurate, channel inventory held at our distributors may fluctuate significantly, which in turn may prompt distributors to make significant adjustments to their purchase orders placed with us. As a result, our revenue and operating results may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter. In addition, because our products are used in consumer electronics products, our revenue is subject to seasonality. Our sales seasonality is affected by numerous factors, including global and regional economic conditions as well as the PC market conditions, revenue generated from new products, changes in distributor ordering patterns in response to channel inventory adjustments and end customer demand for our products and fluctuations in consumer purchase patterns prior to major holiday seasons. In recent periods, broad fluctuations in the semiconductor markets and the global and regional economic conditions, in particular the decline of the PC market conditions, have had a more significant impact on our results of operations than seasonality. Furthermore, our revenue may be impacted by the level of demand from our major customers due to factors outside of our control. If these major customers experience significant decline in the demand of their products, encounter difficulties or defects in their products, or otherwise fail to execute their sales and marketing strategies successfully, it may adversely affect our revenue and results of operations.
Regulatory Matters: As previously disclosed, the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”) commenced an investigation into our compliance with export control regulations relating to business transactions with Huawei and its affiliates (“Huawei”), which were added to the “Entity List” by the Department of Commerce (“DOC”) in May 2019. We continue to cooperate fully with federal authorities in the investigation. The Company has continued to respond to inquiries and requests from DOJ for documents and information relating to the investigation, and the matter is currently pending at DOJ. However, DOJ and DOC have not provided us any clear or definitive response regarding the timeline of the investigation and potential resolutions or outcome. In the meantime, we continue incur significant costs and expenses, including legal and professional fees, in connection with the government investigation, which may reduce our profitability and operating margin.
Principal line items of statements of operations
The following describes the principal line items set forth in our consolidated statements of operations:
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from the sale of power semiconductors, consisting of power discretes and power ICs. Historically, a majority of our revenue has been derived from power discrete products. Because our products typically have three-year to five-year life cycles, the rate of new product introduction is an important driver of revenue growth over time. We believe that expanding the breadth of our product portfolio is important to our business prospects, because it provides us with an opportunity to increase our total bill-of-materials within an electronic system and to address the power requirements of additional electronic systems. In addition, a small percentage of our total revenue is generated by providing packaging and testing services to third parties through one of our subsidiaries.
Our product revenue is reported net of the effect of the estimated stock rotation returns and price adjustments that we expect to provide to our distributors. Stock rotation returns are governed by contract and are limited to a specified percentage of the monetary value of products purchased by the distributor during a specified period. At our discretion or upon our direct negotiations with the original design manufacturers ("ODMs") or original equipment manufacturers ("OEMs"), we may elect to grant special pricing that is below the prices at which we sold our products to the distributors. In these situations, we will grant price adjustments to the distributors reflecting such special pricing. We estimate the price adjustments for inventory at the distributors based on factors such as distributor inventory levels, pre-approved future distributor selling prices, distributor margins and demand for our products.
Cost of goods sold
Our cost of goods sold primarily consists of costs associated with semiconductor wafers, packaging and testing, personnel, including share-based compensation expense, overhead attributable to manufacturing, operations and procurement, and costs associated with yield improvements, capacity utilization, warranty and valuation of inventories. As the volume of sales increases, we expect cost of goods sold to increase. We continued to ramp up the 12-inch fab at the JV Company to meet the increasing demand on our products. While our utilization rates cannot be immune to the market conditions, our goal is to make them less vulnerable to market fluctuations. We believe our market diversification strategy and product growth will drive higher volume of manufacturing which will improve our factory utilization rates and gross margin in the long run.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, selling, general and administrative expenses and impairment of long-lived assets. We expect our operating expenses as a percentage of revenue to fluctuate from period to period as we continue to exercise cost control measures in response to the declining PC market as well as align our operating expenses to the revenue level.
Research and development expenses. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, bonuses, benefits, share-based compensation expense, expenses associated with new product prototypes, travel expenses, fees for engineering services provided by outside contractors and consultants, amortization of software and design tools, depreciation of equipment and overhead costs. We continue to invest in developing new technologies and products utilizing our own fabrication and packaging facilities as it is critical to our long-term success. We also evaluate appropriate investment levels and stay focused on new product introductions to improve our competitiveness. We expect that our research and development expenses will fluctuate from time to time.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, bonuses, benefits, share-based compensation expense, product promotion costs, occupancy costs, travel expenses, expenses related to sales and marketing activities, amortization of software, depreciation of equipment, maintenance costs and other expenses for general and administrative functions as well as costs for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to fluctuate in the near future as we continue to exercise cost control measures.
Income tax expense
We are subject to income taxes in various jurisdictions. Significant judgment and estimates are required in determining our worldwide income tax expense. The calculation of tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations of different jurisdictions globally. We establish accruals for potential liabilities and contingencies based on a more likely than not threshold to the recognition and de-recognition of uncertain tax positions. If the recognition threshold is met, the applicable accounting guidance permits us to recognize a tax benefit measured at the largest amount of tax benefit that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with a taxing authority. If the actual tax outcome of such exposures is different from the amounts that were initially recorded, the differences will impact the income tax and deferred tax
provisions in the period in which such determination is made. Changes in the location of taxable income (loss) could result in significant changes in our income tax expense.
We record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, based on historical profitability and our estimate of future taxable income in a particular jurisdiction. Our judgments regarding future taxable income may change due to changes in market conditions, changes in tax laws, tax planning strategies or other factors. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates change in the future, the deferred tax assets may increase or decrease, resulting in corresponding changes in income tax expense. Our effective tax rate is highly dependent upon the geographic distribution of our worldwide profits or losses, the tax laws and regulations in each geographical region where we have operations, the availability of tax credits and carry-forwards and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.
U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Enacted December 22, 2017
On December 22, 2017, the United States enacted tax reform legislation through the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“the Tax Act”), which significantly changes the existing U.S. tax laws, including, but not limited to, (1) a reduction in the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%, (2) a shift from a worldwide tax system to a territorial system, (3) eliminating the corporate alternative minimum tax (AMT) and changing how existing AMT credits can be realized, (4) bonus depreciation that will allow for full expensing of qualified property, (5) creating a new limitation on deductible interest expense and (6) changing rules related to uses and limitations of net operating loss carryforwards created in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017.
The Company is not currently subject to the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse ( BEAT) tax, which is a tax imposed on certain entities who make payments to their non U.S. affiliates, where such payments reduce the U.S. tax base . The BEAT tax is imposed at a rate of 10% on Adjusted Taxable Income, excluding certain payments to foreign related entities. It is an incremental tax over and above the corporate income tax and is recorded as a period cost. It is possible that this tax could be applicable in future periods, which would cause an increase to the effective tax rate and cash taxes.
U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act” (“CARES Act”), Enacted March 27, 2020
On March 27, 2020, the United States enacted the CARES Act, which made the changes to existing U.S. tax laws, including, but not limited to, (1) allowing U.S. federal net operating losses originated in the 2018, 2019 or 2020 tax years to be carried back five years to recover taxes paid based upon taxable income in the prior five years, (2) eliminated the 80% of taxable income limitation on net operating losses for the 2018, 2019 and 2020 tax years (the 80% limitation will be reinstated for tax years after 2020), (3) accelerating the refund of prior year alternative minimum tax credits, (4) modifying the bonus depreciation for qualified improvement property and (5) modifying the limitation on deductible interest expense.
As a result of the ability to carryback net operating losses from the June 2018 and June 2019 years to the June 2015 to June 2017 tax years, net operating losses which were previously tax-effected using the current 21% U.S. federal tax rate were revalued to the U.S. tax rates in effect for the June 2015 to June 2017 tax years due to the ability of receiving tax refunds for the taxes paid in these years. Accordingly, we reported a discrete tax benefit of $1.1 million in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 related to the re-measurement of the net operating losses that could be realized via the new net operating loss carryback provisions.
“U.S. Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021” (“CAA 2021”), Enacted December 27, 2020
On December 27, 2020, the United States enacted the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, which made changes to existing U.S. tax laws. There was no material impact of the tax law changes included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 to the Company.
“The American Rescue Plan Act of, 2021”, Enacted March 11, 2021
On March 11, 2021, the United States enacted the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, which made changes to existing U.S. tax laws. There was no material impact of the tax law changes included in the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 to the Company.
Operating results
The following tables set forth our results of operations and as a percentage of revenue for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Our historical results of operations are not necessarily indicative of the results for any future period.
(1) Includes share-based compensation expense as follows:
Revenue
The following is a summary of revenue by product type:
Fiscal 2021 vs 2020
Total revenue was $656.9 million for fiscal year 2021, an increase of $192.0 million, or 41.3%, as compared to $464.9 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $90.8 million in sales of power discrete products and an increase of $95.4 million in sales of power IC products. The increase in power discrete and power IC product sales was primarily due to a 23.0% increase in unit shipments and a 14.5% increase in average selling price due to a shift in product mix as compared to last fiscal year. The increase in revenue of packaging and testing services for the fiscal year 2021 as compared to last fiscal year was primarily due to increased demand. During fiscal year 2021, we accelerated the development of new technology platforms which allowed us to introduce 41 medium and high voltage MOSFET products, targeting primarily the power supply and communication marketing, and 11 module products primarily for the consumer markets, as well as 22 low voltage MOSFET products primarily for the computing and communication markets. In addition, we introduced 84 Power IC new products for computing applications, power supply, communication and consumer markets.
Fiscal 2020 vs 2019
Total revenue was $464.9 million for fiscal year 2020, an increase of $14.0 million, or 3.1%, as compared to $450.9 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $20.1 million in sales of power discrete products, partially offset by a decrease of $3.9 million in sales of power IC products. The net increase in product sales was primarily due to a 6.0% increase in average selling price as compared to last fiscal year due to a shift in product mix, partially offset by a 2.3% decrease in unit shipments. The decrease in revenue of packaging and testing services for fiscal year 2020 as compared to last fiscal year was primarily due to the fluctuation of demand on these services externally.
Cost of goods sold and gross profit
Fiscal 2021 vs 2020
Cost of goods sold was $452.4 million for fiscal year 2021, an increase of $90.2 million, or 24.9%, as compared to $362.2 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily due to 41.3% increase in revenue. Gross margin increased by 9.0 percentage points to 31.1% for the fiscal year 2021, as compared to 22.1% for the fiscal year 2020. Our JV Company continued its ramp during the fiscal year 2021, which resulted in an increase in the capacity utilization and contributed to the increase in gross margin. We expect our gross margin to continue to fluctuate in the future as a result of variations in our product mix, ramp up costs related to the JV Company, factory utilization, semiconductor wafer and raw material pricing, manufacturing labor cost and general economic and PC market conditions.
Fiscal 2020 vs 2019
Cost of goods sold was $362.2 million for fiscal year 2020, an increase of $26.6 million, or 7.9%, as compared to $335.5 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily due to limited mass production in our JV Company and the 3.1% increase of revenue. Gross margin decreased by 3.5 percentage points to 22.1% for fiscal year 2020, as compared to 25.6% for fiscal year 2019. The decrease in gross margin was primarily the result of low capacity utilization due to the limited mass production in our Chongqing joint venture during the fiscal year 2020.
Research and development expenses
Fiscal 2021 vs 2020
Research and development expenses were $63.0 million for fiscal year 2021, an increase of $11.7 million, or 22.8%, as compared to $51.3 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $4.0 million increase in employee compensation and benefit expense mainly due to higher bonus accrual, a $4.2 million increase in product prototyping engineering expense as a result of increased engineering activities, a $2.5 million increase in share-based compensation expense due to higher stock awards price, and a $0.5 million increase in facility expenses as a result of higher office rental expenses and higher utility costs. We continue to evaluate and invest resources in developing new technologies and products utilizing our own fabrication and packaging facilities. We believe the investment in research and development are important to meet our strategic objectives.
Fiscal 2020 vs 2019
Research and development expenses were $51.3 million for fiscal year 2020, an increase of $4.8 million, or 10.4%, as compared to $46.4 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $1.4 million increase in employee compensation and benefit expense mainly due to annual merit increase, partially offset by lower bonus accrual, a $2.1 million increase in professional fees, a $0.9 million increase in depreciation expenses, and a $0.4 million increase in share-based compensation expense due to more grants in stock awards.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Fiscal 2021 vs 2020
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $77.5 million for fiscal year 2021, an increase of $12.7 million, or 19.6%, as compared to $64.8 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $13.2 million increase in employee compensation and benefits expenses, mainly due to increased headcount, higher bonus expenses and increased employee insurance expenses, as well as $2.2 million increase in share-based compensation expense due to higher stock rewards price. The increase was partially offset by a $1.9 million decrease in legal expense related to the government investigation, and a $0.9 million decrease in business travel expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fiscal 2020 vs 2019
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $64.8 million for fiscal year 2020, a decrease of $11.2 million, or 14.7%, as compared to $76.0 million for fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $14.9 million reduction in pre-production costs as a result of the commencement of limited mass production at the 12-inch fab facility at the JV Company, and a $2.7 million decrease in share-based compensation expense. The net decrease was partially offset by a $1.0 million increase in depreciation expenses and a $5.4 million increase in legal expenses primarily due to the government investigation.
Impairment of privately-held investment
During the fiscal year 2020, we recorded an other-than-temporary impairment charge for our investment of $0.6 million in a privately-held start-up company. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we have a remaining $0.1 million of privately-held investment.
Interest expense and other income (loss), net
Interest expense was primarily related to bank borrowings. Interest expense increased by $3.6 million in fiscal year 2021 as compared to the last fiscal year was primarily due to an increase in bank borrowings as well as less interest refund from the Chinese government in the JV Company. Interest expense decreased by $4.0 million in fiscal year 2020 as compared to the fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to $6.1 million of interest refund from the Chinese government in the JV Company, partially offset by higher interest expense as a result of an increase in bank borrowings.
Interest income and others were primarily related to interest earned from cash and cash equivalents, as well as foreign exchange gains (losses). Interest income and others, net increased by $3.7 million in fiscal year 2021 as compared to the last fiscal year was primarily due to higher foreign currency exchange gains as a result of the appreciation of RMB against USD. Interest income and others, net decreased by $1.6 million in fiscal year 2020 as compared to the fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to higher foreign currency exchange losses as a result of the depreciation of USD against RMB.
Income tax expense
Fiscal 2021 vs 2020
Income tax expense for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was $3.9 million and $0.3 million, respectively. Income tax expense increased by $3.6 million, or 1,030.7% in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily due to an approximate $80 million increase in pretax book income in fiscal 2021 (in which we reported a pretax book income of $60.2 million) vs. fiscal 2020 (in which we reported pretax book loss of $17.9 million). Excluding discrete income tax items, the effective tax rate for the current fiscal year was 7.1%, compared to (9.6%) for the prior fiscal year. The changes in the effective tax rate and tax expense between the fiscal years resulted primarily from changes in the mix of earnings in various geographic jurisdictions between the current fiscal year and prior fiscal year.
Fiscal 2020 vs 2019
Income tax expense for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 was $0.3 million and $1.3 million, respectively. Income tax expense decreased by $0.9 million, or 72.3% in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to a $1.1 million tax
benefit in fiscal year 2020 from re-measuring the tax benefit of our U.S. net operating losses that could be carried back to the fiscal 2015, 2016 and 2017 years following the enactment of the CARES Act in March 2020, partially offset by decreased research credits generated in fiscal year 2020 vs. fiscal year 2019 and changes in the mix of earnings in various geographic jurisdictions between the respective periods in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. Excluding the discrete income tax items, the effective tax rate for the current fiscal year was (9.6%), compared to (14.6%) for the last fiscal year. The changes in the effective tax rate and tax expense between the fiscal years resulted primarily from changes in the mix of earnings in various geographic jurisdictions between the current fiscal year and prior fiscal year and decreased research credits generated in fiscal year 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal need for liquidity and capital resources is to maintain sufficient working capital to support our operations and to invest adequate capital expenditures to grow our business. To date, we finance our operations and capital expenditures primarily through funds generated from operations and borrowings under our term loans, financing lease and other debt agreements.
On August 18, 2021, Jireh entered into a term loan agreement with a financial institution (the "Bank") in an amount up to $45.0 million for the purpose of expanding and upgrading our fabrication facility located in Oregon. The obligation under the loan agreement is secured by substantially all assets of Jireh and guaranteed by the Company. The agreement has a 5.5 year term and matures on February 16, 2027. Jireh will make consecutive quarterly payments of principal and interest. The loan accrues interest based on adjusted LIBOR plus the applicable margin based on the outstanding balance of the loan. This agreement contains customary restrictive covenants and includes certain financial covenants that require the Company to maintain.
In October 2019, the Company's subsidiary in China entered into a line of credit facility with Bank of Communications Limited in China. This line of credit was scheduled to mature on February 14, 2021 and is based on the China Base Rate multiplied by 1.05, or 4.99% on October 31, 2019. The purpose of the credit facility is to provide short-term borrowings. The Company could borrow up to approximately RMB 60.0 million or $8.5 million based on the currency exchange rate between the RMB and the U.S. Dollar on October 31, 2019. In October 2020, this line of credit was renewed with the same terms and a maturity date of April 21, 2022. As of June 30, 2021, there was no outstanding balance under the loan.
On November 16, 2018, the Company's subsidiary in China entered into a line of credit facility with Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, which expired on September 30, 2019. The purpose of the credit facility was to provide short-term borrowings. The Company could borrow up to approximately RMB 72.0 million or $10.3 million based on currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on November 16, 2018. In December 2020, this line of credit was renewed with the same terms and a maturity date of December 31, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, there was no outstanding balance under the line of credit.
On August 9, 2019, one of the Company's wholly-owned subsidiaries (the "Borrower") entered into a factoring agreement with the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited (“HSBC”), whereby the Borrower assigns certain of its accounts receivable with recourse. This factoring agreement allows the Borrower to borrow up to 70% of the net amount of its eligible accounts receivable of the Borrower with a maximum amount of $30.0 million. The interest rate is based on one month London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") plus 1.75% per annum. The Company is the guarantor for this agreement. The Company is accounting for this transaction as a secured borrowing under the Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets guidance. In addition, any cash held in the restricted bank account controlled by HSBC has a legal right of offset against the borrowing. This agreement, with certain financial covenants required, has no expiration date. The Borrower was in compliance with these covenants as of June 30, 2021. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company borrowed $56.7 million and repaid it in full. As of June 30, 2021, there was no outstanding balance and the Company had unused credit of approximately $30.0 million. On August 11, 2021, the Borrower signed an agreement with HSBC to decrease the borrowing maximum amount to $8.0 million with certain financial covenants required. Other terms remain the same.
On May 1, 2018, Jireh Semiconductor Incorporated (“Jireh”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a loan agreement with a financial institution (the "Bank") that provided a term loan in an amount of $17.8 million. The obligation under the loan agreement is secured by certain real estate assets of Jireh and guaranteed by the Company. The loan has a five-year term and matures on June 1, 2023. Beginning June 1, 2018, Jireh made consecutive monthly payments of principal and interest to the Bank. The outstanding principal shall accrue interest at a fixed rate of 5.04% per annum on the basis of a 360-day year. The loan agreement contains customary restrictive covenants and includes certain financial covenants that require the
Company to maintain, on a consolidated basis, specified financial ratios. The Company was in compliance with these covenants as of June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of the term loan was $15.1 million.
On August 15, 2017, Jireh entered into a credit agreement with the Bank that provided a term loan in an amount up to $30.0 million for the purpose of purchasing certain equipment for our fabrication facility located in Oregon. The obligation under the credit agreement is secured by substantially all assets of Jireh and guaranteed by the Company. The credit agreement has a five-year term and matures on August 15, 2022. In January 2018 and July 2018, Jireh drew down on the loan in the amount of $13.2 million and $16.7 million, respectively. Beginning in October 2018, Jireh is required to pay to the Bank on each payment date, the outstanding principal amount of the loan in monthly installments. The loan accrues interest based on an adjusted London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") as defined in the credit agreement, plus specified applicable margin in the range of 1.75% to 2.25%, based on the outstanding balance of the loan. The credit agreement contains customary restrictive covenants and includes certain financial covenants that require the Company to maintain, on a consolidated basis, specified financial ratios and fixed charge coverage ratio. The Company was in compliance with these covenants as of June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of the term loan was $9.3 million.
In September 2017, the Board of Directors approved a repurchase program (the “Repurchase Program”) that allowed us to repurchase our common shares from the open market pursuant to a pre-established Rule 10b5-1 trading plan or through privately negotiated transactions up to an aggregate of $30.0 million. The amount and timing of any repurchases under the Repurchase Program depend on a number of factors, including but not limited to, the trading price, volume, availability of our common shares and the amount of available cash reserve. Shares repurchased under this program are accounted for as treasury shares and the total cost of shares repurchased is recorded as a reduction of shareholders' equity. During fiscal year 2021 and 2020, we did not repurchase any shares pursuant to the repurchase program. During fiscal years 2019, we repurchased an aggregate of 111,509 shares, from the open market for a total cost of approximately $1.5 million, excluding fees and related expenses, at an average price of $13.43 per share. As of June 30, 2021, the Company had repurchased an aggregate of 6,784,648 shares for a total cost of $67.3 million, at an average price of $9.92 per share, excluding fees and related expenses, since inception of the program. No repurchased shares have been retired. Of the 6,784,648 repurchased shares, 159,645 shares with a weighted average repurchase price of $10.15 per share, were reissued at an average price of $5.24 per share for option exercises and vested restricted stock units ("RSU"). As of June 30, 2021, $13.4 million remain available under the share repurchase program.
The Chinese government imposes certain currency exchange controls on cash transfers out of China. Regulations in China permit foreign owned entities to freely convert the Renminbi into foreign currency for transactions that fall under the "current account," which includes trade related receipts and payments, interests, and dividend payments. Accordingly, subject to the review and verification of the underlying transaction documents and supporting documents by the account banks in China, our Chinese subsidiaries may use Renminbi to purchase foreign exchange currency for settlement of such "current account" transactions without the pre-approval from China's State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) or its provincial branch. Pursuant to applicable regulations, foreign-invested enterprises in China may pay dividends only out of their accumulated profits, if any, determined in accordance with Chinese accounting standards and regulations. In calculating accumulated profits, foreign-invested enterprises in China are required to allocate at least 10% of their profits each year, if any, to fund the equity reserve account unless the reserve has reached 50% of the registered capital of the enterprises. While SAFE approval is not statutorily required for eligible dividend payments to the foreign parent, in practice, before making the dividend payment, the account bank may seek SAFE's opinion with respect to a dividend payment if the payment involves a relatively large amount, which may delay the dividend payment depending on the then overall status of cross-border payments and receipts of China.
Transactions that involve conversion of Renminbi into foreign currency in relation to foreign direct investments and provision of debt financings in China are classified as "capital account" transactions. Examples of "capital account" transactions include repatriations of investments by foreign owners and repayments of loan principal to foreign lenders. "Capital account" transactions require prior approval from SAFE or its provincial branch or an account bank delegated by SAFE to convert a remittance into a foreign currency, such as U.S. dollars, and transmit the foreign currency outside of China. As a result of this and other restrictions under PRC laws and regulations, our China subsidiaries are restricted in their ability to transfer a portion of their net assets to us, and such restriction may adversely affect our ability to generate sufficient liquidity to fund our operations or other expenditures. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, such restricted portion amounted to approximately $209.9 million and $209.8 million, or 50.4% and 61.4%, of our total consolidated net assets attributable to the Company, respectively. The increase of restricted net assets was primarily from the JV Company in China.
We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including working capital and capital expenditures, for at least the next twelve months. In addition, we recently commenced an investment plan to expand the manufacturing capacity and upgrade the operational capabilities of our
Oregon fab. We intend to fund the costs by a combination of cash reserve, bank loans and equipment leases. In the long-term, we may require additional capital due to changing business conditions or other future developments, including any investments or acquisitions we may decide to pursue. If our cash is insufficient to meet our needs, we may seek to raise capital through equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity securities could result in dilution to our shareholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and may include operating and financial covenants that would restrict our operations. We cannot be certain that any financing will be available in the amounts we need or on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
JV Company Financing Transactions
From time to time the JV Company has entered into financing and loan agreements with banks and other third parties to fund capital expenditures and other operational expenses in connection with the constructions and ramp-up of the manufacturing facility in Chongqing. The JV Company incurs debt through its own financing agreements, and our parent company and other subsidiaries are not parties to these agreements and do not provide any guarantee or security for JV Company’s debt, nor do we have direct access to any cash proceeds borrowed from such loan agreements. The JV Company is currently pursuing additional financing transactions to fund its operations and ramp-up activities, and to refinance its existing debt. There is no guarantee that the JV Company will be able to secure financing on favorable terms, or at all. In addition, any equity financing by the JV Company may dilute our equity ownership in the JV Company, which may adversely affect our ability to maintain control over the JV Company.
On May 9, 2018 (the “Effective Date”), the JV Company entered into a lease finance agreement and a security agreement (the “Agreements”) with YinHai Leasing Company and China Import/Export Bank (the “Lenders”). Pursuant to the Agreements, the Lenders agree to provide an aggregate of RMB 400.0 million, or $62.8 million based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on the Effective Date, of financing to the JV Company (the “Lease Financing”). In exchange for the Lease Financing, the JV Company agrees to transfer title of its assembly and testing equipment to the Lenders, and the Lenders lease such equipment to the JV Company under a five-year lease arrangement, pursuant to which the JV Company makes quarterly lease payments to the Lenders consisting of principal and interest based on a repayment schedule mutually agreed by the parties. The interest under the Lease Financing is accrued based on the China Base Rate multiplied by 1.15, or 5.4625% on the Effective Date. Under the Agreements, at the end of the five-year lease term, the Lenders agree to sell such equipment back to the JV Company for a nominal amount (RMB 1). The JV Company’s obligations under the Lease Financing are secured by the land and building owned by the JV Company (the “Collateral”). The proceeds from the Lease Financing will be used primarily for the acquisition and installation of the 12-inch fabrication equipment and other expenses of the JV Company relating to the completion of the fabrication facility located in Chongqing. The Agreements contain customary representation, warranties and covenants, including restrictions on the transfer of the Collateral. The Agreements also contain customary events of default, including but are not limited to, failure to make payments and breach of material terms under the Agreements. On June 28, 2020, the parties entered into a modification to this agreement as a result of a change in the bank reference rate, pursuant to which the interest rate was changed to be the five-year loan prime rate in China plus 0.8125%, or 5.4625%. Other terms of this agreement remain the same. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of the Lease Financing of 190.0 million RMB (equivalent of $29.4 million based on the currency exchange rate as of June 30, 2021) was recorded under short-term and long-term finance lease liabilities.
On November 29 and December 4, 2018, the JV Company entered into two, one-year loan agreements with China Merchant Bank and Chongqing LiangJiang New District China Merchants Group Limited Company in China to provide loans for RMB 80 million and RMB 20 million, respectively, or $14.5 million in total based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on December 31, 2018, at varying interest rates. On January 20, 2020, the JV Company renewed the loan agreements with the same terms. Interest payments are due monthly and quarterly with the entire principal due not later than January 21, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, these two loans were expired and there was no outstanding balance under the loans.
On March 12, 2019, the JV Company entered into a loan agreement with The Export-Import Bank of China in the aggregate principal amount of RMB 200 million (approximately $29.8 million based on currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on March 31, 2019). The loan will mature on February 20, 2025. The JV Company drew down RMB 190 million and RMB 10 million in March 2019 and December 2019, respectively. The loan withdraw window expired on February 28, 2020. The interest is accrued based on the China Base Rate multiplied by 1.1, or 5.39%. The loan requires quarterly interest payments. The principal payments are required to be paid every 6 months over the term of loan commencing in October 2019. This loan is secured by the buildings and certain equipment owned by the JV Company. As a condition of the loan arrangements, 14 million RMB (approximately $2.0 million) of cash is held as restricted cash by the JV Company as a compensating balance at the JV Company's bank until the principal is paid. On June 24, 2020, a modification of this loan was signed as a result of a change in the bank reference rate, pursuant to which the interest rate was changed to be based on the five-year loan prime rate in China plus 0.74%, or 5.39%. Other terms of this loan remain the same. As of June 30, 2021, the
outstanding balance of the loan was 184 million RMB (equivalent of $28.5 million based on the currency exchange rate as of June 30, 2021).
In December 2019, the JV Company entered into a loan agreement with China Development Bank in the amount of $24.0 million. The obligation under the loan agreement is secured by certain assets of the JV Company. Beginning December 18, 2020, the JV Company will make consecutive semi-annual payments of principal until December 8, 2024. The interest is accrued based on the LIBOR rate plus 2.8%. The interest is required to be paid on March 21 and September 21 each year. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of the loan was $19.2 million.
On April 15, 2020, the JV Company entered into a one-year loan agreement with China Everbright Bank in China to borrow a maximum of RMB 100 million (approximately $14.3 million based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on April 15, 2020), in the amount in RMB or USD. Interest payments were due on the 20th of each month, and the entire principal was due on April 16, 2021. The loan consisted of RMB 20 million for working capital borrowing in Chinese yuan and RMB 80 million for borrowing in US dollars that was collateralized by eligible accounts receivable. As of June 30, 2021, this loan was expired and there was no outstanding balance under the loan.
On April 26, 2020, the JV Company entered into a loan agreement with China Development Bank, Agricultural Bank of China, China Merchants Bank and Chongqing Rural Commercial Bank (collectively, "the Banks") in the aggregate principal amount of RMB 250 million (approximately $35.7 million based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on April 26, 2020). The obligation under the loan agreement is secured by certain assets of the JV Company. Beginning December 18, 2020, the JV Company is required to make consecutive semi-annual payments of principal until December 8, 2024. Interest payment is due on March 20, June 20, September 20 and December 20 of each year based on China one-year loan prime rate ("LPR") plus 1.3%. The JV Company drew down RMB 250 million (approximately $35.3 million based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on June 30, 2020) in April 2020. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of the loan was $34.1 million.
On November 13, 2020, the JV Company entered into a one-year loan agreement with China Merchant Bank in China. The JV Company can borrow up to Chinese Renminbi ("RMB") 50.0 million, or $7.6 million, based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and U.S. Dollar on November 13, 2020. The loan's interest rates are based on the China one-year loan prime rate ("LPR") plus 1.4% per annum. Interest payments are due quarterly with the entire principal due not later than November 19, 2021. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, the JV Company borrowed RMB 50.0 million at an interest rate of 5.25% per annum. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of this loan was $7.7 million.
On June 29, 2021, the JV Company entered into a one-year loan agreement with China Citic Bank in China to borrow a maximum of $7.7 million. Interest payments are due on the 20th of each quarter starting September 20, 2021, and the entire principal is due on June 29, 2022. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of this loan was $7.7 million at an interest rate of 3.49% per annum.
On April 19, 2021, the JV Company entered into a loan agreement with China Everbright Bank in China to borrow a maximum of Chinese Renminbi ("RMB") 100 million. The borrowing can be in RMB or U.S. Dollar ("USD"). The loan consists of RMB 50 million for working capital borrowings in Chinese yuan and RMB 50 million for borrowing in USD. The loan is collateralized by eligible accounts receivable. On April 19, 2021, the JV Company borrowed RMB 50.0 million, or $7.7 million based on the currency exchange rate between RMB and USD on April 19, 2021, at an interest rate of 5.1% annum. The interest payments are due quarterly with the entire principal due no later than May 19, 2022. On June 16, 2021 and June 24, 2021, the JV Company also borrowed $4.2 million and $3.5 million at interest rate of 2.7% per annum, with principal due on August 18, 2021 and September 9, 2021, respectively. As of June 30, 2021, the total outstanding balance of these loans was $15.4 million.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had $204.8 million and $162.7 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, respectively. Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash primarily consisted of cash on hand, restricted cash and short-term bank deposits with original maturities of three months or less. Of the $204.8 million and $162.7 million cash and cash equivalents, $134.6 million and $120.3 million, respectively, were deposited with financial institutions outside the United States.
The following table shows our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $128.7 million for fiscal year 2021 resulted primarily from net income of $56.3 million, non-cash charges of $70.0 million and net change in assets and liabilities providing net cash of $2.5 million. The non-cash charges of $70.0 million included depreciation and amortization expenses of $52.7 million, share-based compensation expense of $15.3 million, loss on disposal of property and equipment of $0.4 million, and net deferred income taxes of $1.6 million. The net change in assets and liabilities providing net cash of $2.5 million was primarily due to $48.5 million increase in accrued and other liabilities and $1.7 million increase in income taxes payable, partially offset by $22.5 million increase in accounts receivable due to timing of billings and collection of payments, $18.8 million increase in inventories, $5.8 million increase in other current and long-term assets primarily due to decrease in advance payments to suppliers, and $0.5 million decrease in accounts payable primarily due to timing of payments.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $62.3 million for fiscal year 2020 resulted primarily from net loss of $18.3 million, non-cash charges of $56.1 million and net change in assets and liabilities providing net cash of $24.4 million. The non-cash charges of $56.1 million included depreciation and amortization expenses of $45.1 million, share-based compensation expense of $10.5 million, impairment of our investment in a privately-held start-up company of $0.6 million, gain on disposal of property and equipment of $0.1 million, and net deferred income taxes of $0.1 million. The net change in assets and liabilities providing net cash of $24.4 million was primarily due to $27.3 million decrease in other current and long-term assets primarily due to increase in advance payments to suppliers, $11.0 million decrease in accounts receivable due to timing of billings and collection of payments, and $11.0 million increase in accrued and other liabilities, partially offset by $22.8 million increase in inventories, $1.8 million decrease in accounts payable primarily due to timing of payments, and $0.3 million decrease in income taxes payable.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $31.4 million for fiscal year 2019 resulted primarily from net loss of $14.6 million, non-cash charges of $44.8 million and net change in assets and liabilities providing net cash of $1.3 million. The non-cash charges of $44.8 million included depreciation and amortization expenses of $32.0 million, share-based compensation expense of $13.2 million, and net deferred income taxes of $0.5 million. The net change in assets and liabilities providing net cash of $1.3 million was primarily due to $9.6 million increase in accrued and other liabilities, $9.2 million decrease in accounts receivable due to timing of billings and collection of payments, $6.4 million increase in accounts payable primarily due to timing of payments, partially offset by $21.5 million increase in inventories, $1.9 million increase in other current and long-term assets primarily due to increase in advance payments to suppliers, and $0.6 million decrease in income taxes payable.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $72.5 million for the fiscal year 2021 was primarily attributable to $72.7 million purchases of property and equipment, including $50.0 million purchases in JV Company, which was partially offset by $0.1 million government grant related to equipment in the JV Company.
Net cash used in investing activities of $60.8 million for the fiscal year 2020 was primarily attributable to $62.4 million purchases of property and equipment, including $20.0 million purchases in JV Company, which was partially offset by $1.3 million government grant related to equipment in the JV Company and $0.3 million of proceeds from sale of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities of $112.4 million for the fiscal year 2019 was primarily attributable to $112.1 million purchases of property and equipment, including $76.0 million purchases in JV Company, and $0.4 million purchases of intangible assets.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities of $19.0 million for the fiscal year 2021 was primarily attributable to $6.9 million in common shares acquired to settle withholding tax related to vesting of restricted stock units, $16.5 million in payments of capital lease obligations, and $66.6 million in repayments of borrowings, partially offset by $65.9 million of proceeds from borrowings and $5.1 million of proceeds from exercises of share options and issuance of shares under the ESPP.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $37.7 million for the fiscal year 2020 was primarily attributable to $96.2 million of proceeds from borrowings, and $3.4 million of proceeds from exercises of share options and issuance of shares under the ESPP, partially offset by $1.5 million in common shares acquired to settle withholding tax related to vesting of restricted stock units, $11.0 million in payments of capital lease obligations, and $49.4 million in repayments of borrowings.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $75.1 million for the fiscal year 2019 was primarily attributable to $24.0 million proceeds from investment by Chongqing Funds, $77.9 million of proceeds from borrowings, and $3.0 million of proceeds from exercises of share options and issuance of shares under the ESPP, partially offset by $2.0 million in common shares acquired to settle withholding tax related to vesting of restricted stock units, $1.5 million for repurchase of our common shares under the repurchase program, $4.4 million in payments of capital lease obligations, and $21.9 million in repayments of borrowings.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of June 30, 2021 are as follows:
As of June 30, 2021, we had recorded liabilities of $1.2 million for uncertain tax positions and $0.1 million for potential interest and penalties, which are not included in the above table because we are unable to reliably estimate the amount of payments in individual years that would be made in connection with these uncertain tax positions.
Commitments
See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of commitments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2021, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. To the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our consolidated financial statements will be affected. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the estimates, judgments and assumptions including those related to stock rotation returns, price adjustments, allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, warranty accrual, income taxes, leases, share-based compensation, recoverability of and useful lives for property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, as well as economic implications of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenue recognition
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps: (1) identification of the contract with a customer; (2) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determination of the transaction price; (4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied. We recognize revenue at a point in time when product is shipped to the customer, net of estimated stock rotation returns and price adjustments to certain distributors. We present revenue net of sales taxes and any similar assessments. Our standard payment terms range from 30 to 90 days.
We sell our products primarily to distributors, who in turn sell our products globally to various end customers. Our revenue is net of the effect of the variable consideration relating to estimated stock rotation returns and price adjustments that we expect to provide to certain distributors. Stock rotation returns are governed by contract and are limited to a specified percentage of the monetary value of the products purchased by distributors during a specified period. We estimate provision for stock rotation returns based on historical returns and individual distributor agreements. We also provide special pricing to certain distributors primarily based on volume, to encourage resale of our products. We estimate the expected price adjustments at the time the revenue is recognized based on distributor inventory levels, pre-approved future distributor selling prices, distributor margins and demand for our products. If actual stock rotation returns or price adjustments differ from our estimates, adjustments may be recorded in the period when such actual information is known. Allowance for price adjustments is recorded against accounts receivable and provision for stock rotation is recorded in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Our performance obligations relate to contracts with a duration of less than one year. We elected to apply the practical expedient provided in ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. Therefore, we are not required to disclose the aggregate amount of transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied at the end of the reporting period.
We recognize the incremental direct costs of obtaining a contract, which consist of sales commissions, when control over the products they relate to transfers to the customer. Applying the practical expedient, we recognize commissions as expense when incurred, as the amortization period of the commission asset we would have otherwise recognized is less than one year.
Packaging and testing services revenue is recognized at a point in time upon shipment of serviced products to the customer.
Valuation of inventories
We carry inventories at the lower of cost (determined on a first-in, first-out basis) or net realizable value. Cost primarily consists of semiconductor wafers and raw materials, labor, depreciation expenses and other manufacturing expenses and overhead, and packaging and testing fees paid to third parties if subcontractors are used. Valuation of inventories are based on our periodic review of inventory quantities on hand as compared with our sales forecasts, historical usage, aging of inventories, production yield levels and current product selling prices. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those forecasted by us, additional future inventory write-downs may be required that could adversely affect our operating results. Adjustments to inventory, once established are not reversed until the related inventory has been sold or scrapped. If actual market conditions are more favorable than expected and the products that have previously been written down are sold, our gross margin would be favorably impacted.
Product warranty
We provide a standard one-year warranty for the products from the date of purchase by the end customers. We accrue for estimated warranty costs at the time revenue is recognized. Our warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates, labor and material costs for replacing defective parts, related freight costs for failed parts and other quality assurance costs. We monitor our product returns for warranty claims and maintain warranty reserve based on our historical experiences and
anticipated warranty claims known at the time of estimation. If actual warranty costs differ significantly from our estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty accrual would be required and any such adjustments could be material.
Accounting for income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in a number of jurisdictions. We must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of tax credits, benefits and deductions, and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes, as well as interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions. There are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain during the ordinary course of business. We establish accruals for certain tax contingencies based on estimates of whether additional taxes may be due. While the final tax outcome of these matters may differ from the amounts that were initially recorded, such differences will impact the income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made. As a result, significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period.
Significant management judgment is also required in determining whether deferred tax assets will be realized in full or in part. When it is more likely than not that all or some portion of specific deferred tax assets such as net operating losses or foreign tax credit carryforwards will not be realized, a valuation allowance must be established for the amount of the deferred tax assets that cannot be realized. We consider all available positive and negative evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis when assessing whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. We consider evidence such as our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in recent years and our forecast of future taxable income. We will maintain a partial valuation allowance equal to the state research and development credit carryforwards until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of the valuation allowance.
We have not provided for withholding taxes on the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries because we intend to reinvest such earnings indefinitely. As of June 30, 2021, the cumulative amount of undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries considered permanently reinvested was $179.2 million. The determination of the unrecognized deferred tax liability on these earnings is not practicable. Should we decide to remit this income to the Bermuda parent company in a future period, our provision for income taxes may increase materially in that period.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") has issued guidance which clarifies the accounting for income taxes by prescribing a minimum probability threshold that a tax position must meet before a financial statement benefit is recognized. The minimum threshold is defined as a tax position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax law and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. Although the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes the use of a recognition and measurement model, the determination of whether an uncertain tax position has met those thresholds will continue to require significant judgment by management. If the ultimate resolution of tax uncertainties is different from what is currently estimated, a material impact on income tax expense could result.
Our provision for income taxes is subject to volatility and could be adversely impacted by changes in earnings or tax laws and regulations in various jurisdictions. We are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of changes to reserves, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Share-based compensation expense
We maintain an equity-settled, share-based compensation plan to grant restricted share units and stock options. We recognize share-based compensation expense based on the estimated fair value of the awards, using the accelerated attribution method. The fair value of restricted share units is based on the fair value of the Company's common share on the date of grant. For restricted stock awards subject to market conditions, the fair value of each restricted stock award is estimated at the date of grant using the Monte-Carlo pricing model. Share-based compensation expense is significant to the consolidated financial
statements and is calculated using our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the expected term and stock price volatility. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the number of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. Forfeitures are estimated based on historical experience at the time of grant. Changes in estimated forfeitures are recognized in the period of change and impact the amount of stock compensation expenses to be recognized in future periods, which could be material if actual results differ significantly from estimates.
Estimated Useful Lives for Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets
Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and are depreciated using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives of the assets. Patents and exclusive technology rights purchased from third parties are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of three to seven years. Trade name and customer relationships acquired in a business combination are recognized at fair values at the acquisition date and amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated economic lives of three years and four years, respectively.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements under Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on results of operations and financial condition.