ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
(in thousands, except per share amounts)
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Ampco-Pittsburgh Corporation and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Corporation”) manufacture and sell highly engineered, high-performance specialty metal products and customized equipment utilized by industry throughout the world. It operates in two business segments - the Forged and Cast Engineered Products (“FCEP”) segment and the Air and Liquid Processing segment. This segment presentation is consistent with how the Corporation’s chief operating decision maker evaluates financial performance and makes resource allocation and strategic decisions about the business.
Liquidity
The Corporation continues to focus on improving its financial strength and reducing indebtedness. In July 2020, the Corporation repaid its $4,120 Industrial Revenue Bond upon maturity. In September 2020, the Corporation completed an equity rights offering, issuing 5,507,889 shares of its common stock and 12,339,256 Series A warrants to existing shareholders for total gross proceeds of $19,279. Additional proceeds may be received from the future exercise of the Series A warrants. Each Series A warrant provides the holder with the right to purchase 0.4464 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.5668, or $5.75 per whole share of common stock, and expires on August 1, 2025. A majority of the proceeds from the equity rights offering was used to repay remaining borrowings outstanding under the Corporation’s revolving credit facility providing availability for future capital expenditures, which are necessary to accelerate restructuring efforts and further improve the long-term cost structure and profitability of the Corporation, and general corporate purposes and obligations. At December 31, 2020, the Corporation reduced its debt to $37,243, a decrease of $33,614 from its December 31, 2019, balance of $70,857.
COVID-19
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency caused by a new strain of the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) and advised of the risks to the international community as the virus spread globally.
In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. In response, many state and local governments required the closure of various businesses. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security, however, provided guidance identifying the Corporation’s domestic businesses as critical infrastructure industries, essential to the economic prosperity, security and continuity of the United States, which provides exceptions to certain closures mandated by state and local governments and permits businesses to continue operations during such an order. Despite the designation, the Corporation has periodically and temporarily idled certain operations of its FCEP segment and, consequently, furloughed certain of its employees in response to market conditions. It also has experienced, and may continue to experience, customer-requested delays of deliveries or, eventually, potential cancellation of orders. However, it appears that demand bottomed out during the second quarter of 2020 and volume may return to 2019 levels in the latter part of 2021, assuming no additional mass shutdowns due to COVID-19. To date, the Air and Liquid Processing segment has successfully mitigated the negative impact on sales and operating income resulting from the pandemic.
On March 27, 2020, former President Trump signed into law the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.” The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferral of employer-side social security payments and contributions to employee benefit plans, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. Similar programs have been offered in certain of the foreign jurisdictions in which the Corporation operates, including subsidies and reimbursement of certain employee-related costs. While the Corporation has taken, and intends to continue to take, advantage of various provisions of the CARES Act and other similar programs offered domestically and in foreign jurisdictions in which the Corporation operates, where possible, it is unable to determine what impact those provisions may have on its consolidated financial statements in the future.
To date, in response to the pandemic, the Corporation has:
•
Periodically and temporarily idled certain of its forged and cast roll manufacturing facilities due to market conditions resulting in unabsorbed costs;
•
Furloughed employees, particularly within the FCEP segment;
•
Received approximately $4,200 in the form of subsidies and reimbursements for a portion of furloughed employee costs from certain foreign jurisdictions in which the Corporation operates;
•
Recognized approximately $1,000 of anticipated bad debts and slow-moving inventory reserves in the first quarter of 2020 for customers expected to be more severely impacted by the pandemic;
•
Deferred contributions to employee benefits plans until the end of 2020, and employer-side social security payments of $2,163 to the end of 2021 and 2022; and
•
Recognized a discrete income tax benefit of $3,502, upon enactment of the CARES Act, for the carryback of net operating losses to an earlier period, at a higher tax rate, thereby releasing a portion of the valuation allowance the Corporation had previously established against its deferred income tax assets. The carryback of net operating losses resulted in a refund of income taxes previously paid of $3,502.
It is difficult to isolate the impact of the pandemic on the Corporation’s operating results, particularly in relation to the unabsorbed costs resulting from the periodic and temporary idling of certain of the Corporation’s forged and cast roll operations, furloughing of certain of its employees and movements in the global foreign exchange and equity markets. Additionally, the Corporation is uncertain of the full effect the pandemic will have on it for the longer term. The Corporation may experience long-term disruptions to its operations resulting from changes in government policy or guidance; quarantines of employees, customers and suppliers in areas affected by the pandemic; and closures of businesses or manufacturing facilities critical to its business or supply chains. It may also incur higher write-offs of accounts receivables and impairment charges on its asset values, including property, plant and equipment and intangible assets. The Corporation is actively monitoring, and will continue to actively monitor, the pandemic and the potential impact on its operations, financial condition, liquidity, suppliers, industry, and workforce.
Restructuring Efforts
During 2019, the Corporation undertook significant measures to return to profitability, which helped to offset some of the adverse effects stemming from the pandemic. Restructuring efforts included:
•
Completing the sale of certain assets of Akers National Roll Company (“ANR”), an indirect subsidiary of the Corporation located in Avonmore, Pennsylvania (“Avonmore Plant”) in September 2019, which eliminated excess capacity and net operating costs from the Corporation’s cost structure of approximately $4,572 (the “Excess Costs of Avonmore”);
•
Completing the sale of ASW Steel, Inc. (“ASW”), an indirect subsidiary of the Corporation, which had net losses of $9,085 in 2019 and required significant funding;
•
Implementing operational and efficiency improvements at its domestic forged roll facilities and commencing similar initiatives at its European cast roll operations in the second half of 2019; and
•
Completing selected reductions in force across the organization, which yielded an annualized savings of approximately $4,000.
The Segments
The FCEP segment produces forged hardened steel rolls, cast rolls and open-die forged products. Forged hardened steel rolls are used primarily in cold rolling mills by producers of steel, aluminum and other metals. Cast rolls, which are produced in a variety of iron and steel qualities, are used mainly in hot and cold strip mills, medium/heavy section mills and plate mills. Forged engineered products (“FEP”) are principally sold to customers in the steel distribution market, oil and gas industry and the aluminum and plastic extrusion industries. The segment has operations in the United States, England, Sweden, Slovenia, and an equity interest in three joint venture companies in China. Collectively, the segment primarily competes with European, Asian and North and South American companies in both domestic and foreign markets and distributes a significant portion of its products through sales offices located throughout the world.
Roll market conditions improved late in 2020 as steel demand and pricing began to show signs of recovering from the COVID-related downturn earlier in the year. The oil and gas market also showed signs of improvement and demand increased starting toward the end of the third quarter of 2020. The primary focus for this segment is diversification and development of its forged engineered products for use in other industries and ongoing operational and efficiency improvements at its facilities.
The Air and Liquid Processing segment includes Aerofin, Buffalo Air Handling and Buffalo Pumps, all divisions of Air & Liquid Systems Corporation (“Air & Liquid”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Corporation. Aerofin produces custom-engineered finned tube heat exchange coils and related heat transfer products for a variety of industries including OEM/commercial, nuclear power generation and industrial manufacturing. Buffalo Air Handling produces large custom-designed air handling systems for institutional (e.g., hospital, university), pharmaceutical and general industrial building markets. Buffalo Pumps manufactures centrifugal pumps for the fossil-fueled power generation, marine defense and industrial refrigeration industries. The segment has operations in Virginia and New York with headquarters in Carnegie, Pennsylvania. The segment distributes a significant portion of its products through a common independent group of sales offices located throughout the United States and Canada.
Aerofin’s heat exchanger business is being adversely impacted by lower business activity in the commercial and industrial OEM markets. Buffalo Air Handling’s custom air handling business is experiencing steady demand; however, competitive pricing pressures continue. Buffalo Pumps’ specialty centrifugal pumps business is benefiting from steady demand from the marine defense and fossil fueled power generation markets. The focus for this segment is to grow revenues, increase margins, strengthen engineering and manufacturing capabilities, increase manufacturing productivity and continue to improve its sales distribution network.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
The Corporation
(1)
Income (loss) from continuing operations for the Forged and Cast Engineered Products segment for 2019 includes an impairment charge of $10,082 to record the Avonmore Plant at its estimated net realizable value less costs to sell.
Net sales equaled $328,544 and $397,907 for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is principally attributable to a lower volume of shipments for the FCEP segment, due to deferral of deliveries by customers in the flat-rolled steel and aluminum markets, and reduced demand for FEP. A discussion of sales by segment is included below.
Backlog equaled $246,131 at December 31, 2020, versus $321,331 as of December 31, 2019. Backlog represents the accumulation of firm orders on hand which: (i) are supported by evidence of a contractual arrangement, (ii) include a fixed and determinable sales price, (iii) have collectability that is reasonably assured, and (iv) as of September 30, 2020, generally are expected to ship within two
years from the backlog reporting date. Prior to September 30, 2020, longer-term Navy orders for the Air and Liquid Processing segment were excluded from backlog. Approximately 8% of the backlog is expected to be released after 2021. A discussion of backlog by segment is included below.
Gross margin, excluding depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of net sales was 21.6% and 18.0% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The improvement is principally associated with the FCEP segment which benefited from the elimination of the Excess Costs of Avonmore, lower raw material costs and improved pricing and product mix. The improvement was partially offset by a lower volume of shipments of mill rolls and FEP, net unabsorbed costs due in part to the periodic and temporary idling of certain of the forged and cast roll manufacturing operations caused by the pandemic and lower business interruption insurance proceeds in 2020 than in 2019 for equipment outages that occurred in 2018 (the “Proceeds from Business Interruption Insurance Claim”). For the Air and Liquid Processing segment, costs of products sold, excluding depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of net sales was comparable between the periods.
Selling and administrative expenses totaled $45,542 (13.9% of net sales) and $53,643 (13.5% of net sales) for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $8,101 is primarily due to the net of:
•
Lower bad debt expense of approximately $1,229 principally due to bad debt expense of $1,366 for a cast roll customer who filed for bankruptcy in 2019 (the “Bad Debt Expense”);
•
Lower professional fees and employee severance costs of approximately $2,719 associated with the Corporation’s restructuring efforts, which began in the first quarter of 2019, and ongoing cost containment initiatives;
•
Lower employee-related costs, in part, due to reduction-in-force actions completed in 2019;
•
Lower commissions of approximately $1,937 primarily due to the lower volume of FEP sales; and
•
Elimination of selling and administrative expenses at the Avonmore Plant of approximately $704.
Depreciation and amortization equaled $18,575 and $18,967 for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is due to the write-down of the property, plant and equipment of the Avonmore Plant to its estimated net realizable value at March 31, 2019, which eliminated future depreciation expense for the Avonmore Plant.
Impairment charge of $10,082 in 2019 represents the write-down of the Avonmore Plant to its estimated net realizable value less costs to sell (the “Impairment Charge”).
Charge for asbestos litigation of $283 in 2020 represents a charge for the potential insolvency of an asbestos-related insurance carrier (the “Asbestos-Related Charge”).
Investment-related income equaled $1,396 and $1,417 for 2020 and 2019, respectively, and represents primarily dividends received from one of the Corporation’s Chinese joint ventures.
Interest expense equaled $4,114 and $5,342 for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is principally due to lower average borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility in 2020 compared to 2019 and repayment of promissory notes in March 2019.
Other income - net equaled $4,972 and $6,466 for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The prior year includes a net gain of $2,304 resulting from the curtailment of the defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans of ANR and special termination benefits associated with the sale of the Avonmore Plant. The remaining fluctuation between the years is principally due to lower foreign exchange losses in the current year.
Income tax benefit (provision) equaled $470 and $(2,108) for 2020 and 2019, respectively, and includes income tax provisions associated with the Corporation’s profitable operations. An income tax benefit is not able to be recognized on losses of certain of the Corporation’s entities since the entities remain in a three-year cumulative loss position. The income tax benefit recorded in 2020 includes an income tax benefit of $3,502 due to the CARES Act, which enabled the carryback of net operating losses to an earlier period at a higher tax rate and the release of a portion of the valuation allowance previously established against the deferred income tax assets of the Corporation.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax for 2019 of $9,085 represents the net loss associated with ASW. The anticipated sale of ASW represented a strategic shift that would have a major favorable impact on the Corporation’s operations and financial results and, accordingly, was accounted for as a discontinued operation in accordance with the requirements of ASC 205, Presentation of Financial Statements.
Net income attributable to Ampco-Pittsburgh and income per common share for 2020 include an income tax benefit of $3,502, due to the enactment of the CARES Act, the Proceeds from Business Interruption Insurance Claim and the Asbestos-Related Charge, which had a combined net positive impact on income per common share of $0.28. Net loss attributable to Ampco-Pittsburgh and loss per common share for 2019 include the Impairment Charge, the Restructuring-Related Costs, the Excess Costs of Avonmore, the Bad Debt Expense, and the Proceeds from Business Interruption Insurance Claim, which had a combined negative impact on net loss from continuing operations of $16,567, or $1.32 per common share.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Corporation presents below non-GAAP adjusted income from continuing operations, which is calculated as income (loss) from continuing operations, excluding the Impairment Charge, the Restructuring-Related Costs, the Excess Costs of Avonmore, the Bad Debt Expense, the Proceeds from Business Interruption Insurance Claim, and the Asbestos-Related Charge for each of the years, as applicable. This non-GAAP financial measure is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures presented by other companies.
The Corporation presents non-GAAP adjusted income from continuing operations for each of the years because it is a key measure used by the Corporation’s management and its Board of Directors to understand and evaluate the Corporation’s operating performance and to develop operational goals for managing its business. This non-GAAP financial measure excludes significant charges or credits, that are one-time in nature, unrelated to the Corporation’s ongoing results of operations or beyond its control. Additionally, a portion of the incentive and compensation arrangements for certain employees is based on the Corporation’s business performance. The Corporation believes this non-GAAP financial measure helps identify underlying trends in its business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the items that it excludes from adjusted income from continuing operations. In particular, the Corporation believes that the exclusion of the Impairment Charge, the Restructuring-Related Costs, the Excess Costs of Avonmore, which are not expected to continue following the sale of the Avonmore Plant, the Bad Debt Expense, the Proceeds from Business Interruption Insurance Claim, and the Asbestos-Related Charge can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of the Corporation’s core business performance. Accordingly, the Corporation believes that this non-GAAP financial measure provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating its operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of its past performance and future prospects and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by the Corporation in its financial and operational decision-making.
Adjusted income from continuing operations is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are limitations related to the use of adjusted income from continuing operations rather than income (loss) from continuing operations, which is the nearest GAAP equivalent. Among other things, the Excess Costs of Avonmore, which is excluded from the adjusted non-GAAP financial measure, necessarily reflects judgments made by the Corporation in allocating manufacturing and operating costs between the Avonmore Plant and its other operations and in anticipating how it will conduct business following the sale of the Avonmore Plant. There can be no assurance that additional charges similar to the Impairment Charge, the Restructuring-Related Costs, the Bad Debt Expense, the Proceeds from Business Interruption Insurance Claim, and the Asbestos-Related Charge will not occur in future periods.
The adjustments reflected in adjusted income from continuing operations are pre-tax. There is no significant tax impact associated with these adjustments due to the Corporation having a valuation allowance recorded against a substantial majority of its deferred income tax assets for the jurisdictions where the expenses are recognized.
The following is a reconciliation of income (loss) from continuing operations to non-GAAP adjusted income from continuing operations for 2020 and 2019, respectively:
(1)
Represents an impairment charge recognized in the first quarter of 2019 to record the Avonmore Plant to its estimated net realizable value less costs to sell in anticipation of its sale, which was completed in September 2019.
(2)
Represents professional fees associated with the Corporation’s overall restructuring plan and employee severance costs due to reductions in force.
(3)
Represents estimated net operating costs not expected to continue after the sale of the Avonmore Plant, which was completed in September 2019. The estimated excess costs include judgments made by the Corporation in allocating manufacturing and operating costs between ANR and the Corporation’s other operations and in anticipating how it will conduct business following the sale of the Avonmore Plant.
(4)
Represents bad debt expense for a British cast roll customer who filed for bankruptcy in 2019.
(5)
Represents business interruption insurance proceeds received in 2020 and 2019 for equipment outages that occurred in 2018.
(6)
Represents a charge for the potential insolvency of an asbestos-related insurance carrier.
Forged and Cast Engineered Products
Net sales decreased by $67,741 in 2020 from 2019 principally due to:
•
Lower volume of shipments of mill rolls, both forged and cast, as a result of customers temporarily deferring deliveries in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which reduced net sales by approximately $68,900; and
•
Lower demand for FEP due principally to the depressed oil and gas industry, which reduced net sales by approximately $8,300; offset by
•
More favorable pricing and product mix during the current year, which improved sales by approximately $8,300 when compared to the prior year.
Operating results improved $14,751 in 2020 when compared to the prior year. Operating results for the prior year included:
•
The Impairment Charge of $10,082 to write down certain assets of the Avonmore Plant to their estimated net realizable value;
•
The Excess Costs of Avonmore of approximately $4,572, which were eliminated in connection with the sale of Avonmore Plant;
•
A portion of the Restructuring-Related Costs, or $816, due to reductions in force; and
•
The Bad Debt Expense of $1,366 for a cast roll customer who filed for bankruptcy in 2019.
In addition, operating results for the current year benefited from:
•
Changes in pricing and product mix which favorably impacted earnings by approximately $3,300;
•
Lower raw material costs which positively impacted operating results by approximately $4,500; and
•
Lower selling and administrative expense of approximately $4,600 due to a lower cost structure attributable to restructuring efforts taken in the prior year and lower commissions associated with the lower volume of FEP sales.
However, operating results for the current year were adversely affected by:
•
Unabsorbed costs largely due to the periodic and temporary idling of certain facilities and furloughing employees caused by the pandemic, a portion of which was offset by subsidies and reimbursements from certain foreign jurisdictions, resulting in a net negative impact on earnings of approximately $8,900 in 2020;
•
Lower volume of shipments which adversely impacted operating results for the current year by approximately $5,000 when compared to the prior year;
•
Lower Proceeds from the Business Interruption Insurance Claim which equaled $769 in 2020 versus $1,803 in 2019, a difference of $1,034; and
•
Charges for anticipated bad debts and slow-moving inventory reserves of approximately $1,000 for customers expected to be more severely impacted by the pandemic.
Changes in exchange rates for the current year, when compared to the prior year, did not have a significant impact on sales or operating results.
Backlog equaled $191,919 at December 31, 2020, compared to $270,737 at December 31, 2019. The decrease in backlog is principally due to lower backlog for forged and cast rolls as a result of customers postponing order placement given the uncertainty surrounding the pandemic. An overall increase in foreign exchange rates used to translate the backlog of the Corporation’s foreign subsidiaries into the U.S. dollar and a slightly higher backlog for FEP helped to offset the effect of the lower roll backlog when compared to the prior year. At December 31, 2020, approximately 8% of the backlog is expected to ship after 2021; however, as a result of the pandemic, customers could defer deliveries, which may result in a larger percentage of backlog being shipped after 2021.
Air and Liquid Processing
Net sales for 2020 decreased from the prior year by $1,619 principally due to a lower volume of heat exchangers which has been adversely affected by a reduction in short-turn order intake. Sales of centrifugal pumps and air handling units for the current year were slightly better than the prior year. Operating income for 2020 benefited from product mix and savings generated from process improvements but was adversely affected by the lower volume of shipments and the Asbestos-Related Charge of $283 for the potential insolvency of an asbestos-related insurance carrier. Backlog at December 31, 2020, improved $3,618 from December 31, 2019, principally due to higher order intake for centrifugal pumps and refinement of the measurement of backlog for longer-dated Navy pump orders. At December 31, 2020, approximately 8% of the backlog is expected to ship after 2021. To date, the segment has successfully mitigated the negative impact on sales and operating income resulting from the pandemic.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Net cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities for continuing operations equaled $33,635 and $(3,294) for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The significant improvement between the years is principally due to a lower investment in trade working capital, due in part to the contraction in the business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and improved operating results. Although the Corporation recorded the Asbestos-Related Charge in 2020 and the Impairment Charge in 2019, the charges were non-cash charges and, accordingly, did not impact net cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities.
Deferred employer-side social security payments equaled $2,163 through December 31, 2020, which, under the current provisions of the CARES Act, will be due equally in December 2021 and December 2022. Net asbestos-related payments equaled $8,725 and $4,713 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are expected to approximate $6,000 in 2021. Contributions to the defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefits plans equaled $7,857 and $3,544 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. No contributions are expected to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans in 2021 due to relief provided by the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, which was signed into law by President Biden in March 2021. Contributions to the Corporation’s remaining employee benefit plans are expected to approximate $2,234 in 2021.
Net cash flows used in investing activities for continuing operations equaled $7,929 and $2,662 for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash flows used in investing activities for continuing operations for 2019 include proceeds from the sale of ASW of $4,292 and the Avonmore Plant of $3,700. Capital expenditures approximated $8,466 and $10,964 for 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are primarily for the FCEP segment. As of December 31, 2020, purchase commitments for expected future capital expenditures approximated $3,300, which are anticipated to be spent over the next 12-18 months.
Net cash flows used in financing activities for continuing operations equaled $17,220 and $6,617 for 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the current year, the Corporation reduced its net borrowings outstanding under its revolving credit facility by $28,273 and repaid its $4,120 Industrial Revenue Bond at maturity. A portion of the revolving credit facility repayments was from the proceeds from the equity rights offering, which was completed in September 2020. Net proceeds from the equity rights offering equaled $18,139 (total gross proceeds of $19,279 less issuance costs of $1,140). In 2019, the Corporation repaid promissory notes (and interest) equaling $26,474 with additional borrowings under its revolving credit facility. Proceeds from the sale of ASW and the Avonmore Plant in 2019 of $7,992 were used to repay a portion of the borrowings under the revolving credit facility.
The effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents is primarily attributable to the fluctuation of the British pound and Swedish krona against the U.S. dollar.
Net cash flows used in discontinued operations for 2019 represent the cash flows of ASW.
As a result of the above, cash and cash equivalents increased by $9,882 during 2020 and ended the period at $16,842 in comparison to $6,960 at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the majority of the Corporation’s cash and cash equivalents is held by its foreign operations. Domestic customer remittances are used to pay down borrowings under the Corporation’s revolving credit facility, resulting in minimal cash maintained by the domestic operations. Cash held by the foreign operations is considered to be permanently reinvested; accordingly, a provision for estimated local and withholding tax has not been made. If the Corporation were to remit any foreign earnings to itself or any of its U.S. entities, the estimated tax impact would be insignificant.
Funds on hand, funds generated from future operations and availability under the revolving credit facility are expected to be sufficient to finance operational and capital expenditure requirements of the Corporation. The maturity date for the revolving credit facility is May 20, 2022, and, subject to other terms and conditions of the revolving credit agreement, will become due on that date. The Corporation intends to negotiate a longer-term arrangement prior to the maturity of the revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, remaining availability under the revolving credit facility approximated $48,300, net of standard availability reserves.
With respect to environmental matters, see Note 22, Environmental Matters, to the Consolidated Financial Statements. With respect to litigation, see Note 20, Litigation, to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Corporation’s off-balance sheet arrangements include the previously mentioned expected future capital expenditures and letters of credit unrelated to the Industrial Revenue Bonds. See Note 12, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities, to the Consolidated Financial Statements. These arrangements are not considered significant to the liquidity, capital resources, market risk, or credit risk of the Corporation.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
While inflationary and market pressures on costs are likely to be experienced, it is anticipated that ongoing improvements in manufacturing efficiencies and cost savings efforts will mitigate the effects of inflation on the Corporation’s 2021 operating results. The ability to pass on increases in the price of commodities to the customer is contingent upon current market conditions, with the Corporation potentially having to absorb some portion or all of the increase. Product pricing for the FCEP segment’s mill roll product is reflective of current costs, with a significant portion of orders subject to a variable-index surcharge program which helps to protect the segment and its customers against the volatility in the cost of certain raw materials and natural gas. Additionally, long-term labor agreements exist at each of the key locations. Certain of these agreements will expire in 2021. As is consistent with past practice, the Corporation will negotiate with the intent to secure mutually beneficial arrangements covering multiple years. See Note 12, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities, to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Finally, commitments have been executed for certain commodities (copper and aluminum). See Note 15, Derivate Instruments, to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Corporation has identified critical accounting policies that are important to the presentation of its financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations and involve the most complex or subjective assessments. Critical accounting policies relate to assessing recoverability of property, plant and equipment and accounting for pension and other postretirement benefits, litigation and loss contingencies, and income taxes.
Property, plant and equipment is reviewed for recoverability whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the long-lived assets may not be recoverable. If the undiscounted cash flows generated from the use and eventual disposition of the assets are less than their carrying value, then the asset value may not be fully recoverable, potentially resulting in a write-down of the asset value. Estimates of future cash flows are based on expected market conditions over the remaining useful life of the primary asset(s). Accordingly, assumptions are made about pricing, volume and asset-resale values. Actual results may differ from these assumptions. At March 31, 2020, the significant change potentially brought about by COVID-19 to macroeconomic conditions and to industry and market conditions in which the FCEP segment operates, was deemed to be a triggering event under ASC 360, Property, Plant and
Equipment, causing the Corporation to evaluate whether the property, plant and equipment of the asset groupings within the FCEP segment was deemed to be impaired. Accordingly, as of March 31, 2020, the Corporation completed a quantitative analysis of the long-lived assets for these asset groups and determined that the assets were not impaired. The Corporation continues to evaluate the uncertainty associated with COVID-19, and, at December 31, 2020, there were no additional triggering events identified for these asset groups. Additionally, there have been no triggering events for the asset groups within the Air and Liquid Processing segment. The Corporation believes the amounts recorded in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for property, plant and equipment are recoverable and are not impaired as of December 31, 2020.
Accounting for pension and other postretirement benefits involves estimating the cost of benefits to be provided well into the future and attributing that cost over the time period each employee works. To accomplish this, input from the Corporation’s actuaries is evaluated and extensive use is made of assumptions about inflation, long-term rate of return on plan assets, longevity, employee turnover and discount rates. The curtailment of the majority of the Corporation’s defined benefit pension plans and the amendment of various other postretirement benefit plans has helped to mitigate the volatility in net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs resulting from changes in these assumptions.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is an estimate of the average rates of earnings expected to be earned on funds invested or to be invested to provide for the benefits included in the projected benefit obligation. Since these benefits will be paid over many years, the expected long-term rate of return is reflective of current investment returns and investment returns over a longer period. Also, consideration is given to target and actual asset allocations, inflation and real risk-free return. The Corporation believes the expected long-term rate of return ranging between 6.60% and 7.25% for its domestic plans and 3.55% for its foreign plans to be reasonable. Actual returns on plan assets for 2020 approximated 12.02% for the domestic plans and 14.07% for the foreign plans. A percentage point decrease in the expected long-term rate of return would increase annual pension expense by approximately $2,350. Conversely, a percentage point increase in the expected long-term rate of return would decrease annual pension expense by approximately $2,350.
The discount rates used in determining future pension obligations and other postretirement benefits for each of the plans are based on rates of return for high-quality fixed-income investments currently available and expected to be available during the period to maturity of the pension and other postretirement benefits. High-quality fixed-income investments are defined as those investments which have received one of the two highest ratings given by a recognized rating agency with maturities of 10+ years. Assumed discount rates range between 2.50% and 2.63% for its domestic plans, 2.61% for its other postretirement benefits plans, and 1.45% for its foreign plans, at December 31, 2020. A 1/4 percentage point increase in the discount rate would decrease projected and accumulated benefit obligations by approximately $10,900. Conversely, a 1/4 percentage point decrease in the discount rate would increase projected and accumulated benefit obligations by approximately $10,900.
The Corporation believes that the amounts recorded in the accompanying consolidated financial statements related to pension and other postretirement benefits are based on assumptions that are appropriate at December 31, 2020, although actual outcomes could differ.
Litigation and loss contingency accruals are made when it is determined that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Specifically, the Corporation and certain of its subsidiaries are involved in various claims and lawsuits incidental to its businesses. In addition, claims have been asserted alleging personal injury from exposure to asbestos-containing components historically used in some products manufactured by predecessors of Air & Liquid (the “Asbestos Liability”). To assist the Corporation in determining whether an estimate could be made of the potential liability for pending and unasserted future claims for the Asbestos Liability along with applicable insurance coverage, and the amounts of any estimates, the Corporation hires a nationally recognized asbestos-liability expert and insurance consultant. Based on their analyses, reserves for probable and reasonably estimable costs for the Asbestos Liability, including defense costs, and receivables for the insurance recoveries that are deemed probable are established. These amounts rely on assumptions which are based on currently known facts and strategy.
In 2018, the Corporation undertook a review of the Asbestos Liability claims, defense costs and the likelihood for insurance recoveries. The Corporation extended its estimate of the Asbestos Liability, including the estimated costs of settlement and defense costs relating to pending claims and future claims projected to be filed against it through 2052, the estimated final date by which the Corporation expects to have settled all asbestos-related claims. Key variables in these assumptions, including the ability to reasonably estimate the Asbestos Liability through the expected final date by which the Corporation expects to have settled all asbestos-related claims, are summarized in Note 20, Litigation, to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Key assumptions include the number and type of new claims to be filed each year, the average cost of disposing of each new claim, average annual defense costs, and the solvency risk with respect to the relevant insurance carriers. Other factors that may affect the Asbestos Liability and the Corporation’s ability to recover under its insurance policies include uncertainties surrounding the litigation process from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and from case to case, reforms that may be made by state and federal courts, the passage of state or federal tort reform legislation, and continued solvency of the insurance carriers. In 2020, the Corporation recorded an asbestos-related charge of $283 for the potential insolvency of an asbestos insurance carrier. Actual expenses or insurance recoveries could be significantly higher or lower than those recorded if assumptions used in the calculations vary significantly from actual results.
The Corporation intends to evaluate the Asbestos Liability and related insurance receivables as well as the underlying assumptions on a regular basis to determine whether any adjustments to the estimates are required. Due to the uncertainties surrounding asbestos litigation and insurance, these regular reviews may result in the incurrence of future charges or credits; however, the Corporation is currently unable to estimate such future changes. Adjustments, if any, to the Corporation’s estimate of the Asbestos Liability and/or insurance receivables could be material to its operating results for the periods in which the adjustments to the liability or receivable are recorded, and to its liquidity and consolidated financial position when such liabilities are paid.
Accounting for income taxes includes the Corporation evaluation of the underlying accounts, permanent and temporary differences, its tax filing positions and interpretations of existing tax law. A valuation allowance is recorded against deferred income tax assets to reduce them to the amount that is “more likely than not” to be realized. In doing so, assumptions are made about the future profitability of the Corporation and the nature of that profitability. Actual results may differ from these assumptions. If the Corporation determined it would not be able to realize all or part of the deferred income tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be established resulting in a charge to net income (loss). Likewise, if the Corporation determined it would be able to realize deferred income tax assets in excess of the net amount recorded, a portion of the existing valuation allowance would be released resulting in a credit to net income (loss). As of December 31, 2020, the valuation allowance approximates $42,454, reducing deferred income tax assets, net of deferred income tax liabilities, to $1,090, an amount the Corporation believes is “more likely than not” to be realized.
The Corporation does not recognize a tax benefit in the financial statements related to a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return unless it is “more likely than not” that the tax authorities will sustain the tax position solely on the basis of the position’s technical merits. Consideration is primarily given to legislation and statutes, legislative intent, regulations, rulings and case law as well as their applicability to the facts and circumstances of the tax position when assessing the sustainability of the tax position. In the event a tax position no longer meets the “more likely than not” criteria, the Corporation would reverse the tax benefit by recognizing a liability and recording a charge to earnings. Conversely, if the Corporation subsequently determined that a tax position met the “more likely than not” criteria, it would recognize the tax benefit by reducing the liability and recording a credit to earnings. As of December 31, 2020, based on information known to date, the Corporation believes the amount of unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return which may be challenged by the tax authorities not to be significant.
See Note 21, Income Taxes, to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
RECENTLY IMPLEMENTED and ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements.