Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion relates to the consolidated audited financial statements of AMC Entertainment Holdings, Inc. (“AMC”) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to these statements.
Overview
AMC is the world’s largest theatrical exhibition company and an industry leader in innovation and operational excellence. We operate theatres in 14 countries, including the U.S., Europe and Saudi Arabia. In the United States, as of December 31, 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, AMC has the #1 market share in the top two markets, New York and Los Angeles.
Our theatrical exhibition revenues are generated primarily from box office admissions and theatre food and beverage sales. The balance of our revenues are generated from ancillary sources, including on-screen advertising, fees earned from our AMC Stubs® customer loyalty program, rental of theatre auditoriums, income from gift card and exchange ticket sales, and online ticketing fees. As of December 31, 2020, we owned, operated or had interests in 950 theatres and 10,543 screens.
Film Content
Box office admissions are our largest source of revenue. We predominantly license “first-run” films from distributors owned by major film production companies and from independent distributors on a film-by-film and theatre-by-theatre basis. Film exhibition costs are accrued based on the applicable admissions revenues and estimates of the final settlement pursuant to our film licenses. These licenses typically state that rental fees are based on aggregate terms established prior to the opening of the picture. In certain circumstances and less frequently, our rental fees are based on a mutually agreed settlement upon the conclusion of the picture. In some European territories, rental fees are established on a weekly basis for the coming week’s percentage forecast. Some European licenses use a per capita agreement instead, paying a flat amount per ticket, where the sum is agreed in long-term agreements in advance of the film showing. Under an aggregate terms formula, we usually pay the distributor a specified percentage of box office gross or pay based on a scale of percentages tied to different amounts of box office gross, or in Europe, we pay based on the number of weeks since release. The settlement process allows for negotiation based upon how a film actually performs.
The North American industry box office has been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020. Although certain states authorized the reopening of theatres as early as June 2020, with limited seating capacities and social distancing guidelines, some states, including California and New York, remain partially or entirely closed for theatrical exhibition as of December 31, 2020. As a result, studios have postponed new film releases or moved them to the home video market, and movie release dates may continue to move in the future. Major movie releases that were previously scheduled to be released in 2020 have either been rescheduled for 2021 or slated for direct to streaming or PVOD in lieu of a theatrical release, which left a reduced slate of movie releases for 2020, and release dates may continue to move. Certain competitors have decided to temporarily reclose their theatres in light of the ongoing pandemic and the reduced slate of movie releases, which may further exacerbate the trend described above. As a result of the reduced slate of first-run movie releases, we have licensed and exhibited a larger number of films that were released in prior years or decades and where the film rental terms are much lower than for first-run movie releases. The combination of theatre closures, reopening restrictions and limited new film distribution has resulted in a significantly lower industry box office for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In response to the current low attendance levels, (in addition to any local capacity restrictions) we have made adjustments to theatre operating hours in those markets where we are open to align screen availability and associated theatre operating costs with attendance levels for each theatre. We also introduced AMC Private Screening, which allows moviegoers to reserve a separate AMC Safe & Clean auditorium for a private screening for up to 20 people, starting at $99 plus tax.
During 2020, we entered into an agreement with Universal, a division of Comcast Corporation (NASDAQ:CMCSA), to distribute films utilizing a minimum 17-day theatrical exhibition window, after which time Universal will have the option to make its titles available across premium video on demand (“PVOD”) platforms. This multi-year agreement preserves exclusivity for theatrical viewing for at least the first three weekends of a film’s release,
during which time a considerable majority of a movie’s theatrical box office revenue typically is generated. AMC will also share in new revenue streams that will come to the movie ecosystem from PVOD.
During the 2020 calendar year, films licensed from our six largest distributors based on revenues accounted for approximately 80% of our U.S. admissions revenues, which consisted of Sony, Disney, Universal, Warner Bros., Paramount, and Lionsgate. In Europe, approximately 75% of our box office revenue came from films attributed to our three largest distributor groups; which consisted of Warner Bros., Disney, and various independent distributors as a whole (with each independent distributor representing 10% or less). Our revenues attributable to individual distributors may vary significantly from year to year depending upon the commercial success of each distributor’s films in any given year.
Movie Screens
The following table provides detail with respect to digital delivery, 3D enabled projection, large screen formats, such as IMAX® and our proprietary Dolby Cinema™, other Premium Large Format (“PLF”) screens, enhanced food and beverage offerings and our premium seating as deployed throughout our circuit on December 31, 2020. This data represents available services in a pre-COVID-19 environment. Due to mandated government attendance restrictions, the ability for guests to utilize all these amenities has been significantly curtailed:
As of December 31, 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, AMC was the largest IMAX® exhibitor in the U.S. with a 56% market share. Each one of our IMAX® local installations is protected by geographic exclusivity, and as of December 31, 2019, our IMAX® screen count was 98% greater than our closest competitor. We also operate 36 IMAX® screens in Europe. As part of our long-term growth strategy, we expect to continue to expand our IMAX® relationship across the U.S. and Europe, further strengthening our position as the largest IMAX® exhibitor in the U.S. and a leading IMAX® exhibitor in the United Kingdom and Europe. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we closed four IMAX screens related to U.S. theatres that were permanently closed and opened one new IMAX screen.
As of December 31, 2020, we operated 149 Dolby Cinema™ at AMC auditoriums in the U.S. In December 2018, we introduced the first United Kingdom Dolby Cinema Auditorium in our iconic Leicester Square theatre in the heart of London, ending 2020 with six Dolby Cinema™ Auditoriums in Europe. We expect to expand the deployment of our innovative Dolby Cinema™ auditoriums in both our U.S. and International markets as part of our long-term growth strategy.
We also offer our private label PLF experience at many of our locations, with superior sight and sound technology and enhanced seating as contrasted with our traditional auditoriums. These proprietary PLF auditoriums offer an enhanced theatrical experience for movie-goers beyond our current core theatres, at a lower price premium than IMAX® and/or Dolby Cinema™. Therefore, it may be especially relevant in smaller or more price-sensitive markets. As of December 31, 2020, we operated 54 screens under proprietary PLF brand names in the U.S. markets and 75 in the International markets.
Guest Amenities
As part of our long-term strategy, we seek to continually upgrade the quality of our theatre circuit through substantial renovations featuring our seating concepts, acquisitions, new builds (including expansions), expansion of food and beverage offerings (including dine-in theatres), and by disposing of older screens through closures and sales. As discussed above, certain aspects of our long-term strategy, such as growth capital expenditures, with the exception of prior commitments are suspended at this time as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. We
cannot currently determine when we will be able to resume these aspects of our long-term growth strategy. We believe we are an industry leader in the development and operation of theatres. Typically, our theatres have 12 or more screens and offer amenities to enhance the movie-going experience, such as stadium seating providing unobstructed viewing, digital sound and premium seat design.
Recliner seating is the key feature of theatre renovations. We believe that maximizing comfort and convenience for our customers will be increasingly necessary to maintain and improve our relevance. These renovations, in conjunction with capital contributions from our landlords, involve stripping theatres to their basic structure in order to replace finishes throughout, upgrading the sight and sound experience, installing modernized points of sale and, most importantly, replacing traditional theatre seats with plush, electric recliners that allow customers to deploy a leg rest and fully recline at the push of a button. As of December 31, 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the quality improvement in the customer experience could drive a 33% increase in attendance, on average, at these locations in their first year post renovation. These increases will only continue post-COVID-19 pandemic if attendance returns to normalized pre-COVID-19 levels. Upon reopening a remodeled theatre, we typically increase the ticket price to reflect the enhanced consumer experience.
As of December 31, 2020, in our U.S. markets we featured recliner seating in approximately 339 U.S. theatres, including Dine-in-Theatres, totaling approximately 3,342 screens and representing 43.6% of total U.S. screens. In our International markets, as of December 31, 2020, we had recliner seating in approximately 77 International theatres, totaling approximately 533 screens and representing 18.5% of total International screens.
Open-source internet ticketing makes our AMC seats (approximately 1.1 million as of December 31, 2020) in all our U.S. theatres and auditoriums for all our showtimes as available as possible, on as many websites as possible. Our tickets are currently on sale either directly or through mobile apps, at our own website and our mobile apps and other third-party ticketing vendors. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 53.0% of our tickets were purchased online in the U.S., with approximately 76.0% of total online tickets being purchased through AMC.
Food and beverage sales are our second largest source of revenue after box office admissions. Our deployment initiatives also apply to food and beverage enhancements. We have expanded our menu of enhanced food and beverage products to include meals, healthy snacks, premium beers, wine and mixed drinks, and other gourmet products. Our long-term growth strategy calls for investment across a spectrum of enhanced food and beverage formats, ranging from simple, less capital-intensive food and beverage design improvements to the development of new dine-in theatre options. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have temporarily modified our food and beverage operations to include more simplified concession menus, cashless transactions technology, hand sanitizer and disinfecting wipes, and condiment and drink refills available by request, all in an effort to reduce the number of touch-points between guests and employees. We have also upgraded our Coca Cola Freestyle beverage machines to include a mobile app allowing guests to dispense drinks without the need to utilize the machine’s touch screen.
Our MacGuffins Bar and Lounges (“MacGuffins”) give us an opportunity to engage our legal age customers. As of December 31, 2020, we offer alcohol in approximately 340 AMC theatres in the U.S. markets and 251 theatres in our International markets and continue to explore expansion globally.
Loyalty Programs and Other Marketing
In our U.S. markets, we begin the process of engagement with AMC Stubs® our customer loyalty program which allows members to earn rewards, receive discounts and participate in exclusive members-only offerings and services. It features a traditional paid tier called AMC Stubs Premiere™ for a $15 annual membership fee and a non-paid tier called AMC Stubs Insider™. Both programs reward loyal guests for their patronage of AMC theatres. Rewards earned are redeemable on future purchases at AMC locations.
The portion of the admissions and food and beverage revenues attributed to the rewards is deferred as a reduction of admissions and food and beverage revenues and is allocated between admissions and food and beverage revenues based on expected member redemptions. Upon redemption, deferred rewards are recorded as revenues along with associated cost of goods. We estimate point breakage in assigning value to the points at the time of sale based on historical trends. The program’s annual membership fee is allocated to the material rights for discounted or free products and services and is initially deferred, net of estimated refunds, and recorded as the rights are redeemed based on estimated utilization, over the one-year membership period in admissions, food and beverage, and other revenues. A
portion of the revenues related to a material right are deferred as a virtual rewards performance obligation using the relative standalone selling price method and are recorded as the rights are redeemed or expire.
AMC Stubs® A-List is our monthly subscription-based tier of our AMC Stubs® loyalty program. This program offers guests admission to movies at AMC up to three times per week including multiple movies per day and repeat visits to already seen movies for $19.95 to $23.95 per month depending upon geographic market. AMC Stubs® A-List also includes premium offerings including IMAX®, Dolby Cinema™ at AMC, RealD, Prime and other proprietary PLF brands. AMC Stubs® A-List members can book tickets on-line in advance and select specific seats at AMC Theatres with reserved seating. Upon the temporary suspension of theatre operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic, all monthly A-List subscription charges were put on hold. As we reopened theatres, A-List members had the option to reactivate their subscription, which restarted the monthly charge for the program.
As of December 31, 2020, we had more than 23,300,000 member households enrolled in AMC Stubs® A-List, AMC Stubs Premiere™ and AMC Stubs Insider™ programs, combined. Our AMC Stubs® members represented approximately 45% of AMC U.S. markets attendance during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our large database of identified movie-goers also provides us with additional insight into our customers’ movie preferences. This enables us to have a larger, more personalized and targeted marketing effort.
In our International markets, we currently have loyalty programs in the major territories in which we operate. The movie-goers can earn points for spending money at the theatre, and those points can be redeemed for tickets and concession items at a later date. We currently have more than 11,400,000 active members in our various International loyalty programs. We are currently evaluating the Odeon loyalty programs to determine how best to reward our European movie-goers and heighten guest loyalty to drive additional attendance to Odeon theatres.
Our marketing efforts are not limited to our loyalty program as we continue to improve our customer connections through our website and mobile apps and expand our online and movie offerings. We continued to roll out our upgraded mobile applications across the U.S. circuit with the ability to order food and beverage offerings via our mobile applications while ordering tickets ahead of scheduled showtimes. Our mobile applications also include AMC Theatres On Demand, a service for members of the AMC Stubs® loyalty program that allows them to rent or buy movies.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, AMC’s robust online and mobile platforms in our U.S. markets offer customers the safety and convenience of enhanced social distancing by allowing them to purchase tickets and concession items online, avoid the ticket line, and limit other high-touch interactions with AMC employees and other guests. Online and mobile platforms are also available in our International markets.
Significant Transactions
Equity Distribution Agreements. On September 24, 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, as sales agents to sell 15 million shares, and also on October 20, 2020 to sell an additional 15 million shares, of our Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share, through an “at-the-market” offering program. On November 10, 2020 and December 11, 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC and B. Riley Securities, Inc., as sales agents to sell up to 20 million and 178.0 million shares, respectively, of Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share, through an “at-the-market” offering program. We raised gross proceeds of approximately $272.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, through our at-the-market offering of approximately 90,955,685 shares of its Class A common stock and paid fees to the sales agents of approximately $6.8 million. We have used and continue to use the net proceeds from the sale of the Class A common stock pursuant to the equity distribution agreement for general corporate purposes, which may include the repayment, refinancing, redemption or repurchase of existing indebtedness or working capital, capital expenditures and other investments. See Note 17-Subsequent Events of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information regarding additional at-the-market offerings.
Baltics’ theatre sale agreement. On August 28, 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell our equity interest in Forum Cinemas OU, which consists of nine theatres located in the Baltics’ region (Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia) and is included in our International markets reportable segment, for total consideration of approximately €77.25 million, including cash of approximately €64.35 million or $76.6 million prior to any transaction costs. This transaction was undertaken by us to further increase its liquidity and strengthen its balance sheet at a transaction multiple that demonstrates that market participants ascribe positive value to the business. The completion of the sale will take place in several steps and is contingent upon clearance from each regulatory competition council in each country. We received
$37.5 million (€31.53 million) cash consideration upon entering into the sale agreement on August 28, 2020, transferred an equity interest of 49% in Forum Cinemas OU to the purchaser and recorded an initial noncontrolling interest of $34.9 million in total equity (deficit). Transaction costs of $1.4 million and net gain of $1.2 million related to the sale of 49% equity interest of Lithuania and Estonia and the 100% disposal of Latvia were recorded in additional paid-in capital during the year ended December 31, 2020 and will be recognized in earnings when the remaining 51% interests in Lithuania and Estonia are disposed. At December 31, 2020, the carrying amounts of the major classes of assets and liabilities included as part of the disposal group that were previously included in the International markets reportable segment were; goodwill of $41.8 million, property, net, of $13.0 million, operating lease right-of-use assets, net of $15.7 million, and current and long-term operating lease liabilities of $2.4 million and $13.7 million, respectively. The remaining cash consideration is payable upon completion of the sale of the remaining 51% equity interest in Lithuania and Estonia, which is expected to occur in two separate transactions by country following competition council clearance in each country. At December 31, 2020, our noncontrolling interest of 49% in Lithuania and Estonia was $26.9 million. We estimate the sale of Forum Cinemas will be completed in 2021.
Exchange Offers. On July 31, 2020, we closed our previously announced Exchange Offer for our Existing Senior Subordinated Notes for new Second Lien Notes due 2026 and reduced the principal amount of the Company’s total debt by approximately $555 million, which represented approximately 23.9% of the previously outstanding amount of the Company’s subordinated notes. We raised $300 million in additional cash from the issuance of First Lien Notes due 2026, prior to deducting discounts of $30.0 million and deferred financing costs paid to lenders of $6.0 million. Additionally, certain holders of the Company’s Existing Senior Subordinated Notes that agreed to backstop the offering of $200 million of the Company’s First Lien Notes due 2026 received five million Class A common shares, or 4.6% of AMC’s outstanding shares on July 31, 2020, worth $20.2 million at the market closing price on July 31, 2020. The closing of the Exchange Offer also allowed us to extend maturities on approximately $1.7 billion of debt to 2026, most of which was maturing in 2024 and 2025 previously. Interest due for the coming 12 to 18 months on the Second Lien Notes due 2026 is expected to be paid all or in part on an in-kind basis, thereby generating a further near-term cash savings for us of between approximately $120 million and $180 million. See Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
We performed an assessment on a lender by lender basis to identify certain lenders that met the criteria for troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) under ASC 470-60, Troubled Debt Restructurings by Debtors (“ASC 470-60”) as we were experiencing financial difficulties and the lenders granted us a concession. The portion of the loans that did not meet the assessment of TDR under ASC 470-60 were treated as modifications. We accounted for the exchange of approximately $1,782.5 million principal amount of our Existing Senior Subordinated Notes for approximately $1,289.1 million principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 as TDR. We accounted for the exchange of the remaining approximately $235.0 million principal amount of our Existing Senior Subordinated Notes for approximately $173.2 million principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 as a modification of debt as the lenders did not grant a concession and the difference between the present value of the old and new cash flows was less than 10%. The TDR and modification did not result in a gain recognition and we established new effective interest rates based on the carrying value of the Existing Subordinated Notes and recorded the new fees paid to third parties of approximately $36.3 million and $39.1 million in other expense, during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2020, respectively.
We realized significant cancellation of debt income (“CODI”) in connection with our debt restructuring. As a result of such CODI, we estimate a significant portion of our net operating losses will be eliminated as a result of tax attribute reductions. Any loss of tax attributes as a result of such CODI may adversely affect our cash flows and therefore our ability to service our indebtedness.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events, and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates, and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates, and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. We have identified several policies as being critical because they require management to make particularly
difficult, subjective and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain, and there is a likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions.
All of our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1-The Company and Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Long-lived Assets Impairments. We evaluate indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually or more frequently as specific events or circumstances dictate. We operate in a very competitive business environment and our revenues are highly dependent on movie content supplied by film producers. In addition, it is common for us to closely monitor certain locations where operating performance may not meet our expectations.
We review long-lived assets, including definite-lived intangible assets and theatre assets (including operating lease right-of-use assets) whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset group may not be fully recoverable. We identify impairments related to internal use software when management determines that the remaining carrying value of the software will not be realized through future use. We evaluate events or circumstances, including competition in the markets where we operate that would indicate the carrying value of theatre assets may not be fully recoverable. We evaluate theatres using historical and projected data of theatre level cash flow as our primary indicator of potential impairment and consider the seasonality of our business when making these evaluations. If an event or circumstance is identified indicating carrying value may not be recoverable, the sum of future undiscounted cash flows is compared to the carrying value. If carrying value exceeds the future undiscounted cash flows, the carrying value of the asset is reduced to fair value. Assets are evaluated for impairment on an individual theatre basis, which management believes is the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows. The fair value of assets is determined as either the expected selling price less selling costs (where appropriate) or the present value of the estimated future cash flows, adjusted as necessary for market participant factors.
We recorded impairment charges related to definite-lived intangible assets of $14.4 million in U.S. markets and indefinite-lived intangible assets of $15.2 million in International markets during the year ended December 31, 2020. There are a number of estimates and significant judgments that are made by management in performing these impairment evaluations. Such judgments and estimates include estimates of future attendance, revenues, rent relief, cost savings, cash flows, capital expenditures, and the cost of capital, among others. Attendance is expected to be significantly below historical levels following reopening with limited seating capacities and social distancing guidelines and studios have postponed new film releases or moved them to the home video market, and movie release dates may continue to move in the future. We believe we have used reasonable and appropriate business judgments. There is considerable management judgment with respect to cash flow estimates and appropriate discount rates to be used in determining fair value, and, accordingly, actual results could vary significantly from such estimates, which fall under Level 3 within the fair value measurement hierarchy. These estimates determine whether impairments have been incurred and quantify the amount of any related impairment charge. Given the nature of our business and our recent history, future impairments are possible and they may be material, based upon business conditions that are constantly changing and the competitive business environment in which we operate.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash impairment of long-lived assets of $152.5 million on 101 theatres in the U.S. markets with 1,139 screens (in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming) and $25.4 million on 37 theatres in the International markets with 340 screens (in Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and UK), which were related to property, net and operating lease right-of-use assets, net. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment losses related to equity method investments in International markets of $8.6 million in equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities. In addition, we recorded impairment losses of $15.9 million in U.S. markets within investment expense (income), related to equity interest investments without a readily determinable fair value accounted for under the cost method during the year ended December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020, we performed a quantitative impairment evaluation of our indefinite-lived intangible assets related to the AMC, Odeon and Nordic trade names and recorded impairment charges of $12.5 million related to Odeon trade name and $2.7 million related to Nordic for the year ended December 31, 2020. No impairment charges were recorded related to the AMC trade name for the year ended December 31, 2020. To estimate fair value of our indefinite-lived trade names, we employed a derivation of the Income Approach known as the Royalty Savings Method. The Royalty Savings Method values an intangible asset by estimating the
royalties saved through ownership of the asset. At December 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020, we applied royalty rates of 0.5% for AMC and Odeon trade names and 1.0% for Nordic to the related theatre revenues on an after-tax basis using effective tax rates. At December 31, 2020, related cash flows were discounted at 12.0% for AMC and 13.5% for Odeon and Nordic, at September 30, 2020, related cash flows were discounted at 13.0% for AMC and 14.0% for Odeon and Nordic, and at March 31, 2020, related cash flows were discounted at 12.5% for AMC and 14.0% for Odeon and Nordic.
Goodwill. We evaluate the goodwill recorded at our two reporting units (Domestic Theatres and International Theatres) for impairment annually as of the beginning of the fourth fiscal quarter or more frequently as specific events or circumstances dictate. Our market enterprise value fell below carrying value on May 24, 2019 and since that time we have recorded impairment charges as of March 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 to more closely align our carrying value with our market enterprise value.
In accordance with ASC 350-20-35-30, we performed an assessment to determine whether there were any events or changes in circumstances that would warrant an interim ASC 350 impairment analysis as of December 31, 2020, September 30, 2020, June 30, 2020, and March 31, 2020.
Based on the suspension of operations at all of our theatres on or before March 17, 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020, the suspension of operations during the second and third quarters of 2020, the temporary suspension of operations of certain of our International Theatres during the fourth quarter of 2020 again after operations had previously been resumed, and the further delay or cancellation of film releases than originally estimated, we performed the Step 1 quantitative goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2020. The impairment test for goodwill involves estimating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing that value to our carrying value. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than our carrying value, the difference is recorded as a goodwill impairment charge, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In performing the Step 1 quantitative goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2020, we used an enterprise value approach to measure fair value of the reporting units. The enterprise fair value of the Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units was less than their carrying values as of March 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, and the fair value of the International Theatres reporting unit was less than its fair value as of December 31, 2020 and goodwill impairment charges of $1,276.1 million and $1,030.3 million, were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 for our Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units, respectively.
We determined the fair value of our Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units by using the income approach for the enterprise valuation methodology, which utilizes discounted cash flows. We did not weight any of the enterprise valuation methodology on the market approach. We believe that using 100% income approach provided a more reasonable measurement of the enterprise value basis at December 31, 2020. Due to the volatility and unreliability in the market multiples, the lack of standalone Domestic and International public theatre companies, and the temporary suspension of operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the current impact on Adjusted EBITDA, we did not believe that placing any weight on the market approach was appropriate for this valuation.
The income approach provides an estimate of fair value by measuring estimated annual cash flows over a discrete projection period and applying a present value discount rate to the cash flows. The present value of the cash flows is then added to the present value equivalent of the residual value of the business to arrive at an estimated fair value of the reporting unit. The residual value represents the present value of the projected cash flows beyond the discrete projection period. The discount rates were determined using a rate of return deemed appropriate for the risk of achieving the projected cash flows. There was considerable management judgment with respect to cash flow estimates and discount rates to be used in estimating fair value, which are classified as Level 3 in fair value hierarchy.
Key rates used in the income approach were as follows:
At September 30, 2020, we performed the Step 1 quantitative goodwill impairment test and used an enterprise value approach to measure fair value of the reporting units. The enterprise fair values of the Domestic Theatres and
International Theatres reporting units were less than their carrying values and goodwill impairment charges of $151.2 million and $5.6 million, respectively, was recorded as of September 30, 2020 for our Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units.
Key rates used in the income approach were as follows:
At March 31, 2020, we performed the Step 1 quantitative goodwill impairment test and used an enterprise value approach to measure fair value of the reporting units. The enterprise fair values of the Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units were less than their carrying values and goodwill impairment charges of $1,124.9 million and $619.4 million, respectively, was recorded as of March 31, 2020 for our Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units. The quantitative goodwill impairment test performed as of March 31, 2020 indicated our estimated enterprise fair value to our market enterprise value implied a premium of 22.7%.
Key assumptions used in the quantitative impairment test performed at March 31, 2020 were as follows:
While the fair values of our reporting units approximate their respective carrying values at the present time, the performance of the reporting units may require improvement in future periods to maintain this level. Further declines in the operating performance of our Domestic and International Theatres, further declines in the fair value of our debt, further declines in the trading price of our Class A common stock, small changes in certain key input assumptions, and/or other events or circumstances could occur and could have a significant impact on the estimated fair values. Examples of adverse events or circumstances that could change include (i) the ultimate duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the prolonged temporary suspension of certain of our theatre operations as well as the behavior of the movie-going public as we resume operations; (ii) an adverse change in macroeconomic conditions; (iii) increased cost factors that have a negative effect on our earnings and cash flows; (iv) negative or overall declining financial performance compared with our actual and projected results of relevant prior periods; (v) further declines in the fair value of our debt, and (vi) a further sustained decrease in our share price. A future impairment could result for a portion of the goodwill, long-lived assets or intangible assets. Any impairment charges that we may take in the future could be material to our results of operations and financial condition.
Income and operating taxes. Income and operating taxes are inherently difficult to estimate and record. This is due to the complex nature of the U.S. and International tax codes and also because our returns are routinely subject to examination by government tax authorities, including federal, state and local officials. Most of these examinations take place a few years after we have filed our tax returns. Our tax audits in many instances raise questions regarding our tax filing positions, the timing and amount of deductions claimed and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. At December 31, 2020, our federal income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $686.5 million, our state income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $1,024.6 million, and our foreign income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $859.7 million. Since these losses have varying degrees of carryforward periods, it requires us to estimate the amount of carryforward losses that we can reasonably be expected to realize. Future changes in conditions and in the tax code may change these strategies and thus change the amount of carry forward losses that we expect to realize and the amount of valuation allowances we have recorded. Accordingly, future reported results could be materially impacted by changes in tax matters, positions, rules and estimates and these changes could be material. See Note 10-Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8, thereof for further information.
During the first quarter of 2020, the severe impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on operations in Germany and Spain caused the Company to conclude the realizability of deferred tax assets held in those jurisdictions does not meet the more likely than not standard. As such, a charge of $33.1 million and $40.1 million was recorded for Germany and Spain, respectively. At December 31, 2020, the Company determined that it was appropriate to record a valuation allowance on the disallowed interest carryforward in Sweden as the realizability of this deferred tax asset in this jurisdiction does not meet the more likely than not standard. As such, the overall net tax benefit recorded on Sweden was reduced by a charge of $3.7 million. In addition, several other international jurisdictions carried valuation allowances against their deferred tax assets at the end of 2020.
On July 31, 2020, we completed our private offers to exchange our Existing Subordinated Notes for newly issued Second Lien Notes due 2026. Due to the terms of that exchange, we were required to recognize cancellation of debt income (CODI) for US tax purposes on the difference between the face value of debt exchanged and the fair market value of the new debt issued. We determined that we should recognize an estimated $1.2 billion of CODI for tax purposes. Further, we concluded that the level of our insolvency at July 31, 2020 exceeded the indicated amount of CODI resulting from the debt exchange, which may allow us to reduce our tax attributes rather than recognize current taxable income. For purposes of determining the tax provision for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we concluded a significant portion of our net operating losses have been eliminated as a result of tax attribute reduction. See Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations and Note 10-Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8, thereof for further information.
Leases. We adopted ASC Topic 842 effective January 1, 2019 and as a result our lease accounting policy has been modified as discussed in Note 3-Leases in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof. Lessees are required to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for virtually all of their leases (other than leases that meet the definition of a short-term lease). The liability is equal to the present value of lease payments. The asset is based on the liability, subject to certain adjustments, such as for lease incentives. For financial presentation purposes, a dual model was retained, requiring leases to be classified as either operating or finance leases. Operating leases result in straight-line expense (similar to operating leases under the prior accounting standard) while finance leases result in a front-loaded expense pattern (similar to capital leases under the prior accounting standard). We used our incremental borrowing rate to calculate the present value of our future operating lease payments, which was determined using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments on a collateralized basis over a similar term since the leases do not provide a determinable implicit rate. Estimating the incremental borrowing rate for operating leases is subjective when reviewing the reasonableness of the inputs and rates applied to each lease.
Operating Results
The following table sets forth our consolidated revenues, operating costs and expenses attributable to our theatrical exhibition operations and segment operating results. Reference is made to Note 13-Operating Segments to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information therein:
*Percentage change in excess of 100%.
(1)
Includes consolidated theatres only and excludes screens offline due to construction and temporary suspension of operations as consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adjusted EBITDA
We present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net earnings (loss) plus (i) income tax provision (benefit), (ii) interest expense and (iii) depreciation and amortization, as further adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance and to include attributable EBITDA from equity investments in theatre operations in International markets and any cash distributions of earnings from our equity method investees. These further adjustments are itemized below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $1,770.6 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA in U.S. markets decreased $1,343.8 million, primarily due to the decrease in attendance largely attributable to the temporary suspension of operations as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses due to the decrease in attendance and a decrease in rent. Adjusted EBITDA in International markets decreased $426.8 million, primarily due to the decreases in attendance, partially offset by decreases in operating expenses due to the decrease in attendance, decreases in rent, and increases in governmental assistance for COVID-19.
The following tables set forth our Adjusted EBITDA by reportable operating segment and our reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA:
(1) For information regarding the income tax provision (benefit), see Note 10-Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof.
(2) During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded goodwill non-cash impairment charges of $1,276.1 million and $1,030.3 million related to the enterprise fair values of the Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash impairment charges related to our long-lived assets of $152.5 million on 101 theatres in the U.S. markets with 1,139 screens which were related to property, net, operating lease right-of-use assets, net and other long-term assets and $25.4 million on 37 theatres in the International markets with 340 screens which were related to property, net and operating lease right-of-use assets, net. We recorded non-cash impairment charges related to indefinite-lived intangible assets of $12.5 million and $2.7 million related to the Odeon and Nordic trade names, respectively, in the International Theatres reporting unit during the year ended December 31, 2020. We also recorded non-cash impairment charges of $14.4 million related to our definite-lived intangible assets in the Domestic Theatres reporting unit during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded non-cash impairment of long-lived assets of $84.3 million on 40 theatres in the U.S. markets with 512 screens, 14 theatres in the International markets with 148 screens, and a U.S. property held and not used.
(3) Amounts represent preopening expense related to temporarily closed screens under renovation, theatre and other closure expense for the permanent closure of screens including the related accretion of interest, non-cash deferred digital equipment rent expense, and disposition of assets and other non-operating gains or losses included in operating expenses. We have excluded these items as they are non-cash in nature or are non-operating in nature.
(4) Equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities primarily consisted of equity in earnings (loss) from DCIP of $(14.5) million and $25.4 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. In addition, we recorded impairment losses in the International markets during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to equity method investments of $8.6 million in equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities.
(5) Includes U.S. non-theatre distributions from equity method investments and International non-theatre distributions from equity method investments to the extent received. We believe including cash distributions is an appropriate reflection of the contribution of these investments to our operations.
(6) Attributable EBITDA includes the EBITDA from equity investments in theatre operators in certain International markets. See below for a reconciliation of our equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities to attributable EBITDA. Because these equity investments are in theatre operators in regions where we
hold a significant market share, we believe attributable EBITDA is more indicative of the performance of these equity investments and management uses this measure to monitor and evaluate these equity investments. We also provide services to these theatre operators including information technology systems, certain on-screen advertising services and our gift card and package ticket program.
(7) Other expense (income) for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a loss of $109.0 million related to the fair value adjustments of the derivative liability and derivative asset for our Convertible Notes, financing fees related to the Exchange Offer of $39.3 million, and credit losses related to contingent lease guarantees of $15.0 million, partially offset by a gain on extinguishment of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 of $93.6 million and financing related foreign currency transaction losses.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a loss on repayment of indebtedness of $16.6 million and the financing related foreign currency transaction losses, partially offset by a gain of $5.8 million as a result of the decrease in fair value of the derivative liability and asset for our Convertible Notes.
(8) Reflects amortization of certain intangible assets reclassified from depreciation and amortization to rent expense, due to the adoption of ASC 842, and deferred rent benefit related to the impairment of right-of-use operating lease assets.
(9) Merger, acquisition and other costs are excluded as they are non-operating in nature.
(10) Non-cash expense included in general and administrative: other.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure commonly used in our industry and should not be construed as an alternative to net earnings (loss) as an indicator of operating performance (as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP). Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. We have included Adjusted EBITDA because we believe it provides management and investors with additional information to measure our performance and estimate our value.
Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. For example, Adjusted EBITDA:
● does not reflect our capital expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● does not reflect the significant interest expenses, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt;
● excludes income tax payments that represent a reduction in cash available to us; and
● does not reflect any cash requirements for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may have to be replaced in the future.
Segment Information
Our historical results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 reflect the results of operations for our two Theatrical Exhibition reportable segments, U.S. markets and International markets.
Results of Operations-For the Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Results of Operations
Revenues. Total revenues decreased 77.3%, or $4,228.6 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Admissions revenues decreased 78.4%, or $2,589.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a 78.9% decrease in attendance, partially offset by a 2.3% increase in average ticket price. The decrease in attendance was primarily due to the temporary suspension of operations at all our theatres in U.S. markets and International markets on or before March 17, 2020. As of October 1, 2020, we had resumed operations at 467 of our domestic theatres, or approximately 78% of our domestic circuit, after having suspended operations for approximately five months beginning on March 17, 2020. During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, in response to state and local government mandates related to domestic resurgence of COVID-19, many of our 467 reopened U.S. theatres suspended operations. As of December 31, 2020, we were operating at 394 domestic theatres with limited seating capacities, representing approximately 67% of our domestic theatres. Similarly, as of October 1, 2020, we had resumed operations at 321 leased and partnership International theatres, or approximately 90% of our International circuit, after having suspended operations at all International theatres for approximately four months beginning in late February 2020. During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, in response to federal and local government mandates related to a global resurgence of COVID-19, nearly all of our International theatres suspended operations. As of December 31, 2020, we were operating at 109 International leased and partnership theatres, with limited seating capacities, representing approximately 30% of our International theatres. Our average screens operated during the year ended December 31, 2020 declined by 52.7% from the prior year. The increase in average ticket price was primarily due to strategic pricing initiatives put in place over the prior year and lower frequency on our A-List subscription program, partially offset by decreases in attendance for 3D and IMAX premium content.
Food and beverage revenues decreased 78.9%, or $1,357.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in attendance.
Total other theatre revenues decreased 62.7%, or $282.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreases in ticket fees, income from gift cards and package tickets and screen advertising due to the decrease in attendance.
Operating costs and expenses. Operating costs and expenses increased $10.1 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the impairment of long-lived assets, partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses due to the decrease in attendance and a decrease in average screens operated. Film exhibition costs decreased 81.0%, or $1,376.4 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in admissions revenues. As a percentage of admissions revenues, film exhibition costs were 45.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 51.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in film exhibition cost percentage is primarily due to the concentration of box office revenues in lower grossing films in the current year which typically results in lower film exhibition costs and an increase in the number of second-run films exhibited in the current period where the film rental terms are much lower than film rental terms for first-run films.
Food and beverage costs decreased 68.1%, or $189.9 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in food and beverage costs was primarily due to the decrease in food and beverage revenues. As a percentage of food and beverage revenues, food and beverage costs were 24.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 16.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Food and beverage costs included $22.6 million of charges for obsolete inventory during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the suspension of theatre operations.
As a percentage of revenues, operating expense was 68.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 30.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Rent expense decreased 8.6%, or $83.7 million, during the year ended December
31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to cash rent abatements from landlords, declines in deferred rent expense due to the impairment of right-of-use assets in calendar 2019 and 2020, theatre closures, declines in percentage rent due to the declines in revenues and declines in common area maintenance charges. See Note 3-Leases in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information on the impact of COVID-19 on leases and rent obligations of approximately $450.0 million that have been deferred to 2021 and future years as of December 31, 2020.
Merger, acquisition and other costs. Merger, acquisition and other costs were $24.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $15.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in legal and professional costs related to strategic contingent planning.
Other. Other general and administrative expense increased 2.4% or $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in stock based compensation expense as a result of the modification and acceleration of vesting of awards during the current year, partially offset by decreases in bonus expense and decreases in salaries as a result of our furlough program that began in March of 2020 and ended in September of 2020. See Note 9-Stockholders’ Equity in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information about stock based compensation expense.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased 10.7% or $48.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to recent capital expenditures, partially offset by lower depreciation expense on theatres impaired in calendar 2019 and 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets, indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized non-cash impairment losses of $152.5 million on 101 theatres in the U.S. markets with 1,139 screens (in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming) which were related to property, net, operating lease right-of-use assets, net and other long-term assets and $25.4 million on 37 theatres in the International markets with 340 screens (in Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and UK), which were related to property, net and operating lease right-of-use assets, net.
We performed quantitative impairment evaluations of our indefinite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 related to the AMC, Odeon and Nordic trade names and recorded impairment charges of $15.2 million related to the Odeon and Nordic trade names during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we performed quantitative impairment evaluations of our definite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and recorded impairment charges of $14.4 million in U.S. markets.
We performed quantitative impairment evaluations of our goodwill as of March 31, 2020, September 20, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and recorded impairment charges of $1,276.1 million and $1,030.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 for our Domestic Theatres and International Theatres reporting units, respectively.
Other expense (income). Other expense of $28.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to third party expenses of $39.3 million related to the restructuring of our debt, the increase in fair value of our derivative liability for the embedded conversion feature in our Convertible Notes due 2026 of $89.4 million, the decrease in fair value of our derivative asset for the contingent call option related to the Class B common stock purchase and cancellation agreement of $19.6 million, estimated credit losses related to contingent lease guarantees of $15.0 million, partially offset by government assistance related to COVID-19 of $38.6 million and a gain on the extinguishment of our second lien secured debt of $93.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, other expense of $13.4 million was primarily due to $17.7 million of expense related to the decrease in the fair value of our derivative asset for the contingent call option related to the Class B common stock purchase and cancellation agreement, $16.6 million expense related to the repayment of indebtedness and $1.5 million of foreign currency transaction losses offset by $23.5 million of income related to the decrease in the fair value of our derivative liability for the embedded conversion feature in our Convertible Notes due 2026. See Note 1-The Company and Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information about the components of other expense.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased $16.1 million to $356.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $340.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the issuance of $500 million of 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2025 on April 24, 2020, borrowings under revolving credit facilities of approximately $325.0 million during the three months ended March 31, 2020 that remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and the issuance of $300 million of 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 on July 31, 2020, partially offset by a reduction in the effective interest rate on $2,017.5 million aggregate principal amount of our senior subordinated notes exchanged for $1,462.3 million aggregate principal amount of second lien notes from 6.37% to 4.46% on July 31, 2020 and the extinguishment of $104.5 million of Second Lien Notes due 2026 in exchange for common shares. See Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 for additional information about our indebtedness.
Equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities. Equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities were $30.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $(30.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in equity in earnings of $61.5 million was primarily due to decreases in equity in earnings from DCIP of $39.9 million as a result of accelerated depreciation charges for digital projectors during the year ended December 31, 2020 and lower revenues due to the closure of theatres.
Investment (income) expense. Investment expense was $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to investment income of $(16.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Investment expense includes impairment charges of $15.9 million related to investments, partially offset by a payment of $3.7 million under the NCM tax receivable agreement during the year ended December 31, 2020. Investment income includes a gain on the sale of our Austria theatres of $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and a payment of $4.3 million under the NCM tax receivable agreement for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax provision. The income tax provision (benefit) was $59.9 million and $(22.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase in income tax expense is primarily due to the recording of international valuation allowances against deferred tax assets held in Spain of $40.1 million and Germany of $33.1 million, partially offset by income tax benefit from net losses incurred in International markets during the year ended December 31, 2020 that are projected to offset previously unabsorbed deferred tax liabilities in International markets. See Note 10-Income Taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
Net loss. Net loss was $4,589.4 million and $149.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Net loss during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was negatively impacted by the decrease in attendance as a result of the temporary suspension of operations at all our theatres on or before March 17, 2020, impairment charges related to long-lived assets, definite and indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill, increased depreciation expense, declines in investment income, declines in equity in earnings of non-consolidated entities, increases in income tax provision, increases in other expense and increases in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by reduced operating expenses and lower amounts of rent expense.
Theatrical Exhibition-U.S. Markets
Revenues. Total revenues decreased 79.5%, or $3,196.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Admissions revenues decreased 80.9%, or $1,932.7 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a 81.4% decrease in attendance, partially offset by a 2.8% increase in average ticket price. The decrease in attendance was primarily due to the temporary suspension of operations at all our theatres in U.S. markets on or before March 17, 2020. As of October 1, 2020, we had resumed operations at 467 of our domestic theatres, or approximately 78% of our domestic circuit, after having suspended operations for approximately five months beginning on March 17, 2020. During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, in response to state and local government mandates related to domestic resurgence of COVID-19, many of our 467 reopened U.S. theatres suspended operations. As of December 31, 2020, we were operating at 394 domestic theatres with limited seating capacities, representing approximately 67% of our domestic theatres. Our average screens operated during the year ended December 31, 2020 declined by 53.6% from the prior year. The increase in average ticket price was primarily due to strategic pricing initiatives put in place over the prior year and lower frequency on our A-List subscription program, partially offset by decreases in attendance for 3D and IMAX premium content.
Food and beverage revenues decreased 80.8%, or $1,089.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in attendance.
Total other theatre revenues decreased 60.7%, or $174.3 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreases in ticket fees, income from gift cards and package tickets and screen advertising due to the decrease in attendance.
Operating costs and expenses. Operating costs and expenses decreased $491.7 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the impairment of long-lived assets, definite lived intangible assets and goodwill, partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses due to the decrease in attendance and a decrease in average screens operated. Film exhibition costs decreased 83.0%, or $1,088.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in admissions revenues. As a percentage of admissions revenues, film exhibition costs were 49.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 54.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in film exhibition cost percentage is primarily due to the concentration of box office revenues in lower grossing films in the current year which typically results in lower film exhibition costs and an increase in the number of second-run films exhibited in the current period where the film rental terms are much lower than film rental terms for first-run films.
Food and beverage costs decreased 69.5%, or $134.7 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in food and beverage costs was primarily due to the decrease in food and beverage revenues. As a percentage of food and beverage revenues, food and beverage costs were 22.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 14.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Food and beverage costs included $17.5 million of charges for obsolete inventory during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the suspension of theatre operations.
As a percentage of revenues, operating expense was 71.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 30.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Rent expense decreased 8.1%, or $57.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to cash rent abatements from landlords, declines in deferred rent expense due to the impairment of right of use assets in calendar 2019 and 2020, theatre closures, declines in percentage rentals due to the decline in revenues and declines in common area maintenance charges. See Note 3-Leases to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information on the impact of COVID-19 on leases and rent obligations of approximately $356.7 million that have been deferred to 2021 and future years as of December 31, 2020.
Merger, acquisition and other costs. Merger, acquisition and other costs were $10.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in legal and professional costs related to strategic contingent planning.
Other. Other general and administrative expense increased 13.2% or $11.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in stock based compensation expense as a result of the modification and acceleration of vesting of awards during the current year, partially offset by decreases in bonus expense and decreases in salaries as a result of our furlough program that began in March of 2020 and ended in September of 2020. See Note 9-Stockholders’ Equity in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information about stock based compensation expense.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased 10.0% or $34.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to recent capital expenditures, partially offset by lower depreciation expense on theatres impaired in calendar 2019 and 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets and goodwill. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized non-cash impairment losses of $152.5 million on 101 theatres in the U.S. markets with 1,139 screens (in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming) which were related to property, net, operating lease right-of-use assets, net and other long-term assets.
We performed quantitative impairment evaluations of our definite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and recorded impairment charges of $14.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We performed quantitative impairment evaluations of our goodwill as of March 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and recorded impairment charges of $1,276.1 million for our Domestic Theatres reporting unit.
Other expense. Other expense of $61.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to third party expenses of $39.3 million related to the restructuring of our debt, the increase in fair value of our derivative liability for the embedded conversion feature in our Convertible Notes due 2026 of $89.4 million, the decrease in fair value of our derivative asset for the contingent call option related to the Class B common stock purchase and cancellation agreement of $19.6 million, estimated credit losses related to contingent lease guarantees of $9.2 million, partially offset by government assistance related to COVID-19 of $1.8 million and a gain on the extinguishment of our second lien secured debt of $93.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, other expense of $13.3 million was primarily due to $17.7 million of expense related to the decrease in the fair value our derivative asset for the contingent call option related to the Class B common stock purchase and cancellation agreement, $16.6 million expense related to the repayment of indebtedness and $0.9 million of foreign currency transaction losses offset by $23.5 million of income related to the decrease in the fair value of our derivative liability for the embedded conversion feature in our Convertible Notes due 2026. See Note 1-The Company and Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information about the components of other expense.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased $14.6 million to $347.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $332.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the issuance of $500 million of 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2025 on April 24, 2020, borrowings under revolving credit facilities of approximately $325.0 million during the three months ended March 31, 2020 that remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and the issuance of $300 million of 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 on July 31, 2020, partially offset by a reduction in the effective interest rate on $2,017.5 million aggregate principal amount of our senior subordinated notes exchanged for $1,462.3 million aggregate principal amount of second lien notes from 6.37% to 4.46% on July 31, 2020 and the extinguishment of $104.5 million of Second Lien Notes due 2026 in exchange for common shares. See Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information about our indebtedness.
Equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities. Equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities were $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $(29.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in equity in earnings of $46.7 million was primarily due to decreases in equity in earnings from DCIP of $39.9 million as a result of accelerated depreciation charges for digital projectors during the year ended December 31, 2020 and lower revenues due to the closure of theatres.
Investment expense (income). Investment expense was $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to investment income of $(3.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Investment expense includes impairment charges of $15.9 million related to investments, partially offset by a payment of $3.7 million under the NCM tax receivable agreement during the year ended December 31, 2020. Investment income includes a payment of $4.3 million under the NCM tax receivable agreement for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax provision. The income tax provision was $2.4 million and $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. See Note 10-Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
Net loss. Net loss was $3,059.2 million and $241.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Net loss during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was negatively impacted by the decrease in attendance as a result of the temporary suspension of operations at all our theatres on or before March 17, 2020, impairment charges related to long-lived assets, definite-lived intangible assets and goodwill, increased depreciation expense, declines in investment income, declines in equity in earnings of non-consolidated entities, increases in other expense and increases in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by reduced operating expenses, lower amounts of rent expense and a decrease in income tax provision.
Theatrical Exhibition - International Markets
Revenues. Total revenues decreased 71.3%, or $1,032.1 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Admissions revenues decreased 71.9%, or $656.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a 72.9% decrease in attendance offset by a 3.7% increase in average ticket price. The decrease in attendance was primarily due to the temporary suspension of operations at all our theatres in International markets on or before March 17, 2020. As of October 1, 2020, we had resumed operations at 321 leased and partnership International theatres, or approximately 90% of our International circuit, after having suspended operations at all International theatres for approximately four months beginning in late February 2020. During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, in response to federal and local government mandates related to a global resurgence of COVID-19, nearly all of our International theatres suspended operations. As of December 31, 2020, we were operating at 109 International leased and partnership theatres, with limited seating capacities, representing approximately 30% of our International theatres. Our average screens operated during the year ended December 31, 2020 declined by 50.0% from the prior year.
Food and beverage revenues decreased 72.0%, or $267.7 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in attendance.
Total other theatre revenues decreased 66.2%, or $107.9 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreases in ticket fees, income from gift cards and package tickets and screen advertising due to the decrease in attendance.
Operating costs and expenses. Operating costs and expenses increased $501.8 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the impairment of long-lived assets, indefinite lived intangible assets and goodwill, partially offset by a decrease in operating costs due to the decrease in attendance and a decrease in average screens operated. Film exhibition costs decreased 74.3%, or $287.9 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in admissions revenues. As a percentage of admissions revenues, film exhibition costs were 38.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 42.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in film exhibition cost percentage is primarily due to the concentration of box office revenues in lower grossing films in the current year which typically results in lower film exhibition costs and an increase in the number of second-run films exhibited in the current period where the film rental terms are much lower than film rental terms for first-run films.
Food and beverage costs decreased 65.0%, or $55.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in food and beverage costs was primarily due to the decrease in food and beverage revenues. As a percentage of food and beverage revenues, food and beverage costs were 28.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 22.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Food and beverage costs included $5.1 million of charges for obsolete inventory during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the suspension of theatre operations.
As a percentage of revenues, operating expense was 64.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 32.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Rent expense decreased 10.1%, or $26.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to cash rent abatements from landlords, declines in deferred rent expense due to the impairment of right of use assets in calendar 2019 and 2020, theatre closures, declines in percentage rentals due to the decline in revenues and declines in common area maintenance charges. See Note 3-Leases to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information on the impact of COVID-19 on leases and rent obligations of approximately $93.3 million that have been deferred to 2021 and future years as of December 31, 2020.
Merger, acquisition and other costs. Merger, acquisition and other costs were $14.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in legal and professional costs related to strategic contingent planning.
Other. Other general and administrative expense decreased 11.6% or $7.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreases in bonus expense and decreases in salaries as a result of our furlough program that began in March of 2020 and ended in September of 2020 partially offset by higher costs for abandoned projects.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased 13.0% or $14.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to recent capital expenditures, partially offset by lower depreciation expense on theatres impaired in calendar 2019 and 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets, indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized non-cash impairment losses of $25.4 million on 37 theatres in the International markets with 340 screens (in Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and UK), which were related to property, net, and operating lease right-of-use assets, net.
We performed quantitative impairment evaluations of our indefinite-lived intangible assets related to the Odeon and Nordic trade names as of March 31, 2012, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and recorded impairment charges of $15.2 million related to these assets during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We performed a quantitative impairment evaluation of our goodwill as of March 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and recorded impairment charges of $1,030.3 million for our International Theatres reporting unit during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other expense (income). Other income of $32.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the international government assistance related to COVID-19 of $36.8 million, partially offset by estimated credit losses related to contingent lease guarantees of $5.8 million. See Note 1-The Company and Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information about the components of other expense.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased $1.5 million to $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to borrowings under revolving credit facilities of approximately $110 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 that remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Equity in (earnings) loss of non-consolidated entities. Equity in loss of non-consolidated entities were $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to earnings of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment charges of $8.6 million related to two international joint ventures.
Investment income. Investment income was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to investment income of $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Investment income includes a gain on the sale of our Austria theatres of $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax provision (benefit). The income tax provision (benefit) was $57.5 million and $(34.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase in income tax provision is primarily due to the recording of international valuation allowances against deferred tax assets held in Spain of $40.1 million and Germany of $33.1 million, partially offset by income tax benefit from net losses incurred in International markets during the year ended December 31, 2020 that are projected to offset previously unabsorbed deferred tax liabilities in International markets. See Note 10-Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
Net earnings (loss). Net earnings (loss) was $(1,530.2) million and $92.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Net loss during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 was negatively impacted by the decrease in attendance as a result of the temporary suspension of operations at all our theatres on or before March 17, 2020,impairment charges related to long-lived assets, indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill increased depreciation expense, increased income tax provision, declines in investment income, increases in general and administrative expenses and declines in equity in earnings of non-consolidated entities, partially offset by reduced operating expenses, lower amounts of rent expense, and increases in other income.
Results of Operations-For the Year Ended December 31, 2019, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 28, 2020, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Liquidity and Capital Resources-For the Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our consolidated revenues are primarily collected in cash, principally through box office admissions and food and beverage sales. Prior to the impact of COVID-19 on our business, we had an operating “float” which partially financed our operations and which generally permitted us to maintain a smaller amount of working capital capacity. This float existed because admissions revenues are received in cash, while exhibition costs (primarily film rentals) are ordinarily paid to distributors from 20 to 45 days following receipt of box office admissions revenues. Film distributors generally release the films which they anticipate will be the most successful during the summer and year-end holiday seasons. Consequently, we typically generate higher revenues during such periods.
We had working capital deficits (excluding restricted cash) as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 of $1,104.6 million and $1,270.6 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, working capital included $583.6 million and $585.8 million, respectively of operating lease liabilities and $405.4 million and $449.2 million, respectively, of deferred revenues. We have borrowed all available amounts under our Revolving Credit Facility to meet obligations as they come due. As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowed $212.2 million (the full availability net of standby letters of credit) under our $225.0 million Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility. We also maintain a revolving credit facility due February 14, 2022 at our Odeon subsidiary (the “Odeon Revolver”). This facility was replaced on February 15, 2021 by the Odeon Term Loan Facility. Reference is made to Note 17-Subsequent Events in the Notes to the Consolidated Statements under Part II. Item 8, thereof for further information about the Odeon Term Loan Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowed $120.8 million (the full availability net of standby letters of credit) under our £100.0 million Odeon Revolver ($136.3 million based on the foreign currency translation rate of 1.3628 on December 31, 2020). As of December 31, 2019, we had $215.0 million available for borrowing, net of standby letters of credit, under our Revolving Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2019, we had issued £10.8 million ($14.2 million) standby letters of credit in the ordinary course of business related to our Odeon Revolver, leaving £89.2 million ($117.0 million) available for borrowing (subject to limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness in our various debt instruments). Reference is made to Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8, thereof for further information about our outstanding indebtedness.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have adjusted certain elements of our business strategy and have taken and continue to take significant steps to preserve cash by eliminating non-essential costs, including reductions to our variable costs and elements of our fixed cost structure, including, but not limited to:
● Suspended non-essential operating expenditures, including marketing & promotional and travel and entertainment expenses; and where possible, utilities and reduced essential operating expenditures to minimum levels necessary while theatres are closed;
● Terminated or deferred all non-essential capital expenditures to minimum levels necessary while theatres are operating for limited hours or closed;
● Implemented measures to reduce corporate-level employment costs while closed, including full or partial furloughs of all corporate-level Company employees for a period of time, including senior executives, with individual work load and salary reductions ranging from 20% to 100%; cancellation of pending annual merit pay increases; and elimination or reduction of non-healthcare benefits. With the resumption of operations, we eliminated the full and partial furloughs;
● All domestic theatre-level crew members were fully furloughed and theatre-level managements’ hours were reduced to the minimum levels necessary to begin resumption of operations when permitted. Similar efforts to reduce theatre-level and corporate employment costs were undertaken internationally consistent with applicable laws across the jurisdictions in which the Company operates. As the Company resumed limited operations, employment costs increased;
● Working with the Company’s landlords, vendors, and other business partners to manage, defer, and/or abate the related rent expenses and operating expenses;
● Introduced an active cash management process, which, among other things, requires senior management approval of all outgoing payments;
● Since April 24, 2020, we have been prohibited from making dividend payments in accordance with the covenant suspension conditions in our Senior Secured Credit Facility Agreement. We had also previously elected to decrease the dividend paid in the first quarter of 2020 by $0.17 per share when compared to the first quarter of 2019. The cash savings as a result of the prior decrease and current prohibition on making dividend payments was $77.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019; and
● We are prohibited from making purchases under our stock repurchase program in accordance with the covenant suspension conditions in our Senior Secured Credit Facility Agreement.
We intend to seek any available potential benefits, including loans, investments or guarantees, under future government programs for which we qualify domestically and internationally. We have taken advantage of many forms of governmental assistance in the U.S. and internationally including but not limited to revenue and fixed cost reimbursements, payroll subsidies, rent support programs, direct grants, and property tax holidays. We cannot predict the manner in which such benefits will be allocated or administered, and we cannot assure that it will be able to access such benefits in a timely manner or at all.
In addition to preserving cash, we enhanced liquidity through debt issuances, debt exchanges and equity sales as follows. See Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations, Note 9-Stockholders’ Equity, and Note 17-Subsequent Events of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
● The April 2020 issuance of $500 million of First Lien Notes due 2025.
● The July 2020 completion of a debt exchange offer in which we issued approximately $1.46 billion aggregate principal amount of Second Lien Notes due 2026 in exchange for approximately $2.02 billion principal amount of our senior subordinated notes, reducing the principal amounts of our debt by approximately $555 million and extending maturities on approximately $1.7 billion of debt to 2026, most of which was maturing in 2024 and 2025 previously. Interest on the Second Lien Notes due 2026 for the first three six-month interest periods after the issue date is expected to be paid all or in part on an in-kind basis pursuant to the terms of the Second Lien Notes due 2026.
● The July 2020 issuance of the First Lien Notes due 2026 in which we received proceeds of $270.0 million, net of discounts and deferred charges.
● The launch of several “at-the-market” equity offerings to raise capital through the sale of our Class A common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 91.0 million shares, generating $272.8 million in gross proceeds and paid fees to sales agents of $6.8 million. In January 2021, we sold approximately 187.0 million shares, generating $596.9 million in gross proceeds and paid fees to sales agents of $14.9 million.
● The December 2020 issuance of 21,978,022 shares of Class A common stock to Mudrick Capital Management, LP (“Mudrick”) in exchange for $104.5 million aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 and a commitment from Mudrick to purchase $100 million aggregate principal amount of 15%/17%/Cash/PIK Toggle First Lien Secured Notes due 2026 (“First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026”) which the Company issued to Mudrick in January 2021 for cash.
● The January 2021 conversion by holders of all $600 million of the Company’s 2.95% Convertible Senior Secured Notes due 2026 into shares of our Class A common stock at a conversion price of $13.51 which resulted in the issuance of 44,422,860 shares of our Class A Common Stock and reduced annual cash interest expense by $17.7 million.
● The February 2021 entry into a new £140.0 million and €296.0 million term loan facility agreement (the “Odeon Term Loan Facility”) by Odeon Cinemas Group Limited (“Odeon”). Approximately £89.7.0 million and €12.8 million of the net proceeds from the Odeon Term Loan Facility was used to repay in full Odeon’s obligations (including principal, interest, fees and cash collateralized letters of credit) under its existing revolving credit facility and the remaining net proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes.
If attendance levels increase consistent with our assumptions described below, we currently estimate that our existing cash and cash equivalents, net proceeds from the completed issuances of debt and common stock in January 2021 and borrowings under the Odeon Term Loan Facility in February 2021 will be sufficient to comply with minimum liquidity requirements under our debt covenants, fund operations, and satisfy obligations including cash outflows for increased rent and planned capital expenditures currently and through at least March 31, 2022. This requires that we achieve significant increases in attendance levels beginning in the third quarter of 2021 and ultimately reaching 90% of pre COVID-19 attendance levels by the fourth quarter of 2021 and through the first quarter of 2022 as the vaccine rollout continues and more Hollywood product is released in our theatres. We entered into the Ninth Amendment (as defined below) to the Credit Agreement (as defined below), pursuant to which the requisite revolving lenders party thereto agreed to extend the suspension period for the financial covenant applicable to the Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below) from March 31, 2021 to March 31, 2022, as described, and on the terms and conditions specified, therein. As a result, we will be subject to the financial covenant beginning with the quarter ending June 30, 2022. We are subject to minimum liquidity requirements of approximately $145 million of which $100 million is required under the conditions for the Extended Covenant Suspension Period under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility during the Extended Covenant Suspension Period, as amended, and £32.5 million (approximately $45 million) required under the Odeon Term Loan Facility. Our liquidity needs thereafter will depend, among other things, on the timing of a full resumption of operations, the timing of movie releases and our ability to generate cash from operations.
We continue to explore potential sources of additional liquidity, which is essential to our long-term viability, including:
● Additional equity financing. We may continue to pursue equity issuances that include our remaining authorized shares. The amount of liquidity we might generate will primarily depend on the market price of our Class A common stock, trading volumes, which impact the number of shares we are able to sell, and the available periods during which sales may be made. Because our market price and trading volumes are volatile, there is no guarantee as to the amounts of liquidity we might generate or that our prior experience accurately predicts the results we will achieve.
● Landlord Negotiations. Commencing in 2021, our cash expenditures for rent are scheduled to increase significantly as a result of rent obligations that had been deferred to 2021 and future years that were approximately $450.0 million as of December 31, 2020. In light of our liquidity challenges, and in order to establish our long-term viability, we believe the Company must continue to reach accommodations with its landlords to abate or defer a substantial portion of the Company’s rent obligations, in addition to generating sufficient amounts of liquidity through equity issuances and the other potential financing arrangements discussed below. Accordingly, the Company has entered into additional landlord negotiations to seek material reductions, abatements and deferrals in our rent obligations. In connection with these negotiations, we have ceased to make rent payments under a portion of our leases and have received notices of default, the result of which may permit landlords to threaten or seek a variety of remedies. We continue to renegotiate leases with landlords to attain additional concessions and address any instances of default. To the extent we achieve substantial deferrals but not abatements, our cash requirements will increase substantially in the future.
● Other Creditor Discussions. While the liquidity we have raised has substantially extended our liquidity runway, the new debt we have issued or that has been committed, together with the higher interest rate payments that will be required in the future but have largely been deferred, will substantially increase our leverage and future cash requirements. These future cash requirements, like our deferred rent obligations, will present a challenge to our long-term viability if our operating income does not return to pre-COVID levels. Even then, we believe we will need to engage in discussions with our creditors to substantially reduce our leverage. We expect to continue to explore alternatives that include new-money financing, potentially in connection with converting debt to equity, which would help manage our leverage but would be dilutive to holders of our common stock. We expect we will continue to receive from and discuss proposals with all classes of creditors. These discussions may not result in any agreement on commercially acceptable terms.
● Covenant Suspension. We entered into the Ninth Amendment to the Credit Agreement, pursuant to which the requisite revolving lenders party thereto agreed to extend the suspension period for the financial covenant applicable to the Revolving Credit Facility from March 31, 2021 to March 31, 2022, as described, and on the terms and conditions specified, therein. See Note 17-Subsequent Events of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
● Joint-venture or other arrangements with existing business partners and minority investments in our capital stock. We continue to explore other potential arrangements, including equity investments, to generate additional liquidity.
It is very difficult to estimate our liquidity requirements, future cash burn rates and future attendance levels. Depending on our assumptions regarding the timing and ability to achieve more normalized levels of operating revenue, the estimates of amounts of required liquidity vary significantly. Similarly, it is very difficult to predict when theatre attendance levels will normalize, which we expect will depend on the widespread availability and use of effective vaccines for the coronavirus. However, our current cash burn rates are not sustainable. Further, we cannot predict what future changes may occur to the supply or release date of movie titles available for theatrical exhibition once moviegoers are prepared to return in large numbers. Nor can we know with certainty the impact of Warner Bros.’s announcement that it is releasing its entire 2021 slate of movies on HBO Max at the same time as the movies debut in theatres or any similar announcements regarding the release of movie titles concurrently to the home video or streaming markets, as those arrangements will be subject to negotiations that have not yet taken place. We estimated future attendance levels and other assumptions to predict our liquidity requirements and future cash burn but our ability to accurately predict our liquidity and cash burn is uncertain due to the unknown magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, there can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in generating the additional liquidity necessary to meet its obligations beyond twelve months from the issuance of these financial statements on terms acceptable to the Company or at all. If the Company is unable to maintain or renegotiate its minimum liquidity covenant requirements, it could have a significant adverse effect on the Company’s business, financial condition and operating results.
We also realized significant cancellation of debt income (“CODI”) in connection with our debt restructuring. As a result of such CODI, we estimate a significant portion of our net operating losses will be eliminated as a result of tax attribute reductions. Any loss of tax attributes as a result of such CODI may adversely affect our cash flows and therefore our ability to service our indebtedness.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, were $(1,129.5) million and $579.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities was primarily due to decreased attendance levels and temporary suspension of operations at all of our theatres on or before March 17, 2020, which resulted in lower operating results during the year ended December 31,2020 and higher payments for accounts payable primarily due to timing.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, were $154.6 million and $516.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Cash outflows from investing activities for capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $173.8 million and $518.1 million, respectively. In 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we significantly reduced capital expenditures to maintenance levels and with the exception of prior commitments, have temporarily suspended growth capital expenditures at this time. In 2019, our capital expenditures primarily consisted of strategic growth initiatives and remodels, maintaining our theatre circuit, and technology upgrades.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flows used in investing activities included proceeds from the disposition of assets of $28.5 million, primarily related to ten properties and other asset sales of $19.8 million and the sale of our remaining interest in one of the Baltic theatres located in Latvia of $6.2 million, and the cash outflow for an additional investment in Saudi Cinema Company LLC (“SCC”) of $9.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash flows used in investing activities included cash outflows of $11.8 million for the acquisition of assets related to four theatres in the U.S. markets, partially offset by proceeds from the disposition of long-term assets of $23.2 million, primarily from the sale of theatres located in Austria of $15.3 million.
We fund the costs of constructing, maintaining and remodeling our theatres through existing cash balances, cash generated from operations, landlord contributions, or borrowed funds, as necessary. We generally lease our theatres pursuant to long-term, non-cancelable operating leases which may require the developer, who owns the property, to
reimburse us for the construction costs. We may decide to own the real estate assets of new theatres and following construction, sell and leaseback the real estate assets pursuant to long-term non-cancelable operating leases. In addition, we estimate that our cash outflows for capital expenditures, net of landlord contributions, will be approximately $100 to $120 million for the year ending December 31, 2021 to maintain operations.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, were $1,330.3 million and $(112.9) million, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase in cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the issuance of our First Lien Notes due 2025, First Lien Notes due 2026, borrowings under our revolving credit facilities, proceeds from the sale of Class A common stock, proceeds from sale of the noncontrolling interest in Forum Cinemas OU and the reduction in cash dividends paid.
Borrowings, net of discounts, under our First Lien Notes due 2025, First Lien Notes due 2026, and revolving credit facilities were $490.0 million, $270.0 million, and $321.8 million, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020. Proceeds from the sale of Class A common stock were $264.7 million.
On August 28, 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell our equity interest in Forum Cinemas OU, which consists of nine theatres located in the Baltic’s region (Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia) in several steps. For further information, see Note 1-The Company and Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof. We received $37.0 million cash consideration, net of transaction costs, and transferred an equity interest of 49% in Forum Cinemas OU to the purchaser during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We and our subsidiaries may from time to time seek to retire or repurchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, by tender offer or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Senior Secured Credit Facility Term Loan due 2026. On April 22, 2019, we entered into the Sixth Amendment to Credit Agreement amending the Credit Agreement dated April 30, 2013. After giving effect to the Sixth Amendment, the Credit Agreement provides for senior secured financing of $2,225.0 million in aggregate, consisting of (1) $2,000.0 million in aggregate principal amount of senior secured tranche B loans maturing April 22, 2026 (the “Term Loan Facility”) and (2) a $225.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (which includes borrowing capacity available for letters of credit) maturing April 22, 2024 (the “Revolving Credit Facility” and, together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Credit Facilities”). The loans were used for the repayment of the Term Loan due 2022 of $849.8 million, repayment of the Term Loan due 2023 of $488.7 million, the redemption of the 5.875% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2022 of $375.0 million, and the redemption of the 6.0% Senior Secured Notes due 2023 of $230.0 million. Call premiums paid related to the repayment of the 6.0% Senior Secured Notes due 2023 and the 5.875% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2022 were $15.9 million and debt financing costs paid were $11.7 million.
Borrowings under the Term Loan Facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, either (1) an applicable margin plus a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (a) 0.50% per annum plus the Federal Funds Effective Rate, (b) the prime rate of Citi and (c) LIBOR determined by reference to the cost of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for an interest period of one month adjusted for certain additional costs, plus 1.00% or (2) an applicable margin plus LIBOR determined by reference to the costs of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing adjusted for certain additional costs.
We had no borrowing capacity available under our Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility or under the Odeon Revolver as of December 31, 2020. On February 15, 2021, Odeon entered into a new £140.0 million and €296.0 million term loan facility agreement (the “Odeon Term Loan Facility”). Approximately £89.7 million and €12.8 million of the net proceeds from the Odeon Term Loan Facility were used to repay in full Odeon’s obligations (including principal, interest, fees and cash collateralized letters of credit) under its existing revolving credit facility and the remaining net proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes. See Note 17-Subsequent Events of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for additional information.
Dividends. The following is a summary of dividends and dividend equivalents declared to stockholders:
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $6.5 million and $84.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we accrued $0.6 million for the remaining unpaid dividends.
Odeon Revolving Credit Facility. On April 24, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Odeon Revolving Credit Facility, pursuant to which the requisite lenders thereunder granted a waiver of the maintenance covenant thereunder for the period from and after the effective date of the Odeon Amendment to and including the earlier of (a) March 31, 2021 and (b) the day immediately preceding the last day of the Relevant Period (as defined in the Odeon Amendment).
First Lien Notes due 2025. On April 24, 2020, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2025, with an original issue discount of $10.0 million. The First Lien Notes due 2025 bear interest at a rate of 10.5% per annum, payable semi-annually on April 15 and October 15 each year, commencing October 15, 2020 and are secured, on a pari passu basis with the Senior Secured Credit Facility. The First Lien Notes due 2025 will mature on April 15, 2025.
Senior Subordinated Debt Exchange Offers. On July 31, 2020, we closed our previously announced private offers to exchange (the “Exchange Offers”) any and all of our outstanding 6.375% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2024, 5.75% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2025, 5.875% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2026 and 6.125% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2027 (together the “Existing Subordinated Notes”) for approximately $1.46 billion in aggregate principal amount of newly issued 10%/12% Cash/PIK Toggle Second Lien Subordinated Secured Notes due 2026.
The aggregate principal amounts of the Existing Subordinated Notes set forth in the table below were validly tendered and subsequently accepted. Such accepted Existing Subordinated Notes were retired and cancelled.
The Exchange Offers reduced the principal amounts of our debt by approximately $555 million, which represented approximately 23.9% of the principal amount of the Existing Subordinated Notes. We raised $300 million in additional cash from the issuance of the incremental First Lien Notes due 2026, prior to deducting $36 million related to discounts and deferred financing costs paid to the lenders. Additionally, certain holders of the Existing Subordinated Notes that agreed to backstop the rights offering for $200 million of the First Lien Notes due 2026 received five million Class A common shares. The closing of the Exchange Offers also allowed us to extend maturities on approximately $1.7 billion of debt to 2026, most of which was maturing in 2024 and 2025 previously. Interest due for 12 to 18 months after issuance on the Second Lien Notes due 2026 is expected to be paid all or in part on an in-kind basis, thereby generating a further near-term cash savings for us of between approximately $120 million and $180 million.
In connection with the Exchange Offers, we also received consents from eligible holders of the Existing Subordinated Notes to amend the indentures governing the Existing Subordinated Notes to among other things, (i) release the existing subsidiary guarantees of the Existing Subordinated Notes, (ii) eliminate substantially all of the restrictive covenants, certain affirmative covenants and certain events of default contained in the indentures governing
the Existing Subordinated Notes, and (iii) make other conforming changes to internally conform to certain proposed amendments.
We performed an assessment on a lender by lender basis to identify certain lenders that met the criteria for a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) under ASC 470-60, Troubled Debt Restructurings by Debtors (“ASC 470-60”) as we were experiencing financial difficulties and the lenders granted us a concession. The portion of the loans that did not meet the assessment of TDR under ASC 470-60 were treated as modifications. We accounted for the exchange of approximately $1,782.5 million principal amount of our Existing Senior Subordinated Notes for approximately $1,289.1 million principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 as TDR. We accounted for the exchange of the remaining approximately $235.0 million principal amount of our Existing Senior Subordinated Notes for approximately $173.2 million principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 as a modification of debt as the lenders did not grant a concession and the difference between the present value of the old and new cash flows was less than 10%. The TDR and modification did not result in a gain recognition and we established new effective interest rates based on the carrying value of the Existing Subordinated Notes and recorded the new fees paid to third parties of approximately $39.3 million in other expense, during both the year ended December 31, 2020.
Convertible Notes. On April 24, 2020, we entered into a supplemental indenture (the “Supplemental Indenture”) to the Convertible Notes due 2024 indenture, dated as of September 14, 2018. The Supplemental Indenture amended the debt covenant under the Convertible Notes due 2024 Indenture to permit us to issue the First Lien Notes due 2025, among other changes.
Concurrently with the Exchange Offers, to obtain the consent of the holders of the Convertible Notes due 2024, we restructured $600 million of Convertible Notes due 2024 issued in 2018 to Silver Lake and others pursuant to which the maturity of the Convertible Notes due 2024 were extended to May 1, 2026 (the “Convertible Notes due 2026”) and a first-priority lien on the collateral securing our Credit Facilities was granted to secure indebtedness thereunder. We accounted for this transaction as a modification of debt as the lenders did not grant a concession and the difference between the present value of the old and new cash flows was less than 10%. The modification did not result in the recognition of any gain or loss and the Company established new effective interest rates based on the carrying value of the Convertible Notes due 2024. Third party costs related to the transaction were expensed as incurred and amounts paid to lenders were capitalized and amortized through maturity of the debt. See Note 17-Subsequent Events of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof regarding the election to convert all $600.0 million of the Convertible Notes due 2026 into shares of the Company’s Class A common stock.
Second Lien Notes due 2026. In connection with the Exchange Offers on July 31, 2020, we issued $1,462.3 million aggregate principal amount of the new Second Lien Notes due 2026 in exchange for the Existing Subordinated Notes. We have reflected a premium of $535.1 million on the Second Lien Notes due 2026 as the difference between the principal balance of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 and the $1,997.4 million carrying value of the Existing Subordinated Notes exchanged. The premium will be amortized to interest expense over the term of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 using the effective interest method.
In connection with the Exchange Offers and the First Lien Notes due 2026, we issued five million shares of Class A common stock to certain holders of subordinated notes as consideration for their commitment to backstop the issuance of $200 million of the First Lien Notes due 2026. Pursuant to the Backstop Commitment Agreement dated July 10, 2020, certain of the actual or beneficial holders of Existing Subordinated Notes agreed to purchase 100% of the First Lien Notes due 2026 that were not subscribed for in connection with the $200 million rights offering to holders of the existing Subordinated Notes participating in the Exchange Offers. Those providing a backstop commitment pursuant to the Backstop Commitment Agreement received their pro-rata share of 5 million shares of the Class A common stock, or 4.6% of AMC’s outstanding shares as of July 31, 2020, worth $20.2 million at the market closing price on July 31, 2020. The equity issuance was recorded by us in stockholders’ deficit with an offset in corporate borrowings as a discount. The discount will be amortized to interest expense over the term of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 using the effective interest method. As part of the registration rights agreement related to the issuance of the Class A common stock, we filed a shelf registration statement in August 2020 providing for the resale of the shares of Class A common stock issued as consideration for the backstop commitment described above.
First Lien Notes due 2026. In connection with the Exchange Offers, certain holders of the Existing Subordinated Notes purchased 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 in an aggregate principal amount of $200 million. The 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 issued to certain holders of the Existing Subordinated Notes were issued pursuant to an
indenture, dated as of July 31, 2020, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and GLAS Trust Company LLC, as trustee and collateral agent.
Separately, upon the closing of its private debt exchange, Silver Lake Alpine, L.P. and Silver Lake Alpine (Offshore Master), L.P., each affiliates of Silver Lake Group, L.L.C. (“Silver Lake”), purchased from us $100 million principal amount of First Lien Notes due 2026. The 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 issued to affiliates of Silver Lake were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of July 31, 2020, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee and collateral agent. The terms of the 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 issued to the holders of the Existing Subordinated Notes and the 10.5% First Lien Notes due 2026 issued to Silver Lake are substantially identical. The $300 million principal amount of new funding is prior to deducting discounts of $30.0 million and deferred financing costs paid to lenders of $6.0 million related to the First Lien Notes due 2026. The discount and deferred financing costs will be amortized to interest expense over the term using the effective interest method.
Mudrick Transaction. On December 10, 2020, the Company entered into a commitment letter with Mudrick Capital Management, LP (“Mudrick”), pursuant to which Mudrick committed, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent, including the payment of the Commitment Shares (as defined below) and consummation of the Second Lien Exchange (as defined below), to purchase $100 million in aggregate principal amount of First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 to be issued by the Company.
On December 14, 2020, the Company issued a total of 21,978,022 shares of its Class A common stock to Mudrick; 8,241,758 shares (“Commitment Shares”) of which were issued as consideration for a commitment provided by Mudrick to purchase the First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 and 13,736,264 shares (“Exchange Shares”) were issued as consideration received for the Second Lien Exchange. Mudrick exchanged $100 million aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 that were held by Mudrick for the Exchange Shares (the “Second Lien Exchange”) and waived its right to PIK interest of $4.5 million principal amount. The fair value of 21,978,022 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock was $70.1 million based on the market closing price of $3.19 per share on December 14, 2020. The Class A common shares issued were recorded in stockholders’ deficit with an offset in corporate borrowings as a discount of $26.3 million for the Commitment Shares and as consideration of $43.8 million for the Second Lien Exchange. The discount will be amortized to interest expense over the term of the First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 using the effective interest method. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of the Second Lien Notes due 2026 of $93.6 million based on the fair value of the Exchange Shares of $43.8 million and the carrying value of the $104.5 million principal amount of the Second Lien Notes exchanged of $137.4 million.
First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026. On January 15, 2021, the Company issued $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of its First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 as contemplated by the commitment letter with Mudrick Capital Management, LP described above. The First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 were issued pursuant to an indenture dated as of January 15, 2021 among the Company, the guarantors named therein and the U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee and collateral agent. The First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 bear cash interest at a rate of 15% per annum payable semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15, beginning on July 15, 2021. Interest for the first three interest periods after the issue date may, at the Company’s option, be paid in PIK interest at a rate of 17% per annum, and thereafter interest shall be payable solely in cash. The First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026 will mature on April 24, 2026.
Odeon Term Loan Facility. On February 15, 2021, Odeon Cinemas Group Limited (“Odeon”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company entered into a new £140.0 million and €296.0 million term loan facility agreement (the “Odeon Term Loan Facility”). Approximately £89.7 million and €12.8 million of the net proceeds from the Odeon Term Loan Facility were used to repay in full Odeon’s obligations (including principal, interest, fees and cash collateralized letters of credit) under its existing revolving credit facility and the remaining net proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes. The Odeon Term Loan Facility will have a maturity of 2.5 years from the date on which it is first drawn. Borrowings under the Odeon Term Loan Facility bear interest at a rate equal to 10.75% per annum during the first year and 11.25% thereafter. Odeon will have the ability to elect to pay interest in cash or in PIK interest for each interest period.
See Note 8-Corporate Borrowings and Finance Lease Obligations and Note 17-Subsequent Events of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information regarding the above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources-For the Year Ended December 31, 2019, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a comparison of our liquidity and capital resources for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 28, 2020, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Commitments and Contingencies
Minimum annual cash payments required under existing finance lease obligations, maturities of corporate borrowings, future minimum rental payments under existing operating leases, committed capital expenditures, investments and betterments, including furniture, fixtures, equipment and leasehold betterments and pension funding that have initial or remaining non-cancelable terms in excess of one year as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
(1) Represents cash requirements for lease payments. Total amount does not equal carrying amount due to imputed interest. Includes deferred payment amounts on rent obligations recorded in operating and finance lease liabilities for which payments have been deferred to 2021 and future years. See Note 3-Leases to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information regarding deferred rent obligations.
(2) Represents cash requirements for the payment of principal on corporate borrowings. Total amount does not equal carrying amount due to unamortized discounts, premiums and deferred charges. See Note 17-Subsequent Events for information regarding the new Odeon Term Loan Facility and the First Lien Toggle Notes due 2026.
(3) Interest expense on our Senior Secured Credit Facility Term Loans due 2026 was estimated at 3.23% based on the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020. This column includes PIK interest of $176.0 million related to the Second Lien Notes due 2026 expected to be paid at maturity.
(4) Represents contractual rent payments due and not paid recorded in accounts payables. See Note 3-Leases to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information regarding deferred rent obligations.
(5) Includes committed capital expenditures, investments, and betterments to our circuit. Does not include planned, but non-committed capital expenditures.
(6) We fund our U.S. pension plans such that the plans are in compliance with Employee Retirement Income Security Act (“ERISA”) and the plans are not considered “at risk” as defined by ERISA guidelines. The U.S. plans have been frozen effective December 31, 2006.
As of December 31, 2020, our recorded obligation for unrecognized tax benefits is $33.5 million. There are currently unrecognized tax benefits of $7.2 million, which we anticipate will be resolved in the next 12 months. See Note 10-Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
We remain contingently liable for lease payments under certain leases of theatres that we previously divested, in the event that such assignees are unable to fulfill their future lease payment obligations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $15.0 million, respectively, in estimated credit losses related to contingent lease
guarantees in other expense. See Note 11-Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for further information.
Impact of Inflation
Historically, the principal impact of inflation and changing prices upon us has been to increase the costs of the construction of new theatres, the purchase of theatre equipment, rent and the utility and labor costs incurred in connection with continuing theatre operations. Film exhibition costs, our largest cost of operations, are customarily paid as a percentage of admissions revenues and hence, while the film exhibition costs may increase on an absolute basis, the percentage of admissions revenues represented by such expense is not directly affected by inflation. Except as set forth above, inflation and changing prices have not had a significant impact on our total revenues and results of operations during the last three years.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1-The Company and Significant Accounting Policies in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 thereof for information regarding recently issued accounting standards.