ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This annual report ("Annual Report") contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"). These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performances or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as "anticipates," "believes," "could," "estimates," "expects," "intends," "may," "plans," "potential," "predicts," "projects," "should," "will," "would," and similar expressions intended to identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect our current views with respect to future events, are based on assumptions, and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other important factors. In particular, statements, whether express or implied, concerning future operating results or the ability to generate sales, income or cash flow are forward-looking statements. They involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are beyond our ability to control or predict, including those discussed in Part II, Item 1A, of this Annual Report. Given these risks, uncertainties, and other important factors, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Also, forward-looking statements represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this Annual Report. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in any forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the future.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. "Apollo," Orbera®, OverStitch™, X-Tack™, the Apollo logo and other trademarks, service marks and trade names of Apollo are registered marks of Apollo Endosurgery, Inc. in the U.S. and other jurisdictions.
Overview
We are a medical technology company primarily focused on the design, development and commercialization of innovative medical devices to advance gastrointestinal therapeutic endoscopy. We develop and distribute devices that are used by gastroenterologists and surgeons for a variety of procedures related to closing gastrointestinal defects and managing surgical or endoscopic adverse events or bariatric (weight loss) intervention.
Our core products are the OverStitch Endoscopic Suturing System ("ESS") and Intragastric Balloon ("IGB") (most often branded as Orbera). In December 2020, we received 510(k) approval for the X-Tack Endoscopic HeliX Tacking System. In December 2018, we divested our Surgical product line, which consisted of the Lap-Band® System and related laparoscopic accessories.
We have offices in the United Kingdom and Italy that oversee commercial activities outside the U.S. ("OUS") and a products manufacturing facility in Costa Rica. All other activities are managed and operated from facilities in Austin, Texas.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
Beginning in early March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures imposed to contain this pandemic disrupted our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The United States and other countries implemented a variety of public health interventions to reduce the risk of disease transmission and conserve healthcare resources for addressing the community health needs of COVID-19. This resulted in an unprecedented decline in global healthcare resources available for procedures that use our products. Following sales growth in the months of January and February 2020 that were consistent with management’s pre-COVID-19 expectations, our sales results in the months of March and April declined commensurate with the global decline in elective procedures and reduced patient access to treatments by shelter in place and social distancing rules, which resulted in cancellation or postponement of procedures that use our products. Beginning in May 2020, our sales began to recover primarily as certain public health interventions implemented by various countries to reduce COVID-19 transmission risks were eased and procedures that use our products increased. As a result, our sales for the six months ended December 31, 2020 have exceeded those in the same period of 2019. Demand for our products and our business showed recovery in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as hospitals began to accept patients for elective procedures though there can be no assurance that this recovery will continue.
The COVID-19 pandemic remains active and continues to represent high uncertainty concerning our sales outlook and risk to our business operations. Business challenges and periodic disruption resulting from COVID-19 will likely continue for the duration of the pandemic, which is uncertain. We cannot assure you that our recent recovery during the second half of 2020 will be indicative of future results or that we will not experience future sales or business disruptions due to COVID-19, which could be significant. See Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Our business will be adversely affected by the effects of the recent COVID-19 outbreak.
Due to the business disruptions stemming directly from the COVID-19 pandemic, we took several actions to preserve our liquidity during 2020. In March and April 2020, we reduced 2019 cash bonuses, implemented reductions in compensation across our workforce including a $100,000 salary cap for all employees, furloughed 57 U.S. employees and reduced the employment arrangements of an additional 34 employees outside the United States. In September, the employee furlough program was discontinued and 35 employees were not recalled. The annual compensation costs associated with these positions were approximately $5.0 million. Finally, in November 2020, we completed a salary restoration plan to restore employee salaries to pre-reduction levels.
On April 27, 2020, the Company was granted a loan of $2.8 million under the Small Business Administration’s ("SBA") Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") established under the CARES Act. The PPP loan matures on February 27, 2023 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum with equal interest and principal payments beginning on September 27, 2021. In December 2020, we applied for forgiveness for the full amount of the loan from the SBA. We will continue to include this PPP loan within our long-term debt until we receive confirmation of forgiveness from the SBA.
Divestiture of the Surgical Product Line
In December 2018, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement ("Purchase Agreement") and sold our Surgical product line to ReShape Lifesciences Inc. ("ReShape"). Our goal with this transaction was to increase our focus on our Endoscopy products and monetize a non-strategic asset.
ReShape agreed to pay $17.0 million in cash, of which the last $3.0 million is due to us in December 2021.
Upon completion of the ReShape transaction, the parties entered into a transition services agreement, supply agreement and distribution agreement. Apollo's transition, distribution, and manufacturing services obligations were completed as of December 31, 2020.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
Our principal source of revenues are sales of our Endoscopy products. The majority of our sales come from direct markets where sales are made to the final end customers, typically healthcare providers. In other markets, we sell our products to distributors who resell our products to end users. Revenues between periods will be impacted by several factors, including the continuing COVID-19 pandemic, physician procedures and therapy preferences, patient procedures and therapy preferences, other market trends, the stability of the average sales price we realize on products and changes in foreign exchange rates used to translate foreign currency denominated sales into U.S. dollars.
Under the ReShape distribution agreement, we agreed to sell Surgical products to customers OUS up to one year. Product sales in 2019 include sales from these serviced markets.
Other revenue includes amounts recognized for our digital aftercare support program, transition and manufacturing services we provided to ReShape and freight charged to customers.
Cost of Sales
Our ESS products, representing the majority of our Endoscopy product sales, have historically been purchased from third-party manufacturers, and our cost of sales for these products has consisted of the actual purchase price from these manufacturers plus an allocation of our internal manufacturing overhead cost. Cost of sales for products we manufacture include raw materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead. Raw materials used in our manufacturing activity are generally not subject to substantial commodity price volatility, and most of our manufacturing costs are incurred in U.S. dollars. Cost of sales also includes royalties, shipping, excess and obsolete inventory charges, inspection and related costs incurred in making our products available for sale or use. In periods of reduced production volume, unabsorbed manufacturing overhead costs are charged to expense when incurred.
Our gross margin comparability between periods has been impacted by the shift in our revenue mix from Surgical to Endoscopy products. Demand for our divested Surgical products historically were declining but Surgical product sales realized a higher gross margin compared to our Endoscopy products, which have been growing in demand. In addition, manufacturing overhead as a percentage of revenue between periods can fluctuate as a result of manufacturing rates and the degree to which manufacturing overhead is allocated to production during the period. We expect to continue to improve gross margins as we complete certain identified gross margin improvement projects and improve capacity utilization of our manufacturing facility.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of salaries, commissions, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel employed in sales, marketing and medical education. In addition, our sales and marketing expense includes costs associated with physician training, industry events, advertising and other promotional activities.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense primarily consists of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel employed in corporate management, finance, legal, compliance, information technology and human resources. General and administrative expense also includes facility costs, insurance, audit fees, legal fees, bad debt expense and costs to develop and maintain our intellectual property portfolio.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense includes product development, clinical trial costs, quality and regulatory compliance, consulting services, outside prototyping services, outside research activities, materials, and other costs associated with development of our products. Research and development expense also includes compensation and stock-based compensation expense for personnel dedicated to these activities. Research and development expense may fluctuate between periods depending on the activity associated with our various product development and clinical obligations.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Definite-lived intangible assets primarily consist of customer relationships, product technology, trade names, patents and trademarks and capitalized software. Intangible assets are amortized over the asset's estimated useful life.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which management has prepared in accordance with existing U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. Management evaluates estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Estimates relate to aspects of our revenue recognition, valuation of intangible assets, long-lived assets and goodwill, going concern assessment, allowance for doubtful accounts, and inventory valuation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that management believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The critical accounting policies addressed below reflect our most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our principal source of revenues is from the sale of our products to hospitals, physician practices and distributors. We utilize a network of employee sales representatives in the U.S. and a combination of employee sales representatives, independent agents and distributors in OUS markets. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in an exchange for those goods. Generally, these conditions are met upon product shipment. Customers generally have the right to return or exchange products purchased from us for up to thirty days from the date of product shipment. Distributors, who resell the products to their customers, take title to products and assume all risks of ownership at the time of shipment and are obligated to pay within specified terms regardless of when, if ever, they sell their products. At the end of each period, we determine the extent to which our revenues need to be reduced to account for expected rebates, returns and exchanges. We classify any shipping and handling cost billed to customers as revenue and the related expenses as cost of sales.
In connection with the December 2018 sale of the Surgical product line, we entered into a transition services agreement, supply agreement and distribution agreement which obligated us to provide specific services for designated periods of time for each service and manufacture Surgical products through December 2020. Transition service revenue is recognized as the support is provided in accordance with the prices established in the transition services agreement. Supply agreement revenue is recognized when products are shipped at the net amount earned based upon the prices established in the supply agreement less the cost to produce the product. Transition service and supply agreement revenue are included in other revenue.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Charges for excess and obsolete inventory are based on specific identification of excess and obsolete inventory items and an analysis of inventory items approaching expiration date. We evaluate the carrying value of inventory in relation to the estimated forecast of product demand. A significant decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory quantities on hand. When quantities on hand exceed estimated sales forecasts, we record estimated excess and obsolescence charges to cost of sales. Our inventories are stated using the weighted average cost approach, which approximates actual costs.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial results, we are providing a non-GAAP financial measure, Endoscopy product sales percentage change in constant currency, which removes the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates that affect the comparability and trend of our Endoscopy product sales. Endoscopy product sales percentage change in constant currency is calculated by translating current foreign currency sales using last year's exchange rate. This supplemental measure of our performance is not required by, and is not determined in accordance with GAAP.
We believe the non-GAAP financial measure included herein is helpful in understanding our current financial performance. We use this supplemental non-GAAP financial measure internally to understand, manage and evaluate our business, and make operating decisions. We believe that making non-GAAP financial information available to investors, in addition to GAAP financial information, may facilitate more consistent comparisons between our performance over time with the performance of other companies in the medical device industry, which may use similar financial measures to supplement their GAAP financial information. However, our non-GAAP financial measure is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP metric.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Product sales by product group and geographic market for the periods shown were as follows:
(1) Other U.S. revenue includes $0.9 million and $1.3 million of transition and manufacturing services provided for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Non-GAAP Endoscopy product sales percentage changes in constant currency for the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Total revenues in 2020 were $42.0 million, compared to $50.7 million in 2019, a decrease of 17.1%. The decline in total revenues was due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related shelter-in-place restrictions and diversion of healthcare resources that began in March of 2020. Total Endoscopy product sales decreased 10.3% to $40.5 million in 2020 from $45.1 million in 2019. During the second quarter of 2020, total Endoscopy product sales declined $6.8 million compared to the same period in 2019 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the second half of 2020, Endoscopy procedures and product utilization in the U.S. recovered while OUS markets continued to be slowed periodically from sporadic COVID-19 resurgence. Direct markets accounted for 82.8% and 79.3% of total Endoscopy product sales in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Sales also declined $3.7 million in 2020 due to the previously described divestiture of our Surgical products. Included in other revenues was $0.9 million and $1.3 million of transition and manufacturing services provided in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Sales
Costs of product sales for the periods shown were as follows:
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 52.9% for 2020 compared to 50.6% for 2019. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of revenue was from implemented gross margin improvement projects, an increase in direct market sales as a percentage of total revenues in 2020, and a higher proportion of IGB product sales in 2020. These improvements were partially offset by a $0.5 million charge in the second quarter of 2020 for unabsorbed overhead costs associated with reduced manufacturing activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense decreased $11.4 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to lower compensation, reduction in marketing spend, suspension of medical education activities and reduced travel as a result of cost saving actions we initiated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In early 2020, we also ceased direct market operations in Brazil.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense decreased $2.5 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to cost savings actions initiated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower professional service fees.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expense decreased $2.7 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to lower clinical trial spend in 2020 as enrollment milestones were achieved in 2019 and due to cost saving actions initiated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets was largely unchanged in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Settlement Gain. Settlement gain of $5.6 million in 2019 resulted from the resolution of a dispute with Allergan Inc. at a lower amount than previously accrued in connection with disputed inventory purchases and transition services provided by Allergan through 2016.
Loss from Operations.
Loss from operations in 2020 was $15.8 million compared to $23.5 million in 2019. Excluding the settlement gain in 2019 of $5.6 million, our loss from operations improved $13.3 million primarily due to the cost reduction actions implemented.
Other Expenses
Interest Expense, net. Net interest expense increased $1.2 million in 2020 primarily due to the non-cash interest on the Convertible Debt issued in August 2019.
Other (Income) Expense. Other (income) expense primarily consists of realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains or losses. The decrease of $1.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily caused by the movement in exchange rates on short-term intercompany loans denominated in U.S dollars payable by our foreign subsidiaries. During 2020, unrealized exchange rate losses on these intercompany loans were $1.2 million compared to unrealized gains of $0.2 million in 2019.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense related to foreign income taxes on income generated in our OUS tax jurisdictions was $0.1 million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
(1) Revenue between periods declined $13.7 million due to the divestiture of the Surgical product line in December 2018. See the product sales table under "Revenues" for additional information for product group and geographic market.
Revenues
Product sales by product group and geographic market for the periods shown were as follows:
(1) Other U.S. revenue includes $1.3 million of transition and manufacturing services provided for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-GAAP Endoscopy product sales percentage change in constant currency for the year ended December 31, 2019 were as follows:
Total revenues in 2019 were $50.7 million, compared to $60.9 million in 2018, a decrease of 16.7%. The decline in total revenues was the result of divesting our Surgical products in December 2018.
Total Endoscopy product sales increased 9.8% to $45.1 million in 2019 from $41.1 million in 2018. In constant currency, Endoscopy sales increased 12.3% when compared to 2018. Direct markets accounted for 79.3% and 81.6% of total Endoscopy product sales in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Total ESS product sales increased $4.9 million, or 21.1%, in 2019 when compared to 2018. In constant currency, total ESS product sales increased 23.4%. U.S. ESS product sales increased $3.9 million, or 35.7%, compared to 2018. OUS ESS product sales increased $1.0 million, or 8.1%, compared to 2018. In constant currency, OUS ESS product sales increased 12.5% when compared to 2018. Worldwide, ESS growth is due to increased sales volume from new user adoption, greater product utilization in our existing customer base and growth in distributor market sales.
Total IGB product sales decreased $0.9 million, or 5.1%, in 2019 when compared to 2018. In the U.S., IGB product sales decreased $0.2 million, or 4.4%, in 2019 when compared to 2018 due to lower consumer demand in the first half of 2019 followed by a 23.2% increase in sales for the fourth quarter of 2019. We believe IGB product sales will continue to fluctuate quarter over quarter in the near term. OUS IGB product sales decreased $0.7 million, or 5.4%, in 2019 when compared to 2018 due to lower sales from lost market share in Brazil. In constant currency, OUS IGB product sales decreased 1.6% in 2019 when compared to 2018.
Included in other revenues for 2019 is $1.3 million of transition and manufacturing services provided to ReShape.
Cost of Sales
Cost of product sales for the periods shown were as follows:
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 50.6% for 2019 compared to 54.5% for 2018. The decline in gross margin is primarily due to a greater proportion of our overall product sales coming from our ESS products, which have experienced higher sales growth but have lower gross margins. Additionally, gross margin realized on remaining OUS Surgical product sales declined in 2019 as a result of the terms of the ReShape supply and distribution agreements. Gross margin for our Endoscopy products increased to 49.5% for 2019 compared to 44.2% for 2018 due to implementation of our gross margin improvement projects.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense decreased $4.1 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due to lower U.S. direct consumer advertising costs, lower sales compensation, and cost savings from insourcing our customer service operation at the end of 2018.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense increased $0.2 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due to higher internal control audit fees incurred in the first quarter of 2019 required for our 2018 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expense decreased $1.8 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due to lower clinical trial spend in 2019 as we completed the Orbera post-approval study.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets decreased $5.0 million in 2019 as compared to 2018 due to the disposition of intangible assets associated with the Surgical business in December 2018.
Settlement Gain. Settlement gain of $5.6 million in 2019 resulted from the resolution of a dispute with Allergan Inc. at a value less than amounts previously accrued for disputed inventory purchases and transition services provided by Allergan through 2016.
Loss on Divestiture. Loss on divestiture of $7.8 million in 2018 was due to the divestiture of our Surgical product line in December 2018.
Loss from Operations.
Loss from operations in 2019 was $23.5 million compared to $40.1 million in 2018. Excluding the settlement gain and loss on divestiture, the loss from operations was $29.1 million in 2019 compared to $32.3 million in 2018. The decreased loss from operations, after excluding the one-time settlement gain and loss on divestiture, was primarily due to lower operating expenses offsetting the reduction in gross margin from the divestiture of our Surgical product line.
Other Expenses
Interest Expense, net. Net interest expense remained unchanged at $4.1 million in 2019 and 2018.
Other (Income) Expense. Other (income) expense primarily consists of realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains or losses. The decrease of $1.8 million in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily caused by the movement in exchange rates on short-term intercompany loans denominated in U.S dollars payable by our foreign subsidiaries. During 2019, unrealized exchange rate gains on these intercompany loans were $0.2 million compared to unrealized losses of $1.2 million in 2018.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense was $0.3 million in 2019 compared to $0.2 million in 2018. Tax expense in 2019 and 2018 relates to foreign income taxes on income generated in our OUS tax jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced operating losses since inception and occasional debt covenant violations and have an accumulated deficit of $272.8 million as of December 31, 2020. To date, we have funded our operating losses and acquisitions through equity offerings and the issuance of debt instruments. We have occasionally been out of compliance with our debt covenants which resulted in amendments to the terms of our debt instruments. Our ability to fund future operations and meet debt covenant requirements will depend upon our level of future revenue and operating cash flow and our ability to access additional funding through either equity offerings, issuances of debt instruments or both.
In July 2020, we issued shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants for aggregate proceeds of approximately $25.0 million and entered into the Sixth Amendment to our loan and security agreement with Solar Capital, Ltd. that waived the minimum covenant requirements for 2020 and decreased our minimum liquidity requirements from $20.0 million to $12.5 million. In December 2020, the Seventh Amendment to our loan and security agreement with Solar Capital, Ltd. extended the interest only period until March 1, 2022 (or September 1, 2022 if certain revenue milestones are achieved in 2021) and extended the maturity date to September 1, 2024 (or March 1, 2025 if certain revenue milestones are achieved in 2021). The deferral of principal repayments resulting from the Seventh Amendment improves our 2021 liquidity by approximately $12.0 million.
Management believes its existing cash and cash equivalents, expected product revenues, and available debt and equity financing arrangements will be sufficient to meet covenant, liquidity and capital requirements for at least the next twelve months. Management periodically evaluates our liquidity requirements, alternative uses of capital, capital needs and available resources. As a result of this process, we have in the past, and may in the future, explore alternatives to finance our business plan, including, but not limited to, sales of common stock, preferred stock, convertible securities or debt financings, reduction of planned expenditures, or other sources, although there can be no assurances that such additional funding could be obtained.
Term Loan Facility
In March 2019, we entered into a term loan facility agreement with Solar Capital, Ltd. to borrow $35.0 million (the "Credit Agreement"). The Credit Agreement, as amended by the Seventh Amendment, matures on September 1, 2024, with principal payments beginning in March 2022, and bears interest at LIBOR, subject to a minimum floor, plus 7.5%. Principal payments are due on a straight-line basis after the interest-only period concludes. An additional 7.0% of the outstanding amount will be due at end of the loan term and an additional 5.5% fee will be due at the earlier of an Exit Event (as defined in the Credit Agreement) or if we achieve trailing twelve-month revenue of $100.0 million before December 4, 2030. The Credit Agreement includes customary affirmative covenants, negative covenants and financial covenants, including a minimum liquidity requirement and minimum product revenues. We used $22.4 million of the proceeds of the Credit Agreement to repay our previous senior secured credit agreement in full, including interest.
The Credit Agreement was amended in March 2020, April 2020, July 2020 and December 2020. These amendments, among other things, (i) waived the trailing six-month Endoscopy revenue requirements through the end of 2020, (ii) reduced the minimum liquidity requirement to $12.5 million, (iii) extended the interest only period until March 1, 2022 (or September 1, 2022 if certain revenue milestones are achieved in 2021) and extended the maturity date to September 1, 2024 (or March 1, 2025 if certain revenue milestones are achieved in 2021), (iv) permitted us to enter into a loan under the SBA’s PPP established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, (v) increased the final fee due at the end of the loan term to 7.0% from 4.9%, (vi) increased the fee due at certain exit or trigger events from 4.5% to 5.5%, (vii) waived the financial statement covenant default associated with the going concern opinion of our independent registered public accounting firm for the year ended December 31, 2019, and (viii) established a minimum LIBOR interest rate.
In February 2021, we entered into the Eighth Amendment to the Credit Agreement which established the revenue covenant requirements for 2021 (see Note 18).
Convertible Senior Debt
In August 2019, we issued $20.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Debt. Interest on the Convertible Debt will be payable semi-annually in shares of our common stock on January 1 and July 1 of each year, beginning on January 1, 2020, at a rate of 6.0% per year. The number of shares of common stock required to settle the amount of interest payable will be based on the volume-weighted average price ("VWAP"), of our common stock for the 10 consecutive trading days immediately preceding the applicable interest payment date. The Convertible Debt will mature on August 12, 2026, unless earlier converted or repurchased in accordance with its terms.
The Convertible Debt converts, at the option of the holders, into shares of our common stock at an initial conversion price of $3.25 per share, subject to adjustment. If the VWAP of our common stock has been at least $9.75 (subject to adjustment) for at least 20 trading days during any 30 consecutive trading day period, we may force the conversion of all or any part of the outstanding principal amount of the Convertible Debt, accrued and unpaid interest and any other amounts then owing, subject to certain conditions.
As of December 31, 2020, $20.5 million aggregate principal amount was outstanding under the Convertible Debt. In July 2020, $0.6 million of interest due for the six-month period ended June 30, 2020 accreted into principal outstanding under the Convertible Debt. In December 2020, $0.1 million of the Convertible Debt was converted into shares of common stock at a holder's election.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law providing certain economic aid packages for qualified entities. In April 2020, we were granted a loan of $2.8 million under the PPP established under the CARES Act. The Loan matures on February 27, 2023 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum with equal interest and principal payments beginning on September 27, 2021.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the loan granted under the PPP, with such forgiveness to be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of the loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs, rent, utilities, and interest on debt. The terms of any forgiveness may also be subject to further requirements in any regulations and guidelines the SBA may adopt.
On June 5, 2020, the PPP Flexibility Act was signed into law which, among other things, (i) extended the covered period from 8 weeks after the date of PPP funding to 24 weeks after the date of PPP funding, (ii) reduced the required amount of payroll expenditures from 75% to 60%, (iii) removed the prior ban on borrowers taking advantage of payroll tax deferral after loan forgiveness and (iv) extended the repayment deferral period to be the earlier of (a) the date forgiveness funds are received or (b) 10 months from the end of the covered period.
In December 2020, we applied for forgiveness of the full amount of the $2.8 million loan from the SBA. We will continue to include this PPP loan within our long-term debt until we receive confirmation of forgiveness from the SBA.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities of $20.8 million for 2020 was primarily the result of a net loss of $22.6 million plus non-cash items of $9.3 million primarily related to depreciation, amortization, non-cash interest, foreign currency on intercompany payables, and stock-based compensation. Net loss, after adjustment for non-cash items, improved $12.9 million compared to the same period in 2019 due to lower operating expenses, primarily due to cost reduction actions we initiated to preserve our liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, which offset reduced gross margin. Additionally, cash used for accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7.1 million primarily related to clinical study payments and raw material purchases.
Cash used in operating activities of $25.6 million for 2019 was primarily the result of a net loss of $27.4 million plus non-cash items of $1.3 million primarily related to the settlement gain of $5.6 million offset by depreciation, amortization, non-cash interest, and stock-based compensation. The increase in net loss after adjustment for non-cash items is primarily due to the divestiture of our Surgical product line in December of 2018. Additionally, cash provided by operating assets and liabilities of $0.6 million related to working capital changes primarily from accounts receivable collections and reduction in inventory levels offset by higher accounts payable payments.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities in both 2020 and 2019 was related to installment payments received from the sale of the Surgical product line partially offset by investments in property and equipment and in our intellectual property portfolio.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $25.6 million for 2020 primarily related to proceeds received from the issuance of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase common stock in July 2020 of $23.3 million and the PPP Loan granted in April 2020 of $2.8 million.
Cash provided by financing activities of $30.5 million for 2019 primarily related to the $13.3 million in net proceeds from the Term Loan Facility refinancing and proceeds from the issuance of $20.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Debt offset by deferred financing costs of $2.9 million.
Future Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash balances totaling $37.2 million. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, product revenues, and available debt and equity financing arrangements will be sufficient to meet covenant, liquidity and capital requirements for at least the next twelve months, although there can be no assurances that we will be able to do so.
Any future capital requirements will depend on many factors including market acceptance of our products, the costs of our research and development activities, the cost and timing of additional regulatory clearance and approvals, the cost and timing of identified gross margin improvement projects, the cost and timing of clinical programs, the ability to maintain covenant compliance with our lending facility, and the costs and timing of sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing activities. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by rules enacted by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2(r) to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of recently enacted accounting pronouncements.