ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
GENERAL
We are a corporation with limited operations and have no revenues from our business operations. Until December 31, 2007, we held the exclusive license to exploit the Dreesen’s Donut Brand in the United States with the exception of the states of Florida and Pennsylvania, and in Suffolk County, New York, which Dreesen retained for itself. The license from Dreesen expired on December 31, 2007.
As of the Effective Date, we discontinued our efforts to promote the Dreesen’s Donut Brand, we have no employees and our main purpose has been to effect a business combination with an operating business which we believe has significant growth potential. As of yet, we have no definitive agreements or understandings with any prospective business combination candidates and there are no assurances that we will find a suitable business with which to combine. The implementation of our business objectives is wholly contingent upon a business combination and/or the successful sale of our securities. We intend to utilize the proceeds of any offering, any sales of equity securities or debt securities, bank and other borrowings or a combination of those sources to effect a business combination with a target business which we believe has significant growth potential. While we may, under certain circumstances, seek to effect business combinations with more than one target business, unless and until additional financing is obtained, we will not have sufficient proceeds remaining after an initial business combination to undertake additional business combinations.
A common reason for a target company to enter into a merger with us is the desire to establish a public trading market for its shares. Such a company would hope to avoid the perceived adverse consequences of undertaking a public offering itself, such as the time delays and significant expenses incurred to comply with the various Federal and state securities law that regulate initial public offerings.
As a result of our limited resources, we expect to effect only a single business combination. Accordingly, the prospects for our success will likely be dependent upon the future performance of a single business. Unlike certain entities that have the resources to consummate several business combinations or entities operating in multiple industries or multiple segments of a single industry, we do not expect the resources to diversify our operations or benefit from the possible spreading of risks or offsetting of losses. A target business may be dependent upon the development or market acceptance of a single or limited number of products, processes or services, in which case there will be an even higher risk that the target business will not prove to be commercially viable.
Our officers are only required to devote a small portion of their time (less than 10%) to our affairs on a part-time or as-needed basis. We expect to use outside consultants, advisors, attorneys and accountants as necessary. We do not anticipate hiring any full-time employees so long as we are seeking and evaluating business opportunities.
We expect our present management to play no managerial role in our company following a business combination. Although we intend to scrutinize closely the management of a prospective target business in connection with our evaluation of a business combination with a target business, our assessment of management may be incorrect. We cannot assure you that we will find a suitable business with which to combine.
Our principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through a combination with an operating business. We will not restrict our potential candidate target companies to any specific business, industry or geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business. The analysis of new business opportunities will be undertaken by or under the supervision of our officers and directors.
EQUIPMENT AND EMPLOYEES
As of March 31, 2021, we had no operating business, no equipment, and no employees. We do not intend to develop our own operating business but instead plan to consummate a business combination transaction with an operating company.
Results of Operations
Continuing Operating Expenses for the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020
We are a corporation with limited operations and did not have any operating revenues during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Total expenses for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 were $155,680 and $62,411, respectively. The majority of these expenses primarily constituted general and administrative expenses related to legal and accounting and compliance with the Exchange Act as well as work in connection with our entering into the definitive agreement with Appgate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At March 31, 2021, we did not have any revenues from operations. Our principal source of operating capital recently has been provided in the form of loans and capital contributions from our stockholders. Absent a merger or other combination with an operating company, we do not expect to have any revenues from operations. No assurance can be given that such a merger or other combination will occur or that we can engage in any public or private sales of our equity or debt securities to raise working capital. We are dependent upon future loans or capital contributions from our present stockholders and/or management and there can be no assurances that our present stockholders or management will make any loans or capital contributions to us.
At March 31, 2021, we had outstanding notes payable in the aggregate principal amount of $367,000 payable to Ironbound, our majority stockholder. We had cash of $7,285 and negative working capital of $554,973. Such funds will not be sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements during the next twelve months and we will require additional funds. We cannot provide assurance that adequate additional funds will be available or, if available, will be offered on acceptable terms.
Our present material commitments are professional and administrative fees and expenses associated with the preparation of our filings with the SEC and other regulatory requirements, as well as expenses in connection with our proposed transaction with Appgate.
Commitments
We do not have any commitments which are required to be disclosed in tabular form as of March 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2021, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements such as guarantees, retained or contingent interest in assets transferred, obligation under a derivative instrument and obligation arising out of or a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Note 2 to the financial statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our financial statements.
We have identified the policies below as some of the more critical to our business and the understanding of our financial position and results of operations. These policies may involve a high degree of judgment and complexity in their application and represent the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements. Although we believe our judgments and estimates are appropriate and correct, actual future results may differ from estimates. If different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, the results could be materially different from these reported results. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout this Report where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
Use of Estimates
In preparing financial statements in accordance with GAAP, management makes certain estimates and assumptions, where applicable, that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. While actual results could differ from those estimates, management does not expect such variances, if any, to have a material effect on the financial statements.
Income Taxes
The asset and liability method is used in accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for operating loss and tax credit carry forwards and for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets unless it is more likely than not that such assets will be realized.
Financial Instruments
The estimated fair values of all reported assets and liabilities which represent financial instruments, none of which are held for trading purposes, approximate their carrying value because of the short term maturity of these instruments or the stated interest rates are indicative of market interest rates.