Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of novel therapeutic compounds to treat disease through the inhibition of the complement system, which is an integral component of the immune system, at the level of C3, the central protein in the complement cascade. We believe that this approach can result in broad inhibition of the principal pathways of the complement system and has the potential to effectively control a broad array of complement-dependent autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
We have the most advanced clinical programs targeting C3 with Phase 3 clinical trials of our lead product candidate, pegcetacoplan, in multiple indications. We believe that pegcetacoplan has the potential to be a best-in-class treatment that may address the limitations of existing treatment options or provide a treatment option where there currently is none. Pegcetacoplan has already shown activity that we believe is clinically meaningful in clinical trials for several distinct medical conditions, including geographic atrophy in age-related macular degeneration, or GA; paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, or PNH; cold agglutinin disease, or CAD; and C3 glomerulopathy, or C3G. We are developing pegcetacoplan and other product candidates, including APL-9, targeting C3 through various routes of administration and plan to conduct clinical trials of these compounds in additional complement-dependent indications.
In October 2020, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement, or the collaboration agreement, with Swedish Orphan Biovitrum AB (Publ), or Sobi. Under the collaboration agreement, we agreed to co-develop pegcetacoplan for systemic indications, including PNH, CAD and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation-associated thrombotic microangiopathy, or HSCT-TMA, in hematology; C3G and immune complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, or IC-MPGN in nephrology; and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS in neurology. Sobi has exclusive ex-U.S. commercialization rights for systemic pegcetacoplan. We retain commercialization rights for systemic pegcetacoplan in the United States and worldwide commercial rights for ophthalmological pegcetacoplan, which includes our GA program in addition to worldwide commercialization rights for APL-9 and other novel compounds targeting C3.
GA. We initiated a Phase 3 clinical program consisting of two Phase 3 clinical trials evaluating pegcetacoplan in patients with GA in September 2018. We refer to these trials as the DERBY and OAKS trials. Both trials are fully enrolled and we expect to announce top-line data from these trials in the third quarter of 2021. In our Phase 2 clinical trial of pegcetacoplan in patients with GA, treatment with pegcetacoplan resulted in a significant reduction in the rate of GA lesion growth over 12 months. Additionally, data released in October 2020 from a post hoc analysis of seven patients in our Phase 1b trial of pegcetacoplan in patients with advanced GA and low vision demonstrated a trend in reduced lesion growth in eyes treated with pegcetacoplan versus untreated fellow eyes after 18 months of treatment.
Systemic Pegcetacoplan. We are developing pegcetacoplan for systemic administration in several indications, including PNH, C3G, IC-MPGN, ALS, CAD and HSCT-TMA.
PNH. In June 2018, we initiated a Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating pegcetacoplan in 80 patients with PNH who exhibited signs of moderate to severe anemia, specifically with an inclusion criterion of hemoglobin level of less than 10.5 g/dL, while being treated with eculizumab, an approved therapy for PNH that is marketed as Soliris. We refer to this trial as the PEGASUS trial.
In January 2020, we announced top-line data from the PEGASUS trial that showed that pegcetacoplan met the trial’s primary efficacy endpoint, demonstrating superiority to eculizumab, with a statistically significant improvement in adjusted means of 3.8 g/dL of hemoglobin at week 16 (p < 0.0001), and promising results in key secondary endpoints. Additional data from the PEGASUS trial presented in June 2020 and December 2020 demonstrated increased hemoglobin levels, reduced transfusion requirements and improved key markers of hemolysis across the patient population, both in patients with high transfusion requirements and in patients with low or no transfusion requirements, which improvements were sustained through 48 weeks of treatment. In the PEGASUS trial, the safety profile of pegcetacoplan was comparable to that of eculizumab.
In September 2019, we initiated a second Phase 3 clinical trial in patients with PNH who have not been treated with eculizumab within three months before entering the trial. This trial is fully enrolled and we intend to present top-line data in the second quarter of 2021. We refer to this trial as the PRINCE trial.
We submitted an NDA to the FDA, and an MAA to the EMA, for pegcetacoplan for the treatment of PNH in September 2020. The FDA accepted the NDA and set the Prescription Drug User Fee Act, or PDUFA, target action date for May 14, 2021. The EMA validated the MAA in October 2020, with the potential for a European Commission decision on the MAA in the second half of 2021.
C3G/IC-MPGN. We have initiated and will continue to lead our registrational program in C3G / IC-MPGN. We initiated the Phase 2 NOBLE trial in up to 12 patients with post-kidney transplant recurrence of C3G or IC-MPGN in October 2020. We expect to dose the first patient in the NOBLE trial in the first half of 2021. We also plan to begin a Phase 3 clinical trial in patients with native kidney or post-transplant recurrence of C3G or IC-MPGN, having reduction of proteinuria as its primary endpoint, in the second half of 2021.
ALS. We have initiated a randomized, placebo-controlled Phase 2 clinical trial of pegcetacoplan in approximately 200 adults with sporadic ALS. We refer to this trial as the MERIDIAN trial. We treated the first patient in MERIDIAN in November 2020 and expect to complete enrollment in MERIDIAN in the second half of 2021.
CAD and HSCT-TMA. Sobi will lead development activities for a Phase 3 clinical trial in CAD and a Phase 2 clinical trial in HSCT-TMA, both planned to begin in 2021. In our Phase 2 clinical trial of pegcetacoplan in patients with CAD, patients achieved increased hemoglobin levels, reduced reticulocytes and bilirubin levels, and reduced LDH levels compared to baseline.
Pipeline. We are developing pegcetacoplan and other product candidates, including APL-9, targeting C3 through various routes of administration. We plan to conduct clinical trials of these compounds in additional complement-dependent indications. APL-9 is a C3 modulator designed to be intravenously administered for acute use. In May 2020 we initiated a Phase 1/2 randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial for APL-9 in 66 patients with respiratory failure including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) secondary to COVID-19. We expect to report results from this trial in the second quarter of 2021. We are also developing APL-9 for the prevention of complement immune system activation coincident with adeno-associated virus, or AAV, vector administration for gene therapies and other indications. We plan to advance three new product candidates into clinical development by the end of 2022.
Since our commencement of operations in May 2010, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our proprietary technology, developing product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies and conducting clinical trials for pegcetacoplan, building our intellectual property portfolio, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, preparing for the commercial launch of our products and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through $772.1 million in net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, including our initial public offering, or IPO, $535.8 million in net proceeds from the private offerings of Convertible Notes, a $250.0 million upfront payment and a $25.0 million as a development reimbursement payment from Sobi each pursuant to the Sobi collaboration agreement, $112.6 million in proceeds from the private placement of shares of our convertible preferred stock prior to our IPO, $140.0 million under the SFJ agreement, $20.0 million in proceeds from borrowings under a term loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and $7.0 million in proceeds from our issuance and sale of a promissory note. We have repaid the term loan facility and the promissory note in full, and we exchanged $126.1 million of aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes for shares of our common stock in January 2021.
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have incurred significant annual net operating losses in each year since our inception and expect to continue to incur net operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses were $344.9 million, $304.7 million and $127.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $926.3 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly if and as we continue to develop and conduct our ongoing and planned clinical trials of pegcetacoplan and APL-9; initiate and continue research and preclinical and clinical development efforts for any future product candidates; seek to identify and develop additional product candidates for complement-dependent diseases; seek regulatory and marketing approvals for our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, if any; establish sales, marketing, distribution and other commercial infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval; require the manufacture of larger quantities of product candidates for clinical development and, potentially, commercialization; maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; hire and retain additional personnel, such as clinical, quality control and scientific personnel; add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and help us comply with our obligations as a public company; and add equipment and physical infrastructure to support our research and development programs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $877.6 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020, will be sufficient to enable us to fund our current operations at least into the second half of 2022. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
We temporarily closed our facilities in March 2020 in respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have since reopened our facilities on a limited basis, subject to compliance with strict safety guidelines, but most of our employees continue to work remotely. We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact upon our operations, including our ongoing clinical trials and the manufacture and supply of our product candidates.
SFJ Agreement
On February 28, 2019, we entered into a development funding agreement, which we refer to as the SFJ agreement, with SFJ Pharmaceuticals Group, or SFJ, under which SFJ agreed to provide funding to us to support the development of pegcetacoplan for the treatment of patients with PNH. Pursuant to the agreement, SFJ paid us $60.0 million following the signing of the agreement and agreed to pay us up to an additional $60.0 million in the aggregate in three equal installments upon the achievement of specified development milestones with respect to our Phase 3 program for pegcetacoplan in PNH and subject to our having cash resources at the time sufficient to fund at least 10 months of our operations.
On June 7, 2019, we amended the SFJ agreement, which we refer to as the SFJ amendment. Under the SFJ amendment, SFJ agreed to make an additional $20.0 million funding payment to us to support the development of pegcetacoplan for the treatment of patients with PNH.
On June 27, 2019, we received $40.0 million from SFJ, consisting of $20.0 million as the first installment of the additional $60.0 million upon the achievement of a milestone and the $20.0 million payable under the SFJ amendment.
In September 2019, we received $20.0 million from SFJ, as the second installment of the additional $60.0 million due to the achievement of a milestone and in January 2020 received the remaining $20.0 million installment of the additional $60.0 million upon the announcement of the results of the PEGASUS phase 3 trial.
Convertible Notes
In September 2019, we issued and sold $220.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.5% convertible senior notes due 2026, or the 2019 Convertible Notes, in a private offering. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2019 Convertible Notes were approximately $212.9 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable. We used $28.4 million of the net proceeds from the offering to pay the cost of the capped call transactions in September 2019 described below.
In May 2020, we issued and sold an additional $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.5% convertible senior notes due 2026, or the 2020 Convertible Notes, in a private offering. The aggregate purchase price of the 2020 Convertible Notes was $328.9 million, which amount included accrued interest from March 15, 2020 to, but not including, May 12, 2020. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2020 Convertible Notes were approximately $322.9 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. We used $43.1 million of the net proceeds from the offering to pay the cost of the capped call transactions in May 2020 described below. The 2020 Convertible Notes were issued as additional notes under the Indenture and form a single series with, and have the same terms as, the 2019 Convertible Notes, but have a different issue date, issue price, CUSIP number and different restrictions on transfer. We refer to the 2019 Convertible Notes and the 2020 Convertible Notes together as the Convertible Notes.
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of 25.3405 shares per $1,000 principal amount of notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $39.46 per share of common stock). The conversion rate is subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. In addition, following certain events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its Convertible Notes in connection with such corporate event or a notice of redemption, as the case may be, in certain circumstances as provided in the indenture governing the Convertible Notes, or the Indenture.
Prior to March 15, 2026, the Convertible Notes are convertible only upon the occurrence of certain events. On or after March 15, 2026 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date of the Convertible Notes, holders may convert the Convertible Notes at any time. Upon conversion of the Convertible Notes, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election.
Prior to September 20, 2023, we may not redeem the Convertible Notes. We may redeem for cash all or a portion of the Convertible Notes, at our option, on or after September 20, 2023 if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive), including the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide a notice of redemption, during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption. The redemption price will be equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
If we undergo a “fundamental change,” as defined in the Indenture, prior to maturity, subject to certain conditions, holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their Convertible Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
The Indenture contains customary terms and covenants, including that upon certain events of default occurring and continuing, either the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding Convertible Notes may declare 100% of the principal of, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on, all the Convertible Notes to be due and payable.
Subsequent to year end, on January 6, 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with certain holders of our 2019 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $126.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares of our common stock. The exchange transactions closed in January 2021.
Capped Call Transactions
In September 2019 and May 2020, concurrently with the pricing of the 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively, we entered into capped call transactions with two counterparties. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of Convertible Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $39.4625, the conversion price of the Convertible Notes, and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of such Convertible Notes. If, however, the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions, there would nevertheless be dilution and/or there would not be an offset of such potential cash payments, in each case, to the extent that such market price exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions.
Collaboration Agreement with Sobi
On October 27, 2020, we entered into the collaboration agreement with Sobi, concerning the development and commercialization of pegcetacoplan and specified other structurally and functionally similar compstatin analogues or derivatives for use systemically or for local non-ophthalmological administration, collectively referred to as the licensed products. See “Business-Collaboration and License Agreement with Sobi” for a description of the key terms of our collaboration agreement with Sobi. We granted Sobi an exclusive (subject to certain rights retained by us), sublicensable license of certain patent rights and know-how to develop and commercialize licensed products in all countries outside of the United States. We retained the right to commercialize licensed products in the United States, and, subject to specified limitations, to develop licensed products worldwide for commercialization in the United States. Under the agreement, Sobi made an upfront payment of $250.0 million in November 2020, and agreed to pay up to an aggregate of $915.0 million upon the achievement of specified one-time regulatory and commercial milestone events, and to reimburse us for up to $80.0 million in development costs. In January 2021 we received a $25.0 million development reimbursement payment from Sobi. We are also entitled to receive tiered, double-digit royalties (ranging from high teens to high twenties) on sales of licensed products outside of the United States, subject to customary deductions and third-party payment obligations, until the latest to occur of: (i) expiration of the last-to-expire of specified licensed patent rights; (ii) expiration of regulatory exclusivity; and (iii) ten (10) years after the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product, in each case on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis. We remain responsible for our license fee obligations (including royalty obligations) to the University of Pennsylvania and for our payment obligations to SFJ Pharmaceuticals.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. If we are able to obtain regulatory approval for pegcetacoplan for the treatment of PNH in the United States, we will expect to generate revenue from the sale of products within the next twelve months.
Licensing and Collaboration Revenue
We enter into licensing agreements from time to time in which we receive upfront payments, milestone payments and royalties. In 2020 we entered into a collaboration agreement with Sobi for the development and commercialization of systemic pegcetacoplan, described below, and two license agreements with third parties to use APL-9 in certain research projects.
We analyze our license and collaboration arrangements pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangement Guidance and Considerations to assess whether such arrangements, or transactions between arrangement participants, involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities or are more akin to a vendor-customer relationship. In making this evaluation, we consider whether the activities of the collaboration are considered to be distinct and deemed to be within the scope of the collaborative arrangement guidance and those that are more reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and, therefore, within the scope of the revenue with contracts with customers guidance. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes in the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement.
For elements of collaboration arrangements that are not accounted for pursuant to the revenue from contracts with customers guidance, an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently, generally by analogy to the revenue from contracts with customers guidance. Amounts related to transactions with a counterparty in a collaborative arrangement that is not a customer are presented as collaboration revenue and on a separate line item from revenue recognized from contracts with customers, if any, in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract, determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Pursuant to ASC 606, we recorded the $250.0 million non-refundable upfront payment in revenue as the payment was associated with the transfer of the good or services in the form of the license to Sobi. The $80.0 million reimbursement for research and development activities does not constitute a customer/vendor relationship and thus is not in the scope of ASC 606. As ASC 808 does not include recognition guidance, we established an accounting policy to recognize the payments under the reimbursement as a receivable on the balance sheet in an amount that is probable to be reimbursed based upon expense incurred by us, with a contra-research and development expense recognized in the statement of operations.
Under the Sobi collaboration agreement, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $250.0 million of licensing revenue for the upfront payment in the consolidated statement of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recognized in the consolidated statement of operations $43.0 million of contra research and development expense relative to the probable amount to be reimbursed under the $80.0 million for research and development. We recorded a corresponding receivable of $43.0 million on the consolidated balance sheet, with $25.0 million and $18.0 million in current and long-term assets, respectively, as of December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses including salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation expense related to individuals performing research and development activities;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct clinical trials and research and development activities on our behalf, and contract manufacturing organizations that manufacture quantities of drug supplies for both our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
the cost of consultants, including share-based compensation expense; and
•
various other expenses incident to the management of our preclinical studies and clinical trials.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed. We have not provided program costs since inception because historically we have not tracked or recorded our research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. Accordingly, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of these product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from pegcetacoplan or any other potential product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing therapeutics, including the uncertainties of:
•
establishing an appropriate safety profile in preclinical studies;
•
successful enrollment in, and completion of clinical trials;
•
receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•
launching commercial sales of the products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•
an acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our product candidate development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses including salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities, potential commercialization of our product candidates and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, attorneys and accountants, among other expenses. Additionally, we anticipate increased costs associated with being a public company including expenses related to services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, insurance costs and investor relations costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Licensing Revenue
On October 27, 2020, we entered into the collaboration agreement with Sobi concerning the development and commercialization of pegcetacoplan and specified other compstatin analogues or derivatives for use systemically or for local non-ophthalmic administration, collectively referred to as the Licensed Products. See “Business-Collaboration and License Agreement with Sobi” for a description of the key terms of our collaboration agreement with Sobi.
The Company has determined that the collaboration agreement is within the scope of FASB ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”) as a contractual arrangement that involves a joint operating activity whereby both parties are (i) active participants in the activity and (ii) exposed to certain significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of the activity. ASC Topic 808 does not address measurement or recognition matters but allows for analogizing to ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Pursuant to ASC 606, we performed the following five steps: (i) identified the contract with a customer; (ii) identified the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determined the transaction price; (iv) allocated the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognized revenue when the entity satisfied a performance obligation.
We identified the following material promises under the Sobi Agreement: (1) licenses to develop and commercialize pegcetacoplan or, Licenses to IP, and (2) performance of research and development services. We determined the promises to be distinct because Sobi can benefit from each of the license and the development services on their own or with readily available services. We could have provided the license without any development services and Sobi would have been able to benefit from it by obtaining development services from another provider as the Licensed Products products are at a more mature stage in their life cycle.
Under the collaboration agreement, Sobi agreed to pay us
i)
a fixed amount of $250.0 million in an upfront payment in November 2020;
ii)
a fixed amount of an additional $80.0 million in development reimbursements, payable yearly in four tranches in amounts determined based upon actual expenses incurred by us;
iii)
up to an aggregate of $915.0 million upon the achievement of specified one-time regulatory and commercial milestone events; and
iv)
tiered, double-digit royalties, ranging from high teens to high twenties, on sales of Licensed Products outside of the United States, subject to customary deductions and third-party payment obligations.
At inception of the collaboration agreement, we considered the $250.0 million non-refundable payment and the $80.0 million fixed proceeds. We also evaluated whether Sobi is a customer for either of the distinct promises in the agreement. Under the Licenses to IP, we determined that Sobi is a customer as the know-how provided and the right granted by us to Sobi are outputs of our business activities for which we will receive consideration. With respect to research and development activity, management determined that there is no vendor relationship as performing research and development activities for others is not a part of our ongoing central operations. Based upon the evaluation of the relative fair values, we allocated the purchase price of $250.0 million and the related milestones and royalties to the license of IP and $80.0 million to performance of research and development activities.
The milestone and royalty payments are subject to activities outside our control. Per ASC 606, we consider this to be a customer/ vendor relationship, therefore, we will include the regulatory milestone payments in the total transaction price when it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue would not occur in a future period. We will recognize commercial milestone and royalty revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur or (ii) when the performance obligation to which the commercial milestone or royalty has been allocated has been satisfied. In case of commercial milestone or royalty payments, we will recognize revenue in the same period that the sales are completed for which we are contractually entitled to the milestone or percentage-based royalty payment. To date, we have not recognized any commercial milestone or royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements. Management will periodically assess the elements of the contract and re-evaluate revenue recognition as necessary.
Pursuant to ASC 606, the $250.0 million non-refundable upfront payment is recognized in revenue as this is the amount allocated to the license. The $80.0 million reimbursement for research and development activities does not constitute a customer/vendor relationship and thus is not in the scope of ASC 606. As ASC 808 does not include recognition guidance we have established an accounting policy to recognize the payments under the reimbursement as a receivable on the balance sheet in an amount that is to be reimbursed based upon expense incurred by us, with a contra- research and development expense recognized in the statement of operations, over time as the expenses are incurred.
Under the Sobi collaboration agreement, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $250.0 million of licensing revenue in the consolidated statement of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recognized in the consolidated statement of operations $43.0 million of contra research and development expense relative to the amount expected to be reimbursed under the $80.0 million for research and development incurred expenses. We also recognized a corresponding receivable of $43.0
million, with $25.0 million in current and $18.0 million in long term assets, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
In addition to the Sobi collaboration agreement, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into two different agreements with third parties to provide APL-9 for use in certain research projects for which $0.6 million was recognized in revenue in the consolidated statement of operations as of December 31, 2020.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by CROs and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to CROs and CMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs and CMOs. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our CROs and CMOs will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting expense amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Convertible Notes
On September 16, 2019, we completed a private offering of the 2019 Convertible Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $220.0 million. On May 12, 2020, we issued the 2020 Convertible Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $300.0 million.
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of 25.3405 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes, equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $39.46 per share of common stock. The conversion rate is subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. In addition, following certain events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we are required to increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its notes in connection with such corporate event or a notice of redemption, as the case may be, in certain circumstances as provided in the Indenture. The Convertible Notes will also be subject to redemption at our option, on or after September 20, 2023, if certain conditions are met. The redemption price is equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
Pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Subtopic 470-20 Convertible Debt, we used an effective interest rate of 10.5% to determine the liability component of the Convertible Notes. This resulted in the recognition of $145.1 million and $204.5 million as the liability component of the 2019 and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively and the recognition of the residual amount of $74.9 million and $95.5 million as the debt discount with a corresponding increase to additional paid in capital for the equity component of the 2019 and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively. The 2020 Convertible Notes aggregate debt issuance costs of $6.0 million were allocated to the liability and equity components in the amounts of $3.7 and $2.3 million, respectively. The 2019 Convertible Notes aggregate debt issuance costs of $7.1 million were allocated to the liability and equity components in the amounts of $4.7 million and $2.4 million, respectively.
On January 6, 2021, subsequent to year end, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with certain holders of its 2019 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $126.1 million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes held by them for (i) 2,232,808 shares of our common stock, which is equal to 20.7792 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the 2019 Convertible Notes exchanged plus (ii) an additional number of shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2019 Convertible Notes exchanged equal to the quotient of (a) $544.07 divided by (b) the average of the daily volume-weighted average prices of our common stock over the ten consecutive trading days commencing on January 7, 2021. We issued an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares of common stock upon settlement of the exchanges in
January 2021. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we hold the $126.1 million principal amounts of exchanged notes and such notes have not been cancelled.
Capped Call Transactions
On September 11, 2019, and May 6, 2020 concurrently with the pricing of the 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively, we entered into capped call transactions with two counterparties. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $39.4625 (the conversion price of the Convertible Notes) and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of such notes. If, however, the market price per share of the Company’s common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $63.14 per share, there would nevertheless be dilution and/or there would not be an offset of such potential cash payments, in each case, to the extent that such market price exceeds the cap price of the capped call transactions.
Pursuant to ASC 815-40 Derivatives and Hedging, we determined that the capped call transactions should be classified as equity instruments and the capped call premiums paid in the amount of $28.4 million and $43.1 million were recorded as a reduction to additional paid-in capital as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 for the 2019 Convertible Notes and 2020 Convertible Notes, respectively.
Development Derivative Liability
Following regulatory approval by the FDA or the EMA, for the use of pegcetacoplan as a treatment for PNH we will be obligated to pay SFJ an initial payment of up to $5.0 million (or a total of up to $10.0 million if regulatory approval is granted by the FDA and the EMA) and then up to an additional $226.0 million in the aggregate (or up to $452.0 million if regulatory approval is granted by the FDA and the EMA) in six additional annual payments with the majority of the payments being made from the third anniversary to the sixth anniversary of regulatory approval. Such payments will be proportionately adjusted in the event that the actual funding from SFJ is greater than $120.0 million (including as a result of the payment of the Additional SFJ Funding but excluding the $20.0 million funding payment made under the SFJ amendment).
The SFJ agreement is presented as a derivative liability on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. The liability was initially recorded at the value of the $60.0 million of aggregate cash received pursuant to the contractual terms, which was determined to have been fairly valued as a level 3 derivative. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we received an additional $20.0 million and $60.0 million, respectively, as we met certain milestones. The SFJ agreement is remeasured quarterly as a level 3 derivative, with the total change in fair value for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $103.0 million and $14.8 million, respectively, recorded in loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability on the consolidated income statement.
The derivative is valued using a scenario-based discounted cash flow method, whereby each scenario makes assumptions about the probability and timing of cash flows, and such cash flows are present valued using a risk-adjusted discount rate. The analysis is calibrated such that the value of the derivative as of the date of the SFJ agreement was consistent with an arm’s-length transaction. Key inputs to the level 3 fair value model include (i) the probability and timing of achieving stated development goals to receive the next tranches of funding, (ii) the probability and timing of achieving FDA and EMA approval, (iii) SFJ’s cost of borrowing (8.0%), and (iv) our cost of borrowing (12.65%).
SFJ’s implied cost of borrowing was 8.0% and our implied cost of borrowing was 12.65% as of the reporting date. These implied costs of borrowing were determined assuming the SFJ agreement was initially executed with arm’s-length terms. If the SFJ agreement was instead not determined to be an arm’s-length transaction, then implied discount rates could differ.
If actual results or events differ materially from the estimates, judgments and assumptions used by us in applying these policies, our reported financial condition and results of operations could be materially affected. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the dollar increase or decrease and percentage change in those items:
Revenue
Licensing revenue increased $250.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to the Collaboration and Licensing Agreement we entered with Sobi in October 2020 concerning the development and commercialization of pegcetacoplan and specified other compstatin analogues or derivatives for use systemically or for local non-ophthalmic administration. Sobi paid us an upfront payment of $250.0 million in November 2020, which is recognized in licensing revenue in the consolidated statement of operations as of December 31, 2020.
Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into two different licensing and collaboration agreements with third parties to provide APL-9 for use in certain research project which totaled $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the dollar increase or decrease and percentage change in those items:
Research and development expenses increased by $104.0 million to $325.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $221.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 47%. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $37.1 million in manufacturing expenses in connection with the supply of pegcetacoplan for our Phase 3 clinical trials and in preparation for commercial launch, an increase of $15.6 million in clinical trial costs associated with the on-going Phase 3 trials and the preparation for and commencement of our clinical trials in other indications, an increase of $38.8 million in compensation and related personnel costs primarily due to the hiring of additional personnel in 2020, an increase of $21.7 million in research and development supporting activities caused primarily by increased regulatory and quality expenses, an increase of $25.0 million for the licensee fee to Penn related to the Sobi transaction, an increase in research and innovation expense of $10.1 million and an increase of $0.6 million in device development expenses. These increases were offset by a $43.0 million contra research and development expense related to the Sobi transaction and a decrease of $1.9 million related to preclinical study expense. We expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase as the number of patients in our trials increases and the number of ongoing trials increases.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $72.4 million to $139.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $67.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 108%. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to an increase in professional and consulting fees of $35.5 million, an increase in employee related costs of $33.8 million due to the hiring of additional personnel, an increase in directors stock compensation expense of $1.8 million ,an increase in insurance costs of $1.1 million, and an increase in office, travel and related costs of $0.6 million, offset by a decrease of $0.4 million in information technology expenses. The increased professional and consulting fees of $35.5 million primarily consisted of an increase in expenses relating to preparation for commercial launch of $29.3 million, an increase of $4.5 million in accounting and legal fees, and an increase in general consulting fees of $2.6 million, offset by a decrease in communication and public relations fees of $0.9 million. The increased employee related costs of $33.8 million consisted of $21.9 million related to an increase in salaries and benefits primarily due to the hiring of additional personnel and $12.3 million related to stock option expense associated with the grants of stock options and restricted stock units to employees, offset by a decrease of $0.4 million in recruitment expense.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
On March 26, 2019, we repaid all outstanding amounts due and owed, including applicable termination fees, under our term loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank. The final payment included the outstanding balance of the term loan as well as (i) a prepayment fee contractually owed of $0.1 million, (ii) a final payment equal to 8% of the original principal amount of the term loan, or $1.6 million, and (iii) per diem interest of $0.1 million, for a total payment of $21.8 million, which resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.2 million. On September 16, 2019, we repaid outstanding amounts due and owed on the promissory note with Golda Darty Partners, S.A. or GDP. The remaining discount on the promissory note related to the issuance of warrants in connection with the issuance of the promissory note resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.3 million.
Loss from Remeasurement of Development Derivative Liability
On February 28, 2019, we entered into the SFJ agreement under which SFJ agreed to provide funding to us to support the development of pegcetacoplan for the treatment of patients with PNH. The development derivative liability was initially recorded at the value of the $60.0 million aggregate cash received pursuant to the contact terms.
The SFJ agreement was amended on June 7, 2019 to provide for additional funding and we received $20.0 million upon execution of the SFJ amendment in June 2019 and in each of September 2019 and January 2020, we achieved a $20.0 million development milestone under the terms of the agreement, resulting in receipt of an aggregate of $60.0 million of additional funding from SFJ.
We remeasure the fair value of the derivative liability as a level 3 derivative at the end of each quarter. The remeasurements resulted in a change in fair value which resulted in a loss of $103.0 million and $14.8 million recorded in the consolidated statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $24.6 million, compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense was primarily attributable to the interest expense on and amortization of the discount on the Convertible Notes offset by the decrease in interest expense attributable to our long-term debt under the term loan facility that we repaid in March 2019 and the promissory note that we repaid in 2019.
Interest Income
Interest income was $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $.9 million, compared to $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income was primarily attributable to a decline in investment yields and interest rates.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense increased $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to corporate franchise taxes and fees.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to foreign and state income tax expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
A discussion of changes in our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference and which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through $772.1 million in net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, including our IPO, $535.8 million in net proceeds from offerings of Convertible Notes, a $250.0 million upfront payment and a $25.0 million development reimbursement payment from Sobi each pursuant to the Sobi collaboration agreement, $112.6 million in proceeds from the private placement of shares of our convertible preferred stock prior to our IPO, $140.0 million under the SFJ agreement, $20.0 million in proceeds from borrowings under a term loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and $7.0 million in proceeds from our issuance and sale of a promissory note. We have repaid the term loan facility and the promissory note in full, and we exchanged $126.1 million of aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes for shares of our common stock in January 2021.
On April 23, 2018, we issued and sold 5,500,000 shares of our common stock in a follow-on public offering at a public offering price of $25.50 per share for net proceeds of $131.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $8.4 million and offering expenses of $0.5 million.
On March 11, 2019, we issued and sold 6,900,000 shares of our common stock in a follow-on offering at a public offering price of $17.00. We received net proceeds of $109.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $7.0 million and offering costs of $0.7 million.
On September 16, 2019, we completed a private offering of $220.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes. We received net proceeds of approximately $212.9 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and offering costs of $7.1 million.
On January 13, 2020, we issued and sold 10,925,000 shares of our common stock in a follow-on offering at a public offering price of $37.00, including 1,425,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock. We received total net proceeds of $381.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $22.2 million and offering costs of $0.5 million.
On May 12, 2020, we completed a private offering of $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2020 Convertible Notes. We received net proceeds of approximately $322.9 million, which included accrued interest March 15, 2020 to, but not including May 12, 2020, and the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and offering costs of $6.0 million.
Subsequent to year end, on January 6, 2021, we entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with certain holders of our 2019 Convertible Notes. Under the terms of these exchange agreements, the holders exchanged approximately $126.1
million in aggregate principal amount of 2019 Convertible Notes held by them for an aggregate of 3,906,869 shares of our common stock. The exchange transactions closed in January 2021.
In addition to our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, we expect to receive research and development reimbursements and are eligible to earn development and commercial milestone payments and royalties under our collaboration agreement with Sobi. Our ability to earn these milestone payments and the timing of earning these payments is dependent upon the outcome of our research and development and commercialization activities and is uncertain at this time.
The capped call transactions that we entered into concurrently with the issuance of the Convertible Notes are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of Convertible Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted Convertible Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions, which is initially $39.4625, the conversion price of the Convertible Notes.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $160.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $344.9 million adjusted for $164.8 million of non-cash items, including a loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability of $103.0 million and share-based compensation expense of $45.4 million, a net increase in operating assets of $35.4 million, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $55.0 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $211.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $304.7 million adjusted for $40.4 million of non-cash items, including share-based compensation expense of $21.1 million, a loss from remeasurement of development derivative liability of $14.8 million, and a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $1.5 million, a net increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $48.7 million and a net decrease in operating assets of $4.5 million. The net increase in operating liabilities resulted primarily from an increase in accrued expenses of $50.5 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $317.0 million due primarily to the purchase of marketable securities with proceeds from the follow-on common stock offering in January 2020, the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes in May 2020 and the $250.0 million from the Sobi agreement offset by the maturities of some of these investments.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.7 million due to the purchase of fixed assets for our offices.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $692.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of proceeds from the follow-on common stock offering in January 2020 of $381.4 million, the proceeds from the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes in May 2020 of $322.9 million, the receipt of $20.0 million from the SFJ agreement and $11.0 million upon the exercise of stock options and the employee share purchase plan, offset by the $43.1 million used to purchase the capped call.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $388.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes in September 2019 of $212.9 million, the issuance of common stock in our March follow-on offering of $109.6 million, the receipt of $120.0 million from the SFJ agreement and $3.1 million upon the exercise
of stock options, offset by $28.7 million for the repayment of our term loan facility and promissory note, and $28.4 million for capped call premiums paid.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Furthermore, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements at least into the second half of 2022. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Although we expect that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to allow us to complete the DERBY and OAKS clinical trials, we do not believe they will be sufficient to allow us to support both the systemic and ophthalmological pegcetacoplan programs through commercial launch. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of pegcetacoplan and other potential product candidates, and because the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for the development of these product candidates is unknown, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the scope, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of, and research and preclinical development efforts for pegcetacoplan, APL-9 and future product candidates;
•
our ability to maintain a productive collaborative relationship with Sobi with respect to pegcetacoplan, including our ability to achieve milestone payments under our agreement with Sobi;
•
our ability to identify additional collaborators for any of our product candidates and the terms and timing of any collaboration agreement that we may establish for the development and any commercialization of such product candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of future product candidates that we pursue and their development requirements;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of clinical trials and of seeking regulatory approvals of pegcetacoplan and other product candidates we may pursue;
•
the costs of commercialization activities for any of our product candidates that receive marketing approval to the extent such costs are not the responsibility of any collaborators, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•
subject to receipt of marketing approval, revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of pegcetacoplan and our other product candidates;
•
our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development and establish a commercial infrastructure;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property related claims;
•
the effect of competing technological and market developments;
•
the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the healthcare system and the economy generally and on our clinical trials and other operations specifically;
•
our ability to obtain adequate reimbursement for any product we commercialize; and
•
the costs of operating as a public company.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of medicines that we do not expect to be commercially available for many
years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We currently do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Debt financing, if available, would result in fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2020:
(1)
Amounts include interest on long-term debt represents obligations under the debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020, applying contractual fixed interest rate and assuming scheduled payments are paid as contractually required through maturity. Subsequent to year end, in January 2021, we entered into an agreement to exchange $126.1 million of our 2019 Convertible Notes for shares of common stock. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
(2)
Equals the non-cancellable purchase commitments under the Bachem Agreement signed with Bachem on December 30, 2020,
(3)
Represents future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating leases. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
On February 28, 2019, we entered into the SFJ agreement. Under the SFJ agreement, following regulatory approval by the FDA or the EMA of the use of pegcetacoplan as a treatment for PNH, we will be obligated to pay SFJ an initial payment of up to $5.0 million (or up to a total of $10 million if regulatory approval is granted by the FDA and the EMA) and then up to an additional $226.0 million in the aggregate (or up to $452.0 million if regulatory approval is granted by the FDA and the EMA) in six additional annual payments with the majority of the payments being made from the third anniversary to the sixth anniversary of regulatory approval. The timing and likelihood of such payments are not currently known.
During the third quarter of 2019, we entered into contracts to conduct research and development activities with third parties which commit us to pay future milestone payments up to $15.0 million or to pay royalty fees ranging from 3-6% if any of the research results in regulatory approval or commercial revenue for a product. The scope of the services under the research and development contracts can be modified and the contracts cancelled by us upon written notice. In some instances, the contracts may be cancelled by the third party upon written notice. If we were to cancel these contracts, we would be required only to pay for activities incurred through termination date. We have not included any of these potential payments in the contractual obligations table above, as we cannot reasonably estimate whether, when and in what amount any of such payments shall be made.
We are party to two license agreements with Penn under which we license specified intellectual property from Penn. The patent rights licensed to us by Penn include patents with claims that recite a class of compounds generically covering pegcetacoplan. Each license agreement requires us to pay ongoing annual maintenance payments of $100,000 per year until the first commercial sale of a licensed product. With respect to the license for the nonophthalmic field of use, we have agreed to make milestone payments to Penn aggregating up to $1.7 million based on achieving specified development and regulatory approval milestones, and up to $2.5 million based on achieving specified annual sales milestones with respect to each of the first two licensed products. In 2018 we made one milestone payment of $0.4 million under the nonophthalmic license. With respect to the license for the ophthalmic field of use, we have agreed to make milestone payments to Penn aggregating up to $3.2 million based on achieving specified development and regulatory milestones, and up to $5.0
million based on achieving specified annual sales milestones. In 2018 we made one milestone payment, net of credits for the annual maintenance payment, of $0.7 million under the ophthalmic license. The license agreements also require that we pay low single-digit royalties to Penn based on net sales of each licensed product by us and our affiliates and sublicensees and specified minimum quarterly royalty thresholds. In addition, we are obligated to pay Penn a specified portion of income we receive from sublicensees. In January 2021 we paid Penn $25.0 million as a sublicensee fee under these agreements relating to the Sobi agreement. We have not included any of these potential payments in the contractual obligations table above, as we cannot reasonably estimate whether, when and in what amount any of such payments shall be made.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since either the contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice to the CRO, or the noncancelable minimum purchase commitments under such contracts have already been satisfied, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. Under these agreements, as of December 31, 2020, we are obligated to pay up to $2.8 million to these vendors.
We have certain non-cancelable purchase obligations related to the manufacturing of drug substance and drug product, primarily with Bachem Americas, Inc, and Bachem AG, for the drug substance for the finished dosage form of pegcetacoplan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.