Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development, and commercialization of novel, proprietary, synthetic small molecules for the treatment of brain and nervous system disorders. We focus our efforts on targeting and modulating N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, or NMDArs, which are vital to normal and effective function of the brain and nervous system. We believe leveraging the therapeutic advantages of the differentiated modulatory mechanism of our compounds will drive a paradigm shift in the treatment of disorders of the brain and nervous system. We are advancing a pipeline of distinct product candidates derived from our NMDAr modulator discovery platform, or the discovery platform. The following table summarizes the current status of our development programs as of the date of this annual report.
NYX-2925 is in clinical development for the treatment of chronic pain. NYX-2925 is being evaluated in two Phase 2b studies in two chronic pain conditions: one evaluating the efficacy and safety in approximately 200 patients with painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy, or painful DPN, and the other evaluating the efficacy and safety in approximately 300 patients with fibromyalgia. These studies have both recently recommenced enrollment following their temporary suspension in March of 2020 due to challenges introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic. NYX-783 is in clinical development for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD. We recently completed an initial exploratory Phase 2 study to evaluate safety, tolerability, and signals of efficacy of NYX-783 in 160 patients with PTSD. In the study, patients treated with NYX-783 demonstrated improvements across PTSD symptoms and NYX-783 was well-tolerated with no drug-related serious adverse events reported. The NYX-783 50 mg group demonstrated a clinically meaningful improvement from baseline on CAPS-5 Total score after 4 weeks of treatment and, while the exploratory study was powered based on clinical, and not statistical, considerations, on some measures NYX-783 did demonstrate statistically significant separation from placebo. NYX-458 is in Phase 2 clinical development for the treatment of cognitive impairment associated with Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. We recently recommenced study activities, including site initiation and obtaining IRB approval, for a Phase 2 exploratory study that was
temporarily suspended in March of 2020 due to challenges introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to recommence the screening and enrollment of patients in that study following an investigator meeting that is planned for March 26, 2021.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate, which we expect will take a number of years and the outcome of which is uncertain, or enter into collaborative agreements with third parties, the timing of which is largely beyond our control and may never occur. To fund our current and future operating plans, we will need additional capital, which we may obtain through one or more equity offerings, debt financings, or other third-party funding, including potential strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. We may, however, be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all, including as a result of COVID-19. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our current product candidates, or any additional product candidates, if developed. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the impacts of COVID-19, our ability to successfully enroll subjects in a timely way for the clinical studies, and the pace and results of our preclinical and clinical development efforts. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
The COVID-19 pandemic has and could further adversely impact our clinical and/or preclinical studies, as well as our business operations. We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on patients and our employees, as well as our operations and the operations of our business partners and healthcare communities. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented policies to mitigate the risk of exposure to COVID-19 by our personnel, including restrictions on the number of staff in any given research and development laboratory or manufacturing facility, a work-from-home policy applicable to the majority of our personnel, and a phased approach to bringing personnel back to our locations over time. However, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations is highly uncertain and subject to change and will depend on future developments which are difficult to predict.
Financial operations overview
Revenues
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We are unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales of our products, if approved. Our revenue to date has been primarily derived from a research collaboration agreement with Allergan (now a subsidiary of AbbVie), under which the jointly funded research activities and associated payments by Allergan to us concluded in the third quarter of 2020; a development services agreement with Allergan, which was put in place to continue certain development activities for a pre-determined period of time following Allergan's acquisition of Naurex Inc.; and research and development grants from the U.S. government that have no repayment or royalty obligations and none of which are currently outstanding.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development activities account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expense consists of costs incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates, including:
● fees paid to consultants, sponsored researchers, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and contract research organizations, or CROs, including in connection with our preclinical and clinical studies, and other related clinical study fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical study database management, and statistical compilation and analysis;
● costs related to acquiring and maintaining preclinical and clinical study materials and facilities;
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
● costs related to salaries, bonuses, and other compensation for employees in research and development functions.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing such product candidates, including the uncertainty related to:
● the impacts of COVID-19;
● future clinical study results; the scope, rate of progress, and expense of our ongoing as well as any additional preclinical studies, clinical studies and other research and development activities;
● clinical study enrollment rate or design;
● the manufacturing of our product candidates;
● our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for our product candidates;
● significant and changing government regulation;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, developing and timely delivery of commercial-grade drug formulations that can be used in our clinical trials and for commercial launch;
● the timing and receipt of regulatory approvals, if any; and
● the risks disclosed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing, and viability associated with the development of that product candidate.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as we continue to implement our business strategy, which includes advancing our product candidates into and through clinical development, expanding our research and development efforts, seeking regulatory approvals for any product candidates for which we successfully complete clinical studies, accessing and developing additional product candidates, and hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts. In addition, product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally incur higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical studies. As such, we expect our research and development expenses to increase as our product candidates advance into later stages of clinical development.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation. General and administrative expenses also include rent as well as professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting, and audit services.
In the future, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to support our research and development and the potential commercialization of our product candidates, if approved. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, tax, regulatory, compliance, and director and officer insurance costs, as well
as investor and public relations expenses associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements.
Other income
Other income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue was $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and is attributable to the research collaboration with Allergan. The jointly funded research activities under the research collaboration and the associated payments by Allergan came to their contractual conclusion in the third quarter of 2020.
Research and development expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $11.5 million was primarily due to the following:
● approximately $4.2 million decrease due to lower employee headcount costs and related support costs in 2020 compared to 2019;
● approximately $3.0 million decrease for costs associated with our preclinical research efforts with external research organizations and in part by the natural conclusion of the research collaboration with Allergan in the third quarter of 2020;
● approximately $2.6 million decrease related to the ongoing development of NYX-458 for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease cognitive impairment, including the temporary suspension of the exploratory Phase 2 study of NYX-458 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
● approximately $1.3 million decrease for clinical, regulatory, and drug product costs related to the ongoing development of NYX-783 due to the conclusion of the Phase 2 study in October 2020.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $0.5 million was due to a $1.7 million increase related to employee non-cash stock based-compensation expenses, costs associated with being a public company, and insurance costs to support ongoing business operations offset by a decrease of $1.3 million related to reduced employee headcount, professional fees, and patent costs
Other income
We recorded $0.7 million of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was due to decreased interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents as a result of decreased interest rates during 2020 compared to 2019.
Liquidity and capital resources
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have incurred significant operating losses and have funded our operations to date through proceeds from collaborations, grants, sales of convertible preferred stock, and our IPO and follow-on equity offerings. We have generated limited revenue to date from a research collaboration agreement with Allergan, a development services agreement with Allergan, and research and development grants from the U.S. government.
On June 25, 2018, we completed an initial public offering, pursuant to which we issued and sold 7,359,998 shares of our common stock at a price of $16.00 per share, which included 959,999 shares sold pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We received $106.5 million of proceeds, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
On July 1, 2019, we entered into a Sales Agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we may issue and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million through Cowen as sales agent. Cowen may sell common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act, including sales made directly on or through the Nasdaq Global Select Market or any other existing trade market for the common stock, in negotiated transactions at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to prevailing market prices, or any other method permitted by law. Cowen will be entitled to receive 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold under the Sales Agreement. There were no shares issued in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, 1,491,482 shares of common stock have been issued and sold pursuant to the Sales Agreement at a weighted-average price of $3.89 per share. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $5.7 million of net proceeds after deducting sales commissions and other offering expenses.
On January 14, 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock pursuant to an effective registration statement on Form S-3. We sold an aggregate of 11,691,666 shares of common stock, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $3.00 per share. Net proceeds from the offering were approximately $33.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other offering expenses.
On October 26, 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock pursuant to an effective registration statement on Form S-3. We sold an aggregate of 16,100,000 shares of common stock, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $3.00 per share. Net proceeds from the offering were approximately $45.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as estimated offering expenses.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and through the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we sold an aggregate of 3,629,458 shares under the “at the market offering” at an average price of $4.03 for net proceeds of $14.5 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $141.0 million. We invest our cash equivalents in liquid money market accounts
Funding requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, research and development services, compensation and related expenses, laboratory and related supplies, legal and other regulatory expenses, patent prosecution filing and maintenance costs for our licensed intellectual property and general overhead costs. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. In addition, since the closing of our IPO, we have incurred, and expect to incur, additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● seek to address and recover from impacts of COVID-19;
● advance the clinical development of our lead product candidates;
● continue to improve the manufacturing process for our product candidates; and manufacture clinical supplies as our development progresses;
● continue the research and development of our preclinical product candidates;
● seek to identify and develop additional product candidates;
● maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● improve our operational, financial, and management systems to support our clinical development and other operations.
Outlook
Based on our research and development plans and our timing expectations related to the progress of our programs, we expect that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate, which we expect will take a number of years and the outcome of which is uncertain, or enter into collaborative agreements with third parties, the timing of which is largely beyond our control and may never occur. To fund our current and future operating plans, we will need additional capital, which we may obtain through one or more equity offerings, debt financings, or other third-party funding, including potential strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. We may, however, be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all, including as a result of COVID-19. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our current product candidates, or any additional product candidates, if
developed. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the effects of COVID-19, our ability to successfully enroll subjects in a timely way for the clinical studies and the pace and results of our preclinical and clinical development efforts. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, the $9.7 million decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to a $7.4 million decrease in our net loss year over year, driven mostly by lower research and development expenses and and a use of cash decrease of $1.5 million due to changes in working capital largely driven by timing of cash paid to support our clinical research programs.
Investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, the $0.2 million increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to purchases of lab equipment.
Financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, the $84.5 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to $78.5 million and $5.7 million of net proceeds received from our January and October 2020 follow-on public offerings and 2020 “at the market offering”, respectively, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. In the preparation of these financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or operating results would be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and development
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate certain of our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with
our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● CROs in connection with performing research and development services on our behalf;
● investigative sites or other providers in connection with clinical studies;
● vendors in connection with preclinical development activities; and
● vendors related to product manufacturing, development, and distribution of clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical study milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting expenses that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued or prepaid research and development expenses.
Stock-based compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to our directors and employees at fair value on the date of grant and recognize the corresponding compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Generally, we issue stock options and restricted stock with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method. We have historically granted stock options with exercise prices equivalent to the fair value of our common stock as of the date of grant.
The fair value of our common stock is determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock. Prior to our IPO, the estimates in determining our stock-based compensation valuations were highly complex and subjective, and since our stock was not publicly traded, our board of directors estimated the fair value of our common stock at various dates, with input from management, considering our then most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and its assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. The grant date fair value of our options is determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The expected term of our options has been determined utilizing the “simplified method” for awards that qualify as “plain-vanilla” options. The historical volatility of share values of publicly traded companies within the biotechnology industry are used as a surrogate for the expected volatility of our common stock. The determination of the set of guideline public companies used to determine the volality assumption continues to represent a significant estimate in the determination of the grant date fair value of our options. We have not made significant changes in the identification of these guideline public companies in recent years. As of yet, we have not incorporated our own historical share price volatility into this determination, and plan to continuously reevaluate this assumption as we develop more history. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term
of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
JOBS Act
Under Section 107(b) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards would apply to private companies. We intend to avail of this exemption. There are other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act that we are currently evaluating. For example, as an “emerging growth company,” we are exempt from Sections 14A(a) and (b) of the Exchange Act which would otherwise require us to (1) submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay,” “say-on-frequency,” and “golden parachutes;” and (2) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of our chief executive officer’s compensation to our median employee compensation. We also intend to avail of an exemption from the rule requiring us to provide an auditor’s attestation report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We will continue to remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of the following: (1) December 31, 2023; (2) the last day of the fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenue is equal to or more than $1.07 billion; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (4) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our financial statements.